A few short months ago, I strolled in the Melbourne summer sun from my hotel to Victoria state Parliament House. I was due to speak to an unusual audience—nearly 100 national champions for diabetes from as far afield as Russia, Ukraine, Nigeria and Canada. We even had South Africa’s own first lady. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It was a privilege to be asked by the International Diabetes Federation to represent Scotland at the first-ever global forum of parliamentary champions for diabetes. The next forum will be in Canada in 2015 and I hope that Scotland will be represented again by other members, such as Nanette Milne, who, along with me, co-convenes the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on diabetes. The conference concluded with the signing of the Melbourne declaration, which committed Parliaments around the globe to ensuring that diabetes is high on their political agenda. The declaration called on nations to have a stronger emphasis on preventative work, early diagnosis, management and access to adequate care, and to ensure that treatment and medicines are available for all those living with diabetes. The declaration was the brainchild of the International Diabetes Federation, the president of which is Sir Michael Hirst, former MP and ex-chair of Diabetes UK. I was proud to talk to the conference delegates about Scotland but also about issues of international significance for diabetes. I am proud to come from a nation of Scots with a strong track record in innovation and discovery, such as Alexander Fleming, who discovered penicillin; James Watt, who invented the steam engine; and Alexander Graham Bell, who invented the telephone. However, international collaboration is where real strides can be made. In 1922, Professor John Macleod from Aberdeen worked with two other outstanding scientists, Dr Banting and Charles Best, and discovered insulin. Macleod and Banting won the Nobel prize for medicine in 1923, which was shared with Charles Best. Fast forward to today and, as co-chair of the cross party group on diabetes, and convener of the Public Petitions Committee, I have worked with politicians, the public, medical experts and campaign groups to be an evangelist for the treatment of diabetes. As a non-diabetic, why am I so passionate about the subject? In 1997, as a freshly elected, fresh-faced member of Parliament—hard to believe as that might be today—I was given a tour of the diabetic unit in my local hospital. I met a diabetes nurse who encouraged me to take an interest in the subject. She told me that diabetes is the main cause of blindness among people of working age. It is responsible for half of all non-traumatic lower limb amputations and, then, was costing the national health service £0.5 billion. I joined the all-party parliamentary group on diabetes at Westminster and was its secretary for eight years. As part of my duties as secretary, I hosted a reception in the House of Commons for MPs, peers, patients, doctors, nurses and NHS bosses. There were 200 guests and I met the star attraction, Gary Mabbutt, who football fans in the chamber will know is the ex-captain of Spurs and an English international. Gary has diabetes and he told me that when he was preparing to leave home to travel to Mexico for the world cup, he received a phone call from the England team doctor who told him he could not go to Mexico because it was too hot and, as a diabetic, he would be unable to cope. It was a ludicrous decision because he was probably the fittest person on the team. In my view, that was a clear example of discrimination against diabetics. We also heard about newly diagnosed diabetics being sacked or downgraded in the police, the fire service and the armed forces. The other event that focused my attention was personal. My late father-in-law had type 1 diabetes for more than 70 years and lost sight in one eye. He taught me that it is possible to lead a normal life with well-controlled and well-maintained pen-needle injections. Last time I asked a parliamentary question of the health minister, I was told that approximately 250,000 people in Scotland were diabetic and that a further 620,000 were at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. In addition, 49,000 people in Scotland have the condition but are undiagnosed. That means that approximately 1 million people in Scotland are directly affected by diabetes, either by having it or by being at high risk of developing it. It means that, if my maths is right—of which there is no guarantee—there are about 800 undiagnosed diabetes sufferers in each Scottish parliamentary constituency and that scores of staff in the Scottish Parliament, and perhaps one or two members, have diabetes without knowing it. Screening for type 2 diabetes is vital but it requires planning that tackles local needs within a national framework. The key is targeting, so that interventions can do the most good. We should view screening as a form of prevention rather than as a cure. It would allow general practitioners, or indeed diabetes and practice nurses, to offer screening earlier to patients who are most at risk, which is normally people over 45 who have a family history of diabetes and are overweight. Early detection is vital. Diabetes UK Scotland reports that most people with type 2 diabetes suffer the condition for between three and seven years before diagnosis. Early detection will reduce the number of patients suffering from complications and will reduce costs. That detection can be done by a simple and inexpensive urine or blood test that takes about 30 seconds. There have been some strong, positive steps in the care of people with diabetes, such as the provision of insulin pumps to under-18s, but the number of people with the condition is rising, which will have a serious effect in Scotland’s immediate future. Beyond the grave social cost of the condition on individuals and families, there is the huge economic cost to the NHS in Scotland, estimated at £1 billion annually, 80 per cent of which goes on managing avoidable complications. With the Melbourne declaration focusing on the prevention of diabetes, the Scottish Government must have a focus on the condition that properly reflects the size of the problem. There are now more people in Scotland living with diabetes than with coronary heart disease. Two and a half times more people have diabetes than have all cancers combined. Each year in Scotland, 1,900 people have an emergency admission for diabetic ketoacidosis—a critical, life-threatening condition that requires immediate medical attention. More than 40 per cent of those admissions are of people under the age of 25. At any one time, people with diabetes account for a fifth of hospital in-patients. In Scotland, a person with diabetes can face a reduced life expectancy by up to 14 years. Diabetes is the leading cause of blindness among people of working age and a main contributor to kidney failure, amputations and cardiovascular disease, including heart attacks and strokes. People with diabetes should be getting their 15 healthcare essential checks from the NHS and previous action plans have been instrumental in taking that forward. We have a great opportunity in Scotland to raise the bar in healthcare. Scotland has one of the highest incidences of type 2 diabetes in the world—it is time that we tackled that ticking time bomb. Not only would it be cost effective, it would, on an individual basis, tackle a condition that blinds, maims and kills.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the national health service about the progress of the diabetes action plan. (S4O-02841)

The minister will be well aware that nearly 1 million people in Scotland are directly affected by diabetes, either by having it or by being at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. How will people with diabetes be at the heart of the new diabetes action plan? Does the minister share my view that we must urgently tackle the ticking time bomb of diabetes in Scotland?

The Public Petitions Committee’s role, in my view, is to shine a light into the dark corners of Scotland, and there can be no darker corner than child sexual exploitation. The committee’s inquiry concluded with 28 powerful and significant recommendations. I hope that, in time, the Scottish Government will accept them all and make a contribution to better and more co-ordinated practice by professionals across Scotland. If we save one child from sexual exploitation, the inquiry will have been worth doing. The evidence that was given to us over the past 10 months was occasionally harrowing and sometimes distressing, but the committee did not flinch from its task just because it was difficult. My thanks go to Barnardo’s, staff from which are in the gallery this afternoon, for lodging the petition and for its consistently high levels of co-operation and support. I also place on record my personal thanks to all the committee members for their contributions, and particularly to Chic Brodie, the deputy convener, who chaired two evidence sessions for me following my Achilles injury last year. Anne Peat and her team of clerks were first class, and many thanks go to them all. I also put on record the committee’s thanks to our adviser, Sarah Nelson, who provided valuable direction and insight as a result of her many years of research in the field. The committee wishes her well with future projects. This is the committee’s first inquiry report in this parliamentary session. I welcome the opportunity today to highlight our work, the evidence that we heard and our findings. I will explain a little about the background to the inquiry. I have heard it said that the Public Petitions Committee does not do inquiries, but inquiries are exactly what the committee does day in and day out. We have mini-inquiries on the back of nearly every public petition that is lodged. However, the committee’s investigation into tackling child sexual exploitation was a longer and more in-depth inquiry. Our work culminated in the publication of a report that contains a number of recommendations for action. I look forward to hearing the minister’s responses later. The subject warranted a more in-depth approach. I understand that it straddles a number of subject committee remits but, given those committees’ legislative loads, we decided to undertake the inquiry ourselves. The committee’s work started with the petition that Barnardo’s Scotland lodged in July 2011. Barnardo’s urged the Scottish Government to commission new research into the nature and scope of child sexual exploitation in Scotland and called for new, dedicated Scottish Government guidelines. When we received the petition, Barnardo’s told the committee that it was seriously concerned that the true nature and scale of CSE in Scotland were not known and that CSE was on the increase. It saw a pressing need to carry out research in Scotland to assess the prevalence of CSE, along the lines of research that has been done in England. Barnardo’s had been in dialogue with the Scottish Government, but it told us that it had received no commitment to take action. The feeling was that, in times of economic pressures, local authorities would find it difficult to justify additional spending to provide services to support victims of child sexual exploitation without having clear and robust evidence of the scale of the problem. It was felt that research was needed to provide the clear evidence that is required. The guidelines that are in place date back to 2003. They focus mainly on young people who have run away from home or who have been exploited through becoming involved in prostitution. They do not take account of the modern reality of young people’s use of technology and the risks that they can face from online grooming and social networking sites. Not just runaways and children who have been drawn into prostitution are at risk of sexual exploitation; sadly, all our children are at risk. The risks are not always from older people; children’s peers can just as easily be the perpetrators. The guidance needs to be updated to recognise that. We are pleased that, as a result of the committee’s interest, the Scottish Government is taking steps to update the material. We also welcome the fact that the minister commissioned the University of Bedfordshire to do preliminary research work in Scotland. That research assessed the information that is available on the prevalence in Scotland by looking at the existing statistical base, and soundings were taken from professionals on the extent and nature of CSE in Scotland. When that research became available, it confirmed to the committee the point that tackling child sexual exploitation needs to be given much higher priority in Scotland. The committee decided to move the issue up the agenda by conducting its own inquiry and calling for evidence. We agreed a specific remit for our inquiry. The committee was aware of work that was being done elsewhere and did not want to duplicate that. We agreed to establish the nature and extent of child sexual exploitation in Scotland. Our first call for evidence was aimed at getting the views of service providers working in the field, often in the third sector, and of service users—the young people. We posed a number of specific questions. That approach worked well and we received powerful evidence and accounts from across Scotland from young people who had found themselves victims. I will highlight two anonymised case studies. A 28-year-old female from Fife told us that her exploitation began when she was just 12 or 13, when peers pressured her into sexual activity and she was given drugs and alcohol in exchange for sexual favours. She said that counselling had been helpful but that better awareness is required. She pointed out that, in her experience, exploitation among peers is common—particularly among young girls—and that more needs to be done in schools to educate young people and enable them to be more resilient. The second case study was about James, who was 15. He comes from a chaotic home and identifies himself as gay. His mother had significant mental health difficulties and attempted suicide, occasionally in James’s presence. James experienced violence at the hands of his mother’s partners and witnessed domestic violence. After a serious incident, he was taken into a local authority children’s home. James is shy and he began to make contact with men through social networking and dating sites. He initially lied about his age but was always honest when he met anyone. All the men he met were adults in the age range of 20 to 45, and all were aware of James’s real age. Because of his early life experience, James had difficulties with assessing risk and judging character, so he was vulnerable to being groomed. He was raped and contracted sexually transmitted infections that led to his hospitalisation. That further damaged his self-esteem and increased his vulnerability. James is now receiving support to help him to recognise and build positive relationships, and to reduce his feelings of isolation and inadequacy. Those are two of the many young people’s accounts that the committee received. I urge all members to read the other testimonies that we received. For the avoidance of doubt, the accounts all come from Scottish young people. The experiences that they told us about and the crimes that were committed against them all happened here in Scotland. One of the deficiencies with the existing research is that very little of the evidence in the public domain comes from young people themselves. That is clearly not because it does not exist; it is out there. The organisations and bodies, mostly from the third sector, pick up the pieces by providing counselling, support, and practical assistance, but hearing from young people was a vital part of the committee’s inquiry. However, although sadly there is no shortage of young people who have been sexually exploited in Scotland, the young people themselves were understandably reluctant to come forward to speak to us. The agencies that we enlisted to assist us were keen to help, but for understandable reasons such as shame, embarrassment, fear or a desire to forget, young people were not willing to be in direct contact with us. The case studies that we received were all anonymised and provided by the service providers. I record my thanks to them for helping us to get the voices of young people out there and into the chamber this afternoon. The second stage of evidence gathering was directed more at statutory bodies. We also asked them a series of specific questions. By doing that, we were able to ensure that the evidence that we received directly addressed the issues that we had identified in the inquiry remit as our priority. We received 38 written submissions, all of which provided considered views. It was notable that a number of identical issues arose time after time. The first one that I will talk about is the definition of child sexual exploitation. No one in the chamber today can have failed to have heard about some of the ways in which children can be sexually exploited. We only have to pick up a newspaper, or turn on the radio or the television to hear about another case that has come to light in which impressionable young people have been sexually exploited. I should emphasise that it is not just girls who are exploited. Boys have also been groomed by older people, gangs or groups, or have been befriended by peers who have ended up exploiting them sexually. Most of the recently reported cases have been in England, and it is shocking to hear the details, some of which are only now coming to light. It is important that the lessons from such cases are learned regardless of where they come from, be it England, Northern Ireland or elsewhere.

The member has made some interesting points and I am happy to go along to her cross-party group in April to go through those points in a lot more detail. I thank the member for the intervention. We increasingly live in a borderless world in which the internet and social networking sites mean that crimes are not confined to any one particular geographical area. New ways in which young people can become prey to those who seek to sexually exploit them are emerging all the time. In Scotland, the current definition of childhood sexual exploitation—which is from 2003—is: “Any involvement of a child or young person below 18 in a sexual activity for which remuneration of cash or in kind is given to a young person or a third party or persons. The perpetrator will have power over the child by virtue of one or more of the following—age, emotional maturity, gender, physical strength, intellect and economic and other resources e.g. access to drugs”. That is the definition that has been used by those tasked with tackling these crimes in Scotland. Does that definition really capture the many ways in which child sexual exploitation can manifest? Does everyone agree that the definition is still relevant and captures the different forms that such exploitation can take? Clearly, in order to tackle such exploitation, we all need to know what it is and be able to recognise it. There needs to be a common understanding among young people themselves, parents, carers, professionals and the public of what forms sexual exploitation can take. It would appear from the evidence that the committee received that there is not a common understanding. There is confusion around what child sexual exploitation is. Must it always involve an exchange of cash or remuneration in kind? If it does not, does that mean that it is not recognised or recorded as child sexual exploitation? What about situations in which a young person is coerced into sexually exploitative practices due to a desire to fit in or be accepted? There may well not be any exchange of money or remuneration in kind but due to a strong desire to fit in or perhaps to come across as being mature, a young person might be vulnerable to being sexually exploited. On definitions, child sexual exploitation is a form of child abuse. However, I know from the evidence that we received that some organisations—including the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children—do not see and do not support any distinction between child abuse and child sexual exploitation. We have a situation in which there is no united view on whether there should be a distinction, much less on what child sexual exploitation looks like, what it is and how to recognise it. Partly for that reason, the committee’s overarching recommendation in its report is that a national, comprehensive strategy is required. The national strategy needs to include an updated definition—one that recognises the extent to which online activity is now part of all of our lives and the risks that that can present for our young people. The strategy also needs to provide direction to ensure that best practice is shared and the action that is required to do that is co-ordinated. That action will include training, public awareness raising, addressing young people’s vulnerabilities and ensuring that the necessary services are supported and sustainable. On sustainable services, I turn to the issue of refuges for young people. About 9,000 young people go missing in Scotland each year. Two of the case studies that the committee received illustrate only too starkly the connection between young people running away from home and the risks of sexual assault and exploitation. I do not propose to go into detail but the case studies are recounted in the committee report. Since 1995, our legislation has made provision for refuges for the under-16s. However, very few refuges were ever established and very little use was made of them by statutory agencies. As of last year, Scotland had only one such refuge, in the Glasgow area, which was run by Aberlour Child Care Trust. We were told by Aberlour that it had tried to work with local authorities and other relevant agencies, including the police, to encourage referrals but it was felt that there had not been an understanding of the value of a refuge and sadly we heard last year that the refuge had shut down because it was no longer viable. We did not get to the heart of why the refuge was closed but we have called for that to be investigated further; the minister may want to comment on that issue in her closing speech. Those are just a few of the issues in the committee report that I wanted to highlight in my opening remarks. I await others’ contributions with interest and I look forward in particular to the minister’s speech. I commend the committee report to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Public Petitions Committee’s 1st Report, 2014 (Session 4), Report on tackling child sexual exploitation in Scotland (SP Paper 449).

The First Minister will be aware that Flybe is to close its Inverness base with a loss of 35 jobs, which include local flight crew, engineers and pilots. Those losses are echoed in cuts in Aberdeen and beyond. Does the First Minister share my view that a base closure today could be a route closure tomorrow? Will he meet me to join the fight to save the base and local Highlands and Islands jobs?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that universities and colleges meet the needs of disabled students. (S4O-02607)

Has the cabinet secretary commissioned any research into the needs of disabled students undergoing further and higher education?

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that pillar 2 rural development projects are vital for reducing poverty, promoting ecosystems and enhancing competitiveness? The programme’s participants are farmers and the wider rural community. When will the cabinet secretary make a decision on the level of voluntary modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2?

Does the minister appreciate that there is a postcode lottery as far as community transport is concerned? In some parts of my patch in the Highlands and Islands, there is very little official bus transport and community transport is the answer. Therefore, the Government’s approach is unfair on rural areas.

I congratulate Maureen Watt and the members of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee on their excellent and constructive report on community transport. Community transport is a subject that is close to my heart. When I worked for the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations in 2005, one of my first tasks was to join a Scottish Government working group that was set up to advise the then Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, Tavish Scott, on the strengths of applications to the rural community transport initiative. As members will know, the fund was set up by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive and was aimed at rural and remote areas where there were very few, or limited, bus services. At that time, as the current transport minister will know, the budget was approximately £600,000 per annum. I remember that the group used to meet in Victoria Quay every month, and I would arrive weighed down by boxes of application forms from areas throughout rural Scotland. The forms were filled in by the hard-working volunteers. As we know, the community transport companies were operating on a shoestring, but they were united in their goal of providing a quality service to their local communities and to elderly, disabled and disadvantaged people. The group’s members would agonise over scoring each application, and we were conscious that not getting it right would mean less community transport in the Highlands, Aberdeenshire and the Borders. I place on record my appreciation for, and thanks to, all those who are running community transport across Scotland. They exhibit the power and strength of the third sector in Scotland, which has deep historical roots. A century and more ago, when the national health service was a mere twinkle in Nye Bevan’s eye, hospital almoners used to care for the sick, comfort the bereaved and counsel the dispossessed. They also had an early version of community transport, in that they arranged the transport of patients back to their own homes—which was, of course, by horse and cart, at that time. That work was not carried out through a sense of paternalism or pity; instead, it was a matter of professionalism and commitment. As the committee’s report notes, community transport is about much more than moving passengers from A to B. In rural and remote areas it is a force for good, an agent of rural development and a weapon against social isolation. I will give one example. In my region—the Highlands and Islands—the award-winning Badenoch & Strathspey Community Transport Company aims to increase its reach into the community by expanding its “Where 2 Today” community car and transport scheme. As members will know, Badenoch and Strathspey is a wide rural area where isolation is a real problem, particularly among the elderly. I am proud to say that I opened the scheme in Grantown-on-Spey in 1997 on a beautiful summer afternoon in one of my first tasks as a fresh-faced newly elected member of Parliament—surprising as that description may seem to members now.

Thank you—thank you so much. [Laughter.] The excellent service is also of notional benefit to the 120 volunteer drivers, most of whom are over 50. Of course, as we heard from Duncan McNeil, the health spin-off to service users and volunteers is immeasurable. A couple of years ago, the Highlands and Islands transport partnership, HITRANS, engaged consultants to review community transport schemes in the Highlands and Islands. After looking at five case studies, the consultants concluded that the cost of replacing community transport initiatives with commercially managed transport services would be £0.5 million. In passing, I want to flag up Iain Gray’s member’s bill, which seeks to change the regulatory framework for buses in Scotland. As members know, that would have implications for community transport. The bill is designed not only to find more ways of facilitating more accessible bus services through a new franchise power for local authorities, but to allow more use to be made of local authority fleets, with the aim of community transport making up the difference. As the committee convener rightly pointed out, community transport faces some serious challenges ahead. Since 2008, public bus transport provision has declined by 12.5 per cent. We have all heard about the demographic changes that will mean that the number of people over 65 will increase by 22 per cent by 2020. Several members have mentioned the critical shortage of revenue and capital funding that has been available for community transport provision since the funding was transferred to local authorities. We have also heard about the need for three-year rather than one-year funding periods, the lack of representative baseline information and the lack of a national co-ordinated approach. In addition, many members have mentioned the huge issue of equity—I think that Elaine Murray mentioned that in the context of concessionary travel. As Voluntary Action Scotland said, “Community transport networks are generally disparate in their nature and suffer from a lack of co-ordination to maximise their effectiveness.” It is also clear that some potential users do not know about the level and range of services that are available in their areas. However, potential solutions are in the air. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to examining the possibility of a grants scheme to fund new vehicles. In his winding-up speech, perhaps the Minister for Transport and Veterans could provide some details about the timescale for that proposal. Community transport is undoubtedly a huge resource for users, particularly in rural Scotland. By integrating with patient transport and utilising publicly owned vehicles such as school buses, the service can go to the next level in serving communities. In terms of building communities, community transport is one instrument in the toolbox and is delivered by the dedication and professionalism of a dynamic third sector.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil and the Health and Sport Committee on their excellent report and I commend the Routledge and Swainson reviews, which made a helpful contribution to the debate. I will focus on patient access to medicines for orphan diseases. The issue was highlighted in the three petitions that served as a springboard for the Health and Sport Committee’s report. As members have said, as convener of the Public Petitions Committee, with my colleagues I took evidence from a variety of groups, such as Rare Disease UK. I associate myself with Nanette Milne’s comments on the great work on drugs that Tina McGeever from Moray did, and thank Christine Grahame for her very kind remarks about the Public Petitions Committee’s work. Orphan medicines are, of course, for the treatment of life-threatening conditions that affect no more than five in 10,000 people. Ultra-orphan medication is licensed for the treatment of diseases with a prevalence of less than one in 50,000. During evidence to my committee, Alastair Kent of Rare Disease UK said: “People with rare diseases do not choose to have a rare disease. There is no kudos attached to having something that is difficult to diagnose, expensive to treat and about which little might be known.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 4 October 2011; c 154.] As others have done, Mr Kent praised the European Union’s orphan medicinal products policy, which has led to therapies being produced for diseases that have been untreatable and have led to consistent and chronic ill health. Market access to new drugs is one dimension, of course, but direct access for individual patients is another. I welcome the Scottish Government’s £20 million a year rare conditions medicines fund, which should provide access for patients who suffer from orphan and ultra-orphan conditions to medicines that are not approved by the Scottish Medicines Consortium. Initially, the fund was to last to 2013, but I think that the cabinet secretary said that it will last until 2016. Will he say in his winding-up speech whether he is confident that value-based pricing will be in place when the fund comes to an end? Will he also say what the timescale is for the peer-approved clinical system to take over from the individual patient treatment request scheme? Many treatments for orphan conditions make a tiny physical difference to the patient but a massive change to their quality of life. I will give one example, which Mr Kent gave my committee. He described the story of a young woman who has an inborn error of metabolism. By having enzyme replacement therapy, her lung function went up by 4 per cent. Members may think that that is not a lot, and they would be right to think that. It is enough for a short intake of breath for a healthy person—or perhaps a longer intake of breath for someone who is giving a speech. However, it meant that she could come off artificial respiration for most of the day, which was a huge improvement to her quality of life. Members can imagine the frustration of families when they see a new therapy that they cannot access, even when their own clinicians have recommended it. We have heard that health economics play a huge role in the debate, and we have heard a lot about the SMC. Just the other morning, I heard it described on the radio as a group of hard-headed economists and statisticians who have the QALY assessment tool, which we have heard a lot about, as their second language. However, many of the treatments for rare diseases come above the £30,000 per QALY limit because they are novel therapies at the cutting edge of innovative research and development.

The member is quite right about modifiers and in the point that he made, which I was going to touch on. NICE looked at extending the QALY system to ultra-orphan conditions, but ruled that out because it would require such a high level of assumptions that it would leave no confidence in the outcome of the process. I was struck to find that there are more than 6,000 rare diseases, which affect one in 17 people. That is around 300,000 people in Scotland. Stephen Nutt, who gave evidence on rare diseases to the Health and Sport Committee in March 2012, said: “we do not think that patients in Scotland currently have fair access to treatment.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 27 March 2012; c 2025.] The key point that he stressed was that patients sought equity, not preferential access to treatment. Ken Macintosh spoke about the PNH Alliance, which represents those who suffer from an ultra-rare bone marrow disease, which is another orphan condition. The key drug, which Ken Macintosh talked about, is Eculizumab, which can change life expectancy to normal from a median survival rate of 10 years. Last year, Lesley Loeliger from PNH Scotland told the Health and Sport Committee: “In my health board area, five patients have been recommended for Eculizumab. Of the five, I have been granted funding but the other four have not been so fortunate. One gentleman was refused funding several times. When I spoke to him, he told me that all he wanted was a life. Sadly, he died the next day.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 27 March 2012; c 2026.] I draw members’ attention to sub-orphan diseases, such as underactive thyroid, which affects 15 in every 1,000 women in the UK. My committee is considering a petition on that condition, for which there is one recommended medicine—in relation to other options, either they are not licensed or there is not enough research to establish their long-term safety. I ask the cabinet secretary to address the concern that, as we heard from Malcolm Chisholm, Scotland is in danger of losing its position at the forefront of clinical research. In particular, Scotland has gone down the league table for the provision of large-scale phase 3 commercial trials. The cabinet secretary knows well that those trials are crucial for the scientific community and for patients who participate in trials. The debate has given us a useful reminder of the often-forgotten sufferers of orphan diseases, who feel that they are the Cinderellas of the health service. I welcome the Scottish Government’s initiative in setting up the new rare conditions medicines fund. However, careful evaluation is needed over the three years of the fund’s life to ensure that it works for those who suffer the most.

President Dwight Eisenhower famously said: “Farming looks mighty easy when your plow is a pencil, and you’re a thousand miles from the corn field.” It is of course tempting to draw a comparison with the architects of the new CAP. Just when we all get to grips with the four-axis model, the European Commission comes along and abolishes them. However, complexity and timescale do not negate importance. Although I welcome the final agreement on the new CAP, I share the frustration of many people—not least some members who have spoken before me—that the policy has taken so long to agree and we are still months away from completion. In fairness, however, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s £70 million allocation from his portfolio’s draft budget to fund effectively the transition between the two programs, which will up to a point mitigate the uncertainly of EU delays. As we know, the new CAP is crucial for farmers and rural communities. The agricultural sector’s needs are in many ways critical to Scotland‘s future and it is essential that the SRDP be tailored to the reality of modern life in rural Scotland, with its rich diversity of individuals, enterprises and communities. The Scottish Agricultural College’s “2012: Rural Scotland in Focus” report reflected that diversity and called for Government policies to be tailored to the wider reality of rural Scotland. In a similar vein, the Carnegie UK Trust report, “Future Directions in Rural Development”, echoed views that were expressed by organisations such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations in calling for greater investment in capacity building and networking at community level. As we have heard, the new SRDP has the potential to benefit not just the farming industry and Scotland‘s environment, but Scotland‘s rural communities. The toolkit contains community-led local development strategies such as LEADER and an extended and improved Scottish national rural network. It is essential that when we address the CAP’s complex technicalities—which many members, not least the cabinet secretary, have referred to—we do not lose sight of the vital dimension of its being intended to be a policy that benefits all who live in rural Scotland. I will focus my remarks on the pillar 2 rural development programme, but it is perhaps worth pausing for a second to look back into history. As we all know, agricultural support—more specifically, support for farmers in the development of agricultural produce for the export market—was, arguably, an early driver for the treaty of Rome in 1957. As members also know, the powerful dynamic between France and Germany, which is reflected in foreign affairs and defence, demonstrates the strength of the relationship between those countries. That presents major challenges for us all in review, reform and renewal of the CAP. One of the bigger questions this afternoon, which Rob Gibson touched on, is the question about why we need public support for agriculture. We know the international picture, which is one of a crisis in global food prices and inflation that has led to food riots in nearly every continent apart from Europe. In addition, instability in the middle east has hit the price of oil and has affected transport and fertiliser costs. The key point is that security of supply is not just about the energy markets; it is a key element in the CAP as well. We would probably need the foresight of the Brahan seer to predict exactly what the Scottish allocation of the CAP is going to be, but we know, as has been pointed out in the debate, that there has been an overall cut in the EU budget and in the overall CAP budget, of 11 per cent and 12 per cent in pillar 1 and pillar 2 respectively. However, Scotland can gain, due to the external convergence mechanism, which is an EU-wide device for boosting direct payments for the recipients of the lowest amounts. The new deal allows much more flexibility for member states to move funds from one pillar to another through modulation, as Alex Fergusson touched on. That will support much-needed rural development. Perhaps the cabinet secretary, in his winding-up speech—if he is paying attention—could say whether he plans to use the full 15 per cent voluntary modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2. Pillar 2 rural development programmes must be linked to the six key priorities, which include enhancing competitiveness, promoting ecosystems, developing social inclusion and reducing poverty. The new arrangements will allow much more flexibility in how money is spent by individual member states. Pillar 2 has a crucial role to play in supporting and developing the delivery of public goods and services by agriculture, although as a number of members have stated—not least the cabinet secretary—the UK receives the lowest share of all EU member states, and Scotland has the lowest share of the four countries in the UK. The new arrangements allow for sub-programmes in a future SRDP, which could help to fund vital programmes that will help with existing and new crofter schemes, particularly those for new entrants. After a recent meeting that I had with the Crofting Commission, it is clear to me that there are growing concerns in crofting communities about how much real money will be allocated to the new crofters programme. Perhaps the cabinet secretary could give some assurances on that when he winds up. I want a future rural development programme that encompasses strong environmental stewardship, that works actively to secure biodiversity, manage landscapes and habitats, and that stresses the needs of people in rural and remote areas. Rural development needs people’s intelligence and individuality. The acid test will be how the CAP delivers for our most fragile and remote rural areas.

I strongly support the point that the member is making about rural development, but does he share my view that a maximum modulation of 15 per cent from pillar 1 to pillar 2 is something that we should be aiming for?

On the SRDP, when does the cabinet secretary expect to make a decision on the voluntary modulation between pillar 1 and pillar 2?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to increase the availability of educational psychologists. (S4O-02442)

A few short weeks ago, I met a student from Elgin who told me that she had just started a two-year master of science course in educational psychology at the University of Strathclyde but had to pay the full £9,365 yearly tuition fees even though, last year, no fees were applicable on the course. I will, of course, write to the minister about her case, but how will the introduction of tuition fees for this course widen access to higher education and tackle the shortage of educational psychologists across Scotland?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what analysis it has made of the issues faced by people under 65 with dementia. (S4O-02438)

As the cabinet secretary has rightly identified, in Scotland some 3,200 people under 65 have dementia. Many of those require help with personal care, such as continence management and food and diet, but are required to pay for such help because they are under 65. Will the cabinet secretary agree to review the policy so that we provide free personal care for dementia sufferers who are under 65 years old?

This is an important debate for Argyll and Bute and beyond, and I appreciate MSPs’ attendance in the chamber. I thank the members who have signed my motion. For those who have not done so, of course I always welcome sinners who wish to repent. This is not a debate about any old ferry crossing; it is about students getting to college, teachers commuting to schools and retired farmers getting to hospital. As members will know, earlier today the Dunoon-Gourock ferry action group braved the elements to campaign outside Parliament, and had the opportunity to meet MSPs. They want to ensure that there is a suitable service on this vital lifeline route. I welcome the group to Parliament, in their vantage point in committee room 5, and I thank the group’s chairperson, Susanna Rice, and Professor Neil Kay and Ronnie Smith who have helped and advised me on ferry matters for many years—as they would, of course, help all MSPs, irrespective of political complexion. Following the meeting of the DGFAG earlier today, it is clear to me that the deep feeling in the community that led to the formation of the group in November 2011 is as strong today as it was then. I had the privilege of attending and speaking at one of the action group’s first organised public meetings in Dunoon, which attracted 550 local residents. Who says that public meetings are dead? I shared a platform with Mike Russell on an evening of heavy showers and storms when both ferry services were off, so we both had to drive via the Rest and be Thankful, which is a misnomer if there ever was one. I was struck by the passion, engagement and, indeed, anger of local residents about the failure of ferry services. Following its inception, the group settled on a mission statement calling on the Scottish Government to deliver a frequent, safe and reliable vehicle and passenger ferry service between Dunoon town centre and Gourock rail terminal. The Gourock-Dunoon route even has its own historians who know every nuance of the Deloitte & Touche report, “Options for the Future of Ferry Services between Gourock and Dunoon”, which is the holy grail and the genesis of this debate, but an ordinary Dunoon-Gourock commuter does not have to read the report to know that the service is inadequate. Alex Neil described the MV Ali Cat, one of the boats on the service, as “not fit for purpose”. In the chamber today, however, we know that the Dunoon-Gourock service involves much more than going from A to B. It is much more than a simple transport system and entails much more than interpretations of some obscure maritime cabotage regulation. It concerns a community’s sense of identity, economic regeneration, and freedom to access jobs, health services and leisure. Where do we go from here? In the brief time that is available I will not rehash the chequered, confused and sometimes conflicted history of the Gourock-Dunoon ferry services, which is well-documented in the excellent Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard, which is represented here today.

It is important that we work with community groups and all political parties to try to achieve a solution to the problem. MVA Consultancy’s report, which was published in June for Transport Scotland, states: “Given the assumptions made here, a passenger and vehicle ferry service would be feasible under a two vessel scenario. It could attract the level of market share, and therefore generate sufficient incremental revenue, to cover the various incremental costs of delivering the service.” In my view we need Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd to provide two purpose-built vessels that have been engineered for the crossing, and to consult the local communities on what they want in terms of on-board facilities. That would take between 18 months and two years according to CMAL. Vessels should, of course, be capable of carrying cars, but no cross-subsidisation would be allowed; it is not permitted under EU regulations. In the event of Argyll Ferries not winning the next tender, vessels should go to the successful bidder, as happened when Serco won the NorthLink Ferries contract. The EU ruled that there could be a vehicle service on the route and that the Government could provide the vessels with service and require all bidders to use the supplied vessels, even if some of the bidders had vessels that would be cheaper. There could also be a short-term option: to use the MV Coruisk as a temporary measure. That option was highlighted to me when I met the ferry action group in the Queen’s hall in Dunoon recently. The MV Coruisk is a relief vessel in the winter; it takes cars and was used on the route in 2004. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities may wish to refer to that in her response. Another aspect to consider is that if we go ahead with two new-build hybrid vessels that use diesel and electricity, it might be possible to access the 2014 structural funds programme to partly fund the build, in the context of the low-carbon economy. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will agree to explore that with her officials. The strength of Argyll and Bute communities is their resilience. I spoke recently to Dunoon lawyer Euan Macdonald, who described how the local area fought back when the United States Navy pulled out of the Holy Loch. Local activists rallied, campaigned and knocked together the heads of politicians until they developed a sensible and practical new option, which provided diversification and new jobs in the area. We need to reinvent that can-do attitude. A solution can be found, with two new vessels that are custom built for the crossing and are capable of taking cars. The time is right to think again. Argyll and Bute deserves better. Second best is not enough. Let me rehash an old political slogan: two boats or no votes.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her comments about the Coruisk. As I highlighted in my speech, I am delighted that the Government is looking at that option. Just in case the cabinet secretary does not have time to discuss the longer term, if the Government is looking at purchasing two new vessels, will she ask her officials to look at the use of structural funds and see whether they can be provided, particularly for hybrid vessels? I believe that there are opportunities there that would reduce the cost to Government.

As a road safety campaigner, I strongly support increasing the speed limit for 7.5 tonne HGVs from 40mph to 50mph on single carriageways. Will the minister think again about trialling that proposal on the Inverness to Perth section of the A9 to build up evidence in favour of a wider roll-out across Scotland?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The First Minister will be aware that diabetes is the main cause of blindness in people of working age and that it accounts for half of non-traumatic lower limb amputations. Will he support a high-risk, targeted screening regime to find the hundreds of thousands of Scots who suffer from diabetes and do not know it? Will he join the crusade to eliminate Scotland’s silent killer?

Was specific legal advice taken on that? Was there likely to be a state aid impediment in those circumstances?

I am grateful for the member’s comments; she will have noticed that I intervened on the minister to raise that very point. Did her committee receive any evidence from the EU to suggest that state aid rules would be breached? After all, it is one thing to assume a breach and another to have physical legal advice on that.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate, not least as a former member of the Forth Crossing Bill Committee in the previous session, which was chaired very effectively by Jackson Carlaw, with solid contributions from Joe FitzPatrick, who has now gone on to greater things. Looking back at the 20 or so hours of evidence that that committee heard from various witnesses, including the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, and representatives from Transport Scotland, Friends of the Earth, FETA and the local communities, I suppose that, in a sense, it was “history in the making ... the largest public sector infrastructure project since devolution.”—[Official Report, 26 May 2010; c 26567.] I will make a few comments about the Forth Road Bridge Bill, and raise a few questions for the minister on issues such as consultation, staffing, finance and the environment. As we have heard from previous speakers, the bill is simple, straightforward and clear, in that it is intended to make provision for a single bridge operating company to carry out the management and maintenance of the Forth road bridge, the new Forth crossing and the connecting trunk roads. We have also heard in evidence that the contract tender will be subject to EU and United Kingdom procurement law and that, due to its scale, it will be advertised in the Official Journal of the European Union. I have a few questions for the minister. I ask again: why has FETA not been able to bid for the new contract on the basis that it will be extinct by the time the tenders go round? I suppose that it is difficult in some ways to compete with extinct bodies.

I totally agree with that point, and I am very pleased and positive about that aspect of the bill. My point is that there is no reason why FETA should not be able to bid for the project. I would develop that point if I had time. The Scottish Government bill team’s supplementary report to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee said: “Ministers chose not to cost Option 3”— which is delegation of the new crossing to FETA— “due to the lack of an effective mechanism to assess VFM.” Surely FETA has the best knowledge of value for money, as it runs the existing bridge. Surely there would be synergies in going from running one bridge to running a second bridge. I ask the minister these questions again, too. Has there been specific legal advice around breaches of state aid rules, or is there an assumption by ministers that there will be a state aid breach? Why not expand FETA so that it can cover the new crossing, too? When will the tender documents be issued? What is the timescale for assessment and the decision on the winning bid? We have already heard that there will be community benefit clauses around local employment and apprenticeships, which I very much support. I specifically ask the minister to clarify in his closing speech whether there will be an unsuccessful bidder premium for the new contract. He will know that, when the bids for the new Forth crossing were put in, the unsuccessful bidder got a £5 million unsuccessful bidder premium. Will that happen in the new contract? Will there be a condition in the contract that specifies that the successful bidder will have to register employees in the United Kingdom for national insurance purposes and not outsource them? That has been a feature of outsourcing organisations working with other companies. The chief engineer was quoted recently saying that the condition of the cables on the existing bridge has not materially diminished since 2008 and that they are not expected to lose more strength as long as the dehumidification systems function correctly. Does the minister agree with the FETA convener, who said that there was nothing to stop the bridge accommodating non-motorway traffic, farm vehicles, learner drivers and abnormal loads? Can we reconsider the issues around consultation? There was some evidence that the Forth Crossing Bill in the previous session did not follow the Aarhus convention in respect of consultation. Notwithstanding that, I support the general principles of the bill.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has for the future of air services from Skye. (S4O-01949)

The minister will be well aware of the “Skye Air Services Feasibility Study”, which predicts an “unconstrained” demand for air services from Skye to Glasgow and Edinburgh of more than 21,000 passengers per year. Does the minister share my enthusiasm for the boost that such services could provide to the business, domestic and tourism markets? It could provide a future in which the sky is the limit for Skye.

The minister will be aware of my interest in this issue, given that I am the co-convener of the cross-party group on diabetes. I agree with the Scottish Government’s targets for under-18s and the target to triple provision of pumps for all age groups over the next three years. However, how will the minister tackle the postcode lottery whereby some laggard health boards are simply not performing and will not meet the first target by the end of this month?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many recent meetings it has had with the United Kingdom Government on the future structural funds programme. (S4O-01887)

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that the new category of structural funds transition status for the Highlands and Islands is good news for both the region and the rest of Scotland, as it opens up new opportunities to invest in training, skills and infrastructure?

The contractor’s progress to date has included establishing the construction site, the temporary removal of parts of the glass roof over the concourse and wall panels, excavating and laying the foundations, and constructing the steel and concrete system frame. The project is on track and within budget. I remind members that the decision to proceed with the project was not taken lightly and was based on the corporate body’s corporate and legal responsibilities to ensure safety. The corporate body has a duty of care to all building users to put in place sufficient measures to the extent that is reasonably practical in the circumstances to do so. Failure to carry out measures that are, in law, reasonably practical could leave the corporate body and its individual members open to prosecution. The external security facility will provide protection for more than 400,000 visitors per year and up to 1,000 passholders daily, including staff, members, the media and contractors, through a significantly safer and more secure environment for screening.

The corporate body has received clear and consistent expert security advice that, in light of current threats, it is highly advisable for the Parliament to construct an external security facility. Although Graeme Pearson will understand more than most that I cannot go into the detail of that advice, there are other indicators such as the number of incidents that our own security staff deal with. For example, more than 1,500 sharp objects such as knives were retained in the public access area during 2012. The risk profile has changed from organised groups to obsessed individuals.

The SPCB is committed to an on-going programme of continuous improvement for accessibility and makes every effort to involve groups of disabled people in identifying where improvements can be made within the parliamentary campus. Recently we have been working with Autism Initiatives UK and the National Autistic Society to enable us to respond positively to the needs of people with autism who visit the Parliament building. For example, with Autism Initiatives UK, we have developed a training programme that is aimed at our public-facing staff, which will help them to gain a better understanding of the needs of people with autism and how best to respond to their individual needs.

I am very grateful to Mr McDonald for raising the issue with us. An initial meeting has taken place with the National Autistic Society and we are now exploring the matter further with the relevant business areas across the Parliament to identify whether we are meeting the needs of people with autism and where further development would be beneficial. We also intend to make contact with the officer at the Northern Ireland Assembly who led the process for gaining the autism access award to find out how that worked for the Assembly. We will update the member once further progress has been made.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to review the number and range of public service obligations for fragile air services in the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-01851)

The minister will be well aware that PSOs are extensively used in France and the Republic of Ireland to sustain air services to remote regions. The iconic beach landing at Barra is a classic example of a fragile, low-capacity route that would never survive the vagaries of the free market. Will the minister agree to meet me to discuss the wider use of PSOs throughout Scotland?

In press reports today, there is some speculation that the structural fund reduction for Scotland will be £260 million. Given that the UK Government has not yet had final negotiations with the Scottish Government to determine the allocation, will the cabinet secretary confirm that that is the actual figure that the Scottish Government expects the reduction to be?

I thank the convener and the members of the European and External Relations Committee for their quality report and for identifying the range of committee activity that engages with Europe, from the e-health action plan to public procurement and broadband networks. In my remarks, I will focus on the future of structural funds, particularly in the Highlands and Islands. I suppose that I will ask the rhetorical question, “How will Scotland be affected by the multi-annual financial framework agreed at the last Council summit?” Taking a wider view, my belief is that the summit was a missed opportunity to fully reform the EU budget, but perhaps that was a bridge too far. There was an overall rise in areas that will help to create jobs and growth, including funding for the youth guarantee, but we have heard about the cuts to the connecting Europe facility, which I believe were a mistake as they will slash information technology infrastructure across Europe. As we heard, it will be up to the UK Government, in negotiation with the Scottish Government, to allocate structural funds for the new programming period of 2014 to 2020 within the EU budget envelope. The announcement of the death of structural funds might have been a little premature, but the funding for cohesion policy has been cut by about 8 per cent compared with the current MAFF. However, the budget still has to be approved by the European Parliament. The new MAFF will introduce a new category of structural funding for transition regions, which will provide funding for regions whose per capita gross domestic product is between 75 per cent and 90 per cent of the EU average. The figure for my region, the Highlands and Islands, is still only just over 84 per cent of the average. Members will know that the Highlands and Islands covers a third of Scotland’s landmass and an area that is larger than Belgium, but its population is smaller than that of Brussels. It has challenging geography, with a coastline that is longer than Brazil’s and more than 100 inhabited islands. As we all know, depopulation has been a running sore in my patch, with huge issues such as the departure of whole communities, the best example of that being St Kilda. The structural funds programme between 2000 and 2006 created or retained 17,000 jobs, assisted more than 9,000 businesses and supported 11,000 trainees. My overalI view is that European funding is not some paternalistic sop from Eurocrats, but a crucial economic tool to lever up to the EU average the per capita GDP of lagging regions. It provides planning and economic opportunities to exploit emerging markets such as life sciences, renewable energy and the creative industries. I am sure that the minister shares my view that transition region status will be an important economic tool in overcoming natural handicaps and allowing the region to work with the rest of Scotland in contributing towards the EU 2020 goals of promoting smart, sustainable and inclusive growth in the EU economy. I am sure that the cabinet secretary has picked up the point that, because the Highlands and Islands is the only transition region in Scotland, we have, in effect, two funds, so we are doubling up through the proposal. That is well worth stressing when we look at the reduction in budgets. My time is short. I ask the cabinet secretary to address the review of state-aid guidelines in the winding-up speech. The financial assistance that public bodies give private companies is vital at a time of economic recession. The European Commission proposals could have a detrimental effect in Scotland by limiting public agencies’ ability to pump-prime crucial growth points such as the renewable energy sector. I also urge the Scottish Government to work with Westminster to review the EU proposals on defining the regional aid map so that regional deprivation and sparsity of population are still key factors. There has to be an underlying fairness in defining the map for the provision of funding to both large enterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises. I wish the committee well in its future deliberations.

I thank the members here today for their interest in the debate and for signing my motion. For those members still to sign, I always welcome sinners who wish to repent. The context of the debate is road safety, but I also believe that increasing the speed limit for heavy goods vehicles will improve productivity in the haulage industry, reduce the costs of production and transportation of goods, and cut prices for the end user: the customer. What is it that I am calling for? I am calling for the raising of the speed limit for HGVs that weigh more than 7.5 tonnes from 40mph to 50mph on single carriageways. Members will be familiar with the fact that the United Kingdom Government recently ran a consultation exercise for England and Wales on this very subject and that we await the results. Members will also be familiar with the fact that the Scotland Act 2012 gives the Scottish ministers the powers to regulate the speed of all classes of vehicle. As I am a road safety campaigner on issues such as the graduated licence scheme for young drivers, l was contacted by a lorry driver, Conor McKenna, from Inverness, whose campaign I agreed to support. Mr McKenna argued that the HGV speed limit for single carriageways frustrated other motorists and led to some to make dangerous overtaking manoeuvres. The Automobile Association chief executive, Edmund King, said: “Drivers will generally support this proposed change as a common sense move. Slower lorries can lead to tailbacks, dangerous overtaking and road rage. Freer-flowing traffic will benefit road safety by reducing dangerous overtaking and benefit the environment by reducing emissions.” Many members will be aware of the environmental issues. My general view is that we should be taking freight off the road and on to rail. When the Labour Party formed an Administration with the Liberal Democrats, it pursued the freight facilities grant and took much freight off the road and on to rail. I was taken by the Road Haulage Association assessment that lorries that do 50mph in higher gears produce fewer emissions than vehicles that do 40mph at lower gears. It is interesting that the policy is beneficial in terms of climate change, as well. Neil Greig, who is the director of policy and research at the Institute of Advanced Motorists, said: “We welcome the consultation on new speed limits for lorries. On many long-distance rural roads, platooning behind lorries who are sticking to the limit is often blamed for causing frustration and dangerous overtaking. Ideally this change should be introduced in a series of trials and pilots first so that the real impact can be assessed before the change is made permanent.” From all parts of the country the message is the same: modern trucks are perfectly capable of doing 50mph safely and fuel efficiently on suitable A roads, and raising the limit would lead to greater road safety and a reduction in death and injury. I call on the minister to pilot a trial on a cross-section of our key road network such as the A9 before making further decisions. Truck drivers have the difficult duty of watching in their mirror long queues of increasingly frustrated drivers building up behind them. Occasionally, such drivers make dangerous manoeuvres as their patience comes to an end and the red mist comes down and clouds their judgment. Sometimes such frustration ends in tragedy. Many believe that having a higher speed limit would avoid that. The answer is to give professional HGV drivers the latitude to drive at up to 50mph on single-carriageway roads where there is no restriction on motorists beyond the national speed limit and where it is safe to do so. Members will be well aware that the speed limits that are currently legislated for are detailed under schedule 6 to the Road Traffic Act 1984. We are talking about a speed limit that was set almost 30 years ago when the design and safety capabilities of HGVs were very different to what they are today. Today, HGVs have safety and design improvements in line with normal family cars and other road vehicles. Of course, the stopping distance of an HGV is more than that of a family car, but so is the stopping distance of an HGV under 7.5 tonnes, which can legally travel at 50mph on a single carriageway. We therefore have a strange anomaly. Two sizes of HGV can legally travel at different speeds, yet all cars, no matter their size, are subject to the same speed limit. A crucial point concerns the driver. An HGV driver is technically far better trained than a normal car driver as they have to pass two separate practical and theory tests on driving and road-safety awareness. In addition, HGV drivers undertake regular sight tests, unlike car drivers. Those facts alone should surely lead us to conclude that there are far fewer road collisions involving HGVs than collisions involving other forms of transport. I welcome the consultation exercise that has taken place south of the border in relation to this issue and, as a long-standing road safety campaigner, I urge the Scottish Government to look seriously at this issue and to consider a study on the A9 and beyond. As Jack Semple, director of policy at the Road Haulage Association said: “The overwhelming view of members is that the current 40mph speed limit is quite unnaturally slow on many roads and creates congestion, frustration and avoidable road safety risks for no good reason; that it is an out-dated limit. Developments in braking and other safety systems mean that HGVs on the road today are perfectly capable of doing 50mph safely and fuel-efficiently on suitable single-carriageway roads. Raising the limit would lead to greater road safety and to a reduction in death and injury.” A new chapter in road safety is ready to be opened. To quote Sir Walter Scott, what we need is: “the will to do, the soul to dare”.

I thank the minister for his comments. He is being very fair minded about the debate that we have had. The consultation in England and Wales has finished and there will be a massive amount of evidence, which will also be applicable to Scotland, on air quality, speed and safety. I assume that the minister’s officials will analyse the consultation in England and Wales. What are the costs of having a Scottish consultation or a mini-pilot? I understand that there are practical constraints, but it seems to me that this is a fairly minor experiment that could have greater gains for Scotland.

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the completion of the resurfacing of the Kessock bridge. (S4O-01812)

I acknowledge the mitigation measures that the minister has developed, especially the reopening of the Conon Bridge railway station, but the gaping hole in the strategy is the lack of a park and ride at Tore. Such a facility could take hundreds of cars from the Black Isle and beyond off the bridge at peak times. Even at this the 11th hour, will the minister look again at that proposal to prevent traffic mayhem on the Kessock bridge and win the gratitude of legions of frustrated north drivers?

When the historians of tomorrow—those yet unborn—meet on the Mount Olympus heights of our great universities to assess devolution, where will the chapter open? What will be the points in time that really made a difference for ordinary Scots? Could it be Donald Dewar’s electrifying but poetic speech at the opening of Parliament, the fight to take children out of poverty, the establishment of free personal care or the smoking ban? I believe that the cross-party support for international development, not least in Malawi, will also be up there in lights. The work on human rights at home and abroad has been outstanding. The creation of the Scottish Human Rights Commission by this very Parliament in 2006 is an example of devolution at its best: outward looking, internationalist and fighting the corner for the powerless, the poor and the dispossessed. Veteran human rights journalist John Pilger said: “We are beckoned to see the world through a one-way mirror, as if we are threatened and innocent and the rest of humanity is threatening, or wretched, or expendable. Our memory is struggling to rescue the truth that human rights were not handed down as privileges from a parliament, or a boardroom, or an institution, but that peace is only possible with justice and with information that gives us the power to act justly.”

I am very sorry—I am really short of time. The Scottish Human Rights Commission has been a success story. In 2010, it received A status and was recognised as fully compliant with the UN principles on the status of national institutions, which brings with it international recognition and speaking rights at the Human Rights Council and other UN bodies. In the same year, the commission and Parliament hosted a national human rights conference, with an address by Mary Robinson, former President of Ireland and ex-UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. In 2011, Scotland was elected chair of the European group of national human rights institutions. We undoubtedly have a strong team of commissioners and staff. I place on record the recognition by Parliament of Professor Alan Miller, chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, who is in the gallery this afternoon. He is a well-respected figure in the international human rights world and his reputation projects influence on the world stage. The Scottish Human Rights Commission’s recent report, “Getting it Right? Human Rights in Scotland”, provides a textbook answer on the question of what human rights is. It is adequate housing, fair pay, fighting fuel poverty, standing up for the victims of crime, and disability action. Aung San Suu Kyi said: “Within a system which denies the existence of basic human rights, fear tends to be the order of the day. Fear of imprisonment ... fear of losing friends ... property or means of livelihood ... fear of isolation, fear of failure.” We all know that human rights institutions are not perfect. As a joint report from the House of Lords and the House of Commons in 2010 made clear, the European Court of Human Rights is in crisis, with a backlog of more than 120,000 cases. Those failures are, in part, a result of the failure of national Governments to implement court judgments. We need more pressure on Governments to implement convention rights at national level. We have made good progress but still have some way to go. In our justice system, there have been positive developments in children’s hearings and improved services for victims. However, as we have heard, there are gaps. There is an increase in hate crimes, a low prosecution rate in human trafficking and variable conditions in detention centres. Adopting the UN national action plan for human rights, which is evidence based, will help us to develop ways to address those gaps. Those areas can be developed and strengths and weaknesses can be analysed. I look forward to the outcome of the participation stage this year. Let us aim for Scotland to pick up the challenge as a leading nation in human rights and an exemplar of best practice, not just in Scotland but in Europe and beyond.

Parliament is invited to agree to the motion in my name on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to nominate Professor Alan Miller to Her Majesty the Queen for reappointment for a second term as the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission. The reappointment process comprised three elements: independent evaluation, interview and nomination. The office-holders that the SPCB supports are subject to annual evaluation, based on set criteria that include, for example, fulfilling the functions of the post; managing the day-to-day running of the office; leadership and motivation skills; and forward planning. A report on the office-holder’s performance is prepared by the independent assessor and submitted to the SPCB, and that forms part of the information that the SPCB considers during the reappointment process. The SPCB sat as a reappointment panel on Tuesday 11 December to consider Professor Miller for reappointment. The panel members were Linda Fabiani, Mary Scanlon and me. I place on record my thanks to Louise Rose for confirming by way of a validation certificate that the nomination is made on merit following a fair and robust reappointment process that conformed to good practice. Details of the information that the SPCB considered and the criteria on which Professor Miller was assessed are set out in a report that the SPCB has lodged in the Scottish Parliament information centre. Professor Miller was appointed on 3 March 2008 as the first chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission. His first task was to establish his office and then, in consultation with the three part-time commission members, to set the strategic direction of the commission. As we heard in the previous debate, the commission has achieved much in its short life. On behalf of the corporate body, I wish Professor Miller and his commission continued recognition and success. I firmly move, That the Parliament nominates Professor Alan Miller to Her Majesty The Queen for reappointment for a second term as the Chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission from 3 March 2013 until 2 March 2016.

As you know, Presiding Officer, Mary Scanlon is unfortunately ill today, and I have been asked to speak to the motion in her name. As a member of the appointment panel, I invite members to agree to the appointment of Lindsey Gallanders as a member of the Standards Commission for Scotland. As members are aware, under the Ethical Standards in Public Life Act 2000, members of the commission are appointed by the SPCB with the agreement of the Parliament. This is the first such appointment undertaken by the corporate body, as until 1 April 2007, the commission was sponsored by the Scottish Government and members of the commission were appointed by Scottish ministers. The role of the commission, as members are aware, is to encourage high ethical standards in public life. It does that by promoting and enforcing the codes of conduct for councillors and members of devolved public bodies. The corporate body sat as a selection panel on 10 December last year. The members of the panel were Liam McArthur, Mary Scanlon and me. From a very strong field of candidates, we are seeking the agreement of Parliament to appoint Lindsey Gallanders as a member of the commission. On behalf of the corporate body, I thank Louise Rose, the independent assessor who oversaw the process and who has confirmed by way of a validation certificate that the appointment process complied with good practice and that the recommendation to appoint Lindsey Gallanders is made on merit after a fair, open and transparent process. We believe that Lindsey Gallanders will bring to the post enthusiasm, integrity, discretion and a commitment to ensuring that high ethical standards are upheld in public life. I am sure that the Parliament will want to wish her every success in her new role. I move, That the Parliament agrees, under section 8 of the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc. (Scotland) Act 2000, to appoint Lindsey Gallanders as a member of the Standards Commission for Scotland.

In the early 1980s, when I was a fresh-faced social work student, hard as that may be to imagine now, I was in a Stirling GP surgery waiting room. On the wall was a striking poster by the Health Education Council that pictured a young woman with a bright smile and perfect complexion who radiated good health. The caption read: “Six months after Mary had a nervous breakdown, her friends are still recovering.” I think that Mary had a lot in common with Winston Churchill, Florence Nightingale and Gandhi, who all suffered from episodic mental illness. In Roy Jenkins’s seminal work on Churchill, Sir Winston described his depression as the “black dog”, which was perhaps not helped by his legendary drinking. I will focus on the stigma surrounding mental illness, which Mark McDonald referred to. I will illustrate it by a couple of examples from my experience as a mental health officer, looking at social and economic implications and touching on best employment practice. Before I move on to that, though, I want to say that the Scottish Government document on the mental health strategy for Scotland is well researched and well argued. I certainly support the three quality ambitions of being person centred, safe and effective, and the seven themes, particularly the anti-stigma work and the Scottish Human Rights Commission’s work on promoting rights for those who suffer from mental illness. I support of course the 2016 standard to have 18 weeks between referral and commencement of treatment. Previous speakers have rightly pointed out that mental health problems cause considerable poor health in Scotland. The World Health Organization, to which previous speakers have referred, estimates that one in four people will have a mental health problem at some time in their lives. The Audit Scotland overview of mental health services reported that depression and anxiety combined is the most common mental health problem. The Scottish Government’s information service estimates that 300,000 Scots take antidepressants regularly and Audit Scotland has highlighted that socially excluded people are at greater risk of developing mental health problems. To paraphrase Nelson Mandela’s famous line: while social exclusion persists, there is no true freedom. I think that Kevin Stewart got it right when he said that there are higher levels of mental health problems in deprived areas. For example, the suicide rate for people living in deprived areas is four times that of people living in the most advantaged areas. The Office of National Statistics reported in 2004 that nearly half of all councils’ looked-after children have mental health problems. In 2003, as Mary Scanlon correctly said, the Scottish Executive stated that three quarters of drug users and half of those with alcohol problems may have mental health problems. Many members have mentioned the Scottish Association for Mental Health study that showed that the social and economic cost of mental health has reached £10.2 billion a year, which represents an increase of 25 per cent since 2004-05. What is the solution? I highlight the groundbreaking work by BT, whose mental wellbeing strategy has led to a 30 per cent fall in mental health related sickness absence and more people returning to work after absence. What about a personal view of mental illness? Lynsey Pattie gave evidence to my Public Petitions Committee in November. She has a mental health problem. She said in evidence: “we need to address the stigma of mental ill health. From a young age, children are taught social education, starting with relationships in primary school and going right through to drugs and alcohol in secondary school. I feel that mental health should feature more heavily in such education, with the correct facts being given. I find it amazing and saddening that so many people have the wrong facts about mental health ... Words such as “psycho” are used daily in newspapers for no other reason than to describe a footballer making a bad tackle. Just yesterday, I heard a news reporter calling a news story “bonkers” and someone else being called a “loony” because they had a different opinion. When there is a murder, people automatically assume that the person is mentally ill.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 13 November 2012; c 868.] My experience as a mental health officer in the mid-1980s was that services were hospital-centric and, in the spectrum of overall healthcare, mental health was the Cinderella service. I still remember working in the locked ward at Craig Dunain hospital in Inverness, which was a Victorian institution, and watching electroconvulsive therapy being given to an elderly patient. I had nightmares for weeks afterwards. Of course, there has been a major shift to community-based and person-centred care. I highlight in particular the excellent work that is carried out by the choose life team. Before joining the Parliament, I worked closely with the Highland team leader and saw at first hand the excellent training that is carried out with nursing, police and local authority staff in the field of suicide prevention. We know from the Royal College of Psychiatrists briefing—and we heard earlier—that economic cycles give a clear indication of suicide trends. I was struck by the comment that more older people experience illnesses such as depression and anxiety.

I strongly agree with the point that Richard Simpson makes. In conclusion, I welcome the Scottish Government’s mental health strategy for Scotland. To campaign for improvements to mental health services is to lead a crusade for social justice and inclusion and to champion the fight against the tyranny of the stigma of mental illness.

Name them!

Is the minister aware of the research carried out by the magazine Ethical Consumer, which criticised Serco for tax avoidance and its poor industrial relations record, not least in Plymouth’s Derriford hospital and Cornwall’s out-of-hours service, where staff numbers have been slashed? Will the minister support a full investigation into the awarding of the contract and, more important, ensure that future ferry contracts have a 50:50 balance between price and quality to protect the workforce and ferry users?

Does the minister share my view that increasing the speed of rail services is the best way of getting drivers out of cars and on to trains and that the necessary capacity improvements on the Highland main line can best be achieved by providing more strategically located dynamic loops, to allow trains to pass each other at speed rather than wait in short loops? Is he satisfied with the fact that both lines that connect Inverness with the north-east and the south are still largely single track?

The cabinet secretary will be well aware that the scientific advice from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea is for an increase in the total allowable catch for the west of Scotland nephrops. That, of course, is to be welcomed, but the Mallaig and North-West Fishermen’s Association tells me that that may be subject to a six-week closure from 21 December. It claims that that lies at the door of Marine Scotland, not its fleet. Will the cabinet secretary investigate that claim and resolve the issue before the deadline is reached?

The loss of senior BBC editorial staff in the north may well mean that programmes are driven from Pacific Quay rather than Plockton. Does the First Minister share my view that the BBC’s responsibility is to represent all of Scotland, not just the central belt?

I know that the member has extensive experience and expertise in IT systems from his previous working life. The corporate body is fully aware of the reliance of members and their staff on effective and efficient IT services in local offices and we are committed to reviewing and, where possible, improving performance. Recent contractual changes provided a vehicle to ensure that all local offices are equipped with the fastest broadband service that their local telecommunications network supports, but it should be noted that the services are delivered over the public infrastructure and, as such, they are limited by the capacity and availability of those common services. Taking that limitation into account, the business information technology office is working with suppliers to consider what other technologies might be used to improve the performance of the network infrastructure that supports local offices. That work will involve consultation with members and the plan is to pilot potential solutions early next year. To assist with the consultation and other IT issues that members may be experiencing, BIT recently appointed an engagement manager, who will be happy to discuss any aspect of the services that are provided. If the member wishes to participate in the pilot, I will be happy to forward his name to BIT.

I thank the member for his comments. He is an ideal choice to be part of the pilot, given his technical expertise, and I will be happy to nominate him to BIT.

I know that Mr Johnstone also has tremendous background knowledge of IT systems, and I would also like to nominate him to form part of the piloting of systems for the future.

Mr Kelly has also taken a great interest in IT issues—[Laughter.] I thank him for his question. The Scottish Parliament, like most modern organisations, relies on information technology for the effective and efficient delivery of business. The business information technology office is committed to reviewing and, as I said, improving performance. Recent changes to the IT systems have increased the resilience and speed of our voice and data systems, thereby providing greater capacity for internet services such as email, web browsing and remote access, as well as reducing costs. Contractual changes have provided us with a vehicle to ensure that all local offices are equipped with the fastest broadband service that the telecommunications network supports but, as I said in my answer to Mr Coffey, it is delivered over the public infrastructure and, as such, it is limited by the capacity and availability of these services. However, members have benefited from increased mailbox sizes and improved reliability of remote access solutions.

The member makes a very strong point. I should note in response to his and previous questions that the Scottish Parliament BIT department benchmarks our work with that of Parliaments in Westminster, Wales and Northern Ireland, but I take on board the comments that the member has made—and has made very well. Finally, just to put the member’s remarks in context, I also point out that we are three staff down in BIT and have lost a considerable number of qualified staff members over the past year.

In answering this question, I think it useful to state from the outset that members’ staff are employed by individual members, not the corporate body. Individual members determine their own staff’s terms and conditions. Of course, if individual members of staff, who are employed by members, wish to set up an employee forum, that is a matter for them. However, given what I have said, it would not be appropriate for the corporate body to engage with such a forum as to do so would confuse the employment relationship between the member and his or her staff.

Although I understand Mr Harvie’s point, I stress that as an employer of 470 staff we engage very well in collective bargaining with our three trade unions and those staff. The key point is that members employ staff and that it is for MSPs to discuss corporate body decisions directly with them.

Will the member give way?

I thank James Dornan for his comments about young people and education. Does he share my view that a graduated driving licence such as exists in New Zealand, which ensures that young drivers must get more experience before they get a full unrestricted licence, is a good way forward?

I welcome this debate on drink-driving. I will focus my remarks on young driver safety. I will begin by reading part of a blog that was posted on a well-known site only this week, from the best friend of a drink-driver. It states: “We all enjoy our nights out but my mate takes it way too far, he’s never aggressive or anything when he’s drunk but last Friday night was the tipping point for many of us that go out. We found out that after 18 pints of Caffreys, 10 JD & Cokes and various shots of liqueurs that he actually drove the 3 miles home. All that started at 5pm and ended at 4am. This has got to stop, if he’d hit anyone or anything then he would never have known about it.” The blog went on: “My take on it is that if he is stupid enough to do it then he will have to face the consequences, but it’s not just him that would suffer ... So would his wife, his three kids and god forbid the poor ... family of the person that he hits.” Having spent years campaigning for driver safety, I have learned a lot about the tragedies that are involved in drink-driving and have spent a lot of time thinking about the solutions to that crucial aspect of driver safety. The trigger for me was the tragic death of two 17-year-olds in March 2010, which were directly linked to drink-driving. After that, I formed a group and led a local campaign in the Highlands and Islands called sensible driving—always arriving. In that case, during the small hours of a March morning two years ago, a local 17-year-old took out her car. She was under the influence of alcohol. Although she was a learner driver, she went for a drive round Inverness and, while driving, saw a male friend of hers who was only minutes from his home. She offered him a lift, which he accepted. She then accelerated to 100mph, within the town, and struck a tree, killing both of them and, in the process, nearly destroying two families and their many friends with grief. It is a truism that is not depleted by repetition that there is no greater tragedy, no greater sorrow and no greater loss than for a parent to lose a child. Although drink-driving appears to be a single issue, as many members have mentioned, it is in fact a diverse problem that includes various dimensions such as alcohol abuse, underage drinking and other social concerns, as identified in the North review and the NICE report of 2010. Therefore, the solutions need to be equally intricate and wide-ranging. The issue demands a comprehensive, creative and flexible approach. It is important to view drink-driving in the broader context of the public health implications of alcohol abuse. As a result, the solutions must take into account drinking patterns and groups that are particularly at risk. As a Highlands and Islands road safety campaigner, I welcome any measures that will improve road safety and reduce fatalities and serious injuries as a result. Many members cited statistics. It is tragic that every year, one in nine deaths on Scottish roads involves a driver who is over the drink-driving limit. Every year an average of 30 deaths on Scottish roads are caused by drivers who are over the legal limit. In 2010, there were 750 casualties and 20 deaths. Many campaigning organisations, including Living Streets, which I think wrote to all members, have called for no alcohol consumption before driving, to end what I call the driver’s Russian roulette. Is it okay to drive after one pint? A pint and a half? Two pints, or maybe more? Many members raised that issue. I firmly believe that we must continue to provide a series of measures to tackle a serious issue. In some areas in the north and elsewhere in Scotland, the drunk driver is kept in custody, to appear before the court the next day. Courts can impose immediate disqualification and can seize the drink-driver’s vehicle, as the cabinet secretary said. My campaign, sensible driving—always arriving, represents a chance to target drink-driving before it starts. It is targeted at new or young drivers and we are pushing for the introduction of a graduated licence scheme. Such a scheme would involve measures such as extending the test to cover night driving and driving on dual carriageways. It would include a period of observational driving and limit the number of passengers in the car.

I agree with the member, who is quite right. Most new drivers are under 25, but new drivers who are over 60, for example, should be part of the scheme. The proposed scheme involves a number of other measures. In the context of this debate, a key proposal is that there should be as near as possible to a zero alcohol level. NICE looked at evidence throughout the world on zero tolerance and graduated licence schemes. It asked what would help to reduce alcohol-related injuries and deaths. One study showed that zero tolerance would reduce deaths among underage drinkers by a quarter, which is a fantastic result. Three studies in the United States showed that zero-tolerance laws changed the pattern of alcohol consumption and drink-driving behaviour among young people. Perhaps most interesting was the study of the graduated licence scheme in New Zealand, which showed that for young drivers, crashes were less likely. Crashes were also less likely to happen at night, because of the restriction on night driving, less likely to involve passengers, because of the restriction in that regard, and less likely to involve drivers who had drunk alcohol. The North review called for reductions in the drink-driving limit, but the UK transport minister said that persistent drink drivers are “less likely to be deterred by a reduction in the limit than by a greater prospect of being caught”. I was going to ask the cabinet secretary if he wanted to comment on that, but he is no longer in the chamber. Perhaps the minister will comment, in his place. International best practice suggests that the countries that have the lowest drink-driving figures have three things in common: a long track record of drink-driving limit enforcement, including a low legal limit; a high level of detection; and mass media support for enforcement. For young drivers, in particular, graduated licence schemes, with restrictions on passengers and night driving and zero tolerance of alcohol, along with increased education, will reduce the carnage on our roads and deaths and injuries among young people throughout Scotland.

As a highlander, I have had an interest in the land reform debate since I was old enough to hold up my first copy of the West Highland Free Press. History provides a rich tapestry of experiences: the Highland clearances, the battle of the braes and the Highland Land League. Perhaps lesser known are the seven men of Knoydart, who defied Nazi sympathiser and landlord Lord Brocket to settle the land. Gigha is an exemplar in the debate—a standard in the toolbox of how it is done. I visited the island in August. As one makes the crossing from Tayinloan to Gigha, the beauty of the natural landscape comes into view, and in the distance it is possible to make out the faint outline of the dancing ladies of Gigha, which point to the transformation of this beautiful place. The beauty of the landscape is superseded only by the warmth of the people on the island. Once there, one finds a thriving community, a youthful and dynamic population, a number of new business start-ups, a fine housing refurbishment project and a community energy resource, exporting power to the national grid. In short, one finds a community that is going places. Yet that was not always the case. A dwindling population, poor housing stock and a lack of opportunities led to fears for the future sustainability of the island. Indeed, as recently as 2000, the population was less than 100. Gigha, as with so many other places in Scotland, had been passed from landowner to landowner, with no reference to the community, choking the entrepreneurial spirit of the residents and stifling development. The catalyst for this remarkable change is what we are celebrating today. Ten years ago, on 15 March 2002, through the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust the people took possession of the island that they call home. For the first time, those with a stake in the island took ownership of the community, and that changed the outlook of the island in remarkable ways. To give some simple facts, the population has grown by 50 per cent, two thirds of the housing stock has been refurbished and the island has moved towards sustainability by purchasing and constructing its own wind farm. Of course, challenges still remain. Not least of those are funding problems, which lead to concerns about the completion of the housing refurbishment. I hope that the minister will be able to provide me with some reassurances in that regard today. However, those challenges should not detract from the incredible success of Gigha, which provides an example to other communities of what can be achieved with community ownership of land. Today, I offer my heartfelt congratulations to the people of Gigha in celebrating this milestone in their history. Gigha is just one of the success stories of community ownership of land. In the communities of Knoydart, Eigg, South Uist, Galston or Harris, there is a new dynamism, new enterprises and a new confidence about the future. That is what comes when private land ownership gives way to community ownership, when a community democratically has control of its land and associated assets and can utilise the land in the cause of securing a more sustainable future. The sort of activity now seen in Gigha has been replicated in those other communities.

The member makes a very good point. I think that this should extend across Scotland, where there is local community demand. Some 500,000 acres of Scotland is now owned and managed by local communities but, significant though that is, it represents only a tiny fraction of Scotland’s land. There is so much more scope to push further forward with the agenda of community ownership. Doing that will help to bring the benefits that we are seeing in Gigha and elsewhere to many more communities. Only two weeks ago, we marked the 20th anniversary of the death of John McEwen, who wrote “Who Owns Scotland?” His book demonstrated just how few people owned the vast bulk of our land. Since it was published in the 1970s, some things have changed for the better but not enough has. The land ownership pattern remains essentially the same, and that simply cannot be right. As we look forward, we cannot imagine a future Scotland where that continues. I have a confession to make: I am a great admirer of David Cameron—not the Prime Minister but the real one, who is the chairman of Community Land Scotland and who is in the public gallery today. In a recent speech, he called land reform “unfinished business”, which is fundamental to greater social justice in Scotland. He said: “Is it possible for Scots to conceive of a future Scotland that does not, explicitly, have greater social justice at its heart? I think not. ... This is not about fighting battles of the past ... land reform remains a cause of the present and the future.” Today, land changes under the feet of the people for some odd reasons. In the same speech, David Cameron highlighted a recent advert for the Gledfield estate in Sutherland, which appeared in the property section of The Press and Journal. I quote: “The estate will appeal to the international super rich ... The asking price for this exceptional property is offers over £8 million, but for that you get a traditional Highland estate with more than 6,000 acres of sporting ground, 2,000 acres of commercial forestry and a spectacular sporting lodge.” Like David Cameron, I cannot see many local people having the more than £8 million that is needed to put in an offer. That is one reason why we need to push on with land reform and build on the work, which I am proud the first Labour Scottish Executive promoted, of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. That is why I welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement of the land reform review group. I welcome the members of the group—particularly my friend Professor Jim Hunter—and its terms of reference, which are to secure a greater diversity in land ownership in Scotland. However, this is a matter not just of law but of money. In that regard, I welcome the re-establishment of Labour’s Scottish land fund, which will assist communities with buying land. That is a step in the right direction but, at £6 million over three years, the fund will not buy many—or any—Sutherland estates of the type that I mentioned.

Mr Thompson has to look at the achievements. Labour introduced the milestone act that set up land reform and we need to continue that work. I hope that there is consensus on that but, judging from his intervention, I think that it is probably unlikely that we will have that from Dave Thompson. The land reform review group is not due to report until the end of 2013. I hope that the minister will today give me the absolute assurance that the long timescale is not an attempt to take the issue off the public agenda for the next year or more. The community of Gigha testifies to the value of land reform. Further land reform is a cause for good. We need to encourage the land reform review group in its work—in that, they will have the support of Parliament to be radical. A new chapter in land reform is ready to be opened. What we need to succeed is, to quote Sir Walter Scott, “The will to do, the soul to dare”.

The strength of the debate is that it has been by and large consensual. Does the member recognise that, when Brian Wilson was a minister of state, he led the way on the land buyout at Knoydart?

To be technical about it, the land fund was mainstreamed into the HIE budget and the Scottish Enterprise budget. It did not disappear.

President Dwight Eisenhower famously said: “Farming looks mighty easy when your plow is a pencil, and you’re a thousand miles from the corn field.” It is, of course, tempting to draw a comparison with the architects of the new CAP. Just when we get to grips with the four axis model, the European Commission wants to abolish it. I pray in aid the cabinet secretary’s recent comment that “The current proposals are so complex that to implement them I would have to have thousands of extra civil servants which is a non-starter.” However, complexity does not negate importance. The new CAP is crucial for farmers and rural communities. The needs of the agricultural sector are critical in many ways for Scotland’s future, of course, but there is a need to recognise the rural difference in Scotland and ensure that Scotland’s implementation of the CAP and, in particular, the SRDP is tailored to the reality of modern life in rural Scotland, with its rich diversity of individuals, enterprises and communities. The recent report by the Scottish Agricultural College entitled “2012: Rural Scotland in Focus” reflected that diversity and called for Government policies to be tailored to the wider reality of rural Scotland. This week, a report published by the Carnegie UK Trust, “Future Directions in Rural Development”, called for greater investment in capacity building and networking at community level, which echoes the views expressed previously by organisations such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. The new SRDP has the potential to benefit not just the farming industry and Scotland’s environment but Scotland’s rural communities through effective implementation of community-led local development strategies such as LEADER and an extended and improved Scottish national rural network. It is essential that in the complex technicalities of the CAP, which many members have referred to, we do not lose sight of the vital dimension that it is intended to be a policy that benefits all rural Scotland. I will focus my remarks on the pillar 2 rural development programme, but it is perhaps worth pausing for a second to look back into history. Agricultural support, but more specifically support for farmers in the development of agricultural produce for the export market, was arguably an early driver for the treaty of Rome in 1957. As we all know, the powerful dynamic between France and Germany, which is reflected in foreign affairs and defence, demonstrates the strength of the relationship between those countries. That presents major challenges for us all in the review, reform and renewal of the CAP. The bigger question for us this afternoon is simply this: what is the purpose of public support for agriculture? I believe that that was well covered in Alyn Smith’s evidence to Rob Gibson’s Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee that “National security is predicated on food security, and that must be our absolute north star in the negotiations.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 November 2011; c 448.] Of course, the international picture is one of a crisis in global food price inflation that has led to food riots in nearly every continent, bar Europe. In addition, instability in the middle east has hit the price of oil and affected transport and fertiliser costs. The key point is that security of supply is an issue for us in the CAP; security of supply is not just about the energy markets. We would need the Brahan seer in order to predict what the CAP budget is going to be. As we have heard from other speakers, there is a serious debate in Europe about whether the budget could be cut. If it is, there is a next-stage action about how much flexibility member states have to move funds through the pillars through modulation. Further, the Scottish Government is required to co-finance the SRDP. Claire Baker made the good point earlier that the increase in co-financing to 63 per cent has resulted a reduction in the SRDP programme to £1.2 billion. Of course, pillar 2 rural development programmes must be linked to the six key priorities, which include enhancing competitiveness, promoting ecosystems and developing social inclusion and poverty reduction. Pillar 2 has a crucial role to play in supporting and developing the delivery of public goods and services by agriculture but, as a number of members have stated—not least the cabinet secretary—the UK receives the lowest share of all EU member states and Scotland has the lowest share of the four countries in the UK. Whatever the final EU framework, there will be an element of subsidiarity to member states and, of course, devolved Governments. Is there room for sub-programmes in a future SRDP? Could we construct targets to increase the number of crofters and small farmers? Does any member seriously suggest—I do not think that they do—that food production is inherently in conflict with the protection of the environment and climate change mitigation? At this point, I welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his new place and I put on the record my thanks for the contribution of Stewart Stevenson, who was a fine Minister for Environment and Climate Change.

I do not think that the CAP is perfect—many members have said that. I want a revised and reformed CAP for pillar 1, for farming directly and for rural development. I think that we have the power to do that in a united UK—Scotland has no force in our deliberations in Europe. William Houston from Angus Growers said: “We are going to need more food, but the arable areas of Scotland have the ability to become more intensive at the same time as becoming more environmentally beneficial”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 23 November 2011; c 414.] I want a future rural development programme that has strong environmental stewardship, that works actively to secure biodiversity and manage landscapes and habitats and that stresses the needs of people in rural and remote areas. Rural development needs people’s intelligence and individuality. The acid test will be how the CAP delivers for our most fragile and remote rural areas.

Shame.

It is not all about Europe’s decisions. The member will be aware of the co-financing rate, which is purely the Scottish Government’s responsibility. Changing that rate from its 2007 level to the current level has meant that there has been €1 billion less in the SRDP. That was the Scottish Government’s decision.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the business community about the air discount scheme. (S4O-01284)

Will the minister reintroduce business to the scheme to ensure that we kick-start the economy in the north?

The First Minister will be well aware of the severe fuel crisis in the Western Isles, where garages are running out of petrol and diesel, and motorists are forced to accept rationing at the pumps. That, of course, has severe consequences for emergency vehicles and the public they serve. Will the First Minister agree to meet Scottish Fuels urgently to help find a solution for the Western Isles?

Does the First Minister share my concerns that, with the removal of the news editor’s job from the proposed Inverness establishment, there would be no direction for those services except from Glasgow? That would mean that the BBC Highland news agenda would be driven from Pacific Quay. Does the First Minister agree that the BBC’s mission must be for the whole of Scotland, including rural and island communities, not just the central belt?

Will the minister take steps to ensure that protections for the NorthLink workforce under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006 are honoured by Serco? Of course the company will seek to maximise its profits—that is the name of the game. However, it is crucial that we ensure that there are no cuts to jobs, pay or terms and conditions, to the detriment of the workforce and island communities. The minister might be aware that Serco has not agreed to participate in the merchant navy officers pension plan. The union Nautilus International is looking at the matter.

Like most other modern organisations, the Scottish Parliament is reliant on IT for the effective and efficient delivery of business. Recent changes to the IT systems have included increasing the resilience and speed of our voice and data systems to provide greater capacity for internet services such as e-mail, web browsing and remote access, and to reduce costs. In addition, contractual changes have provided a vehicle for ensuring that all local offices are equipped with the fastest broadband service that their local telecommunications infrastructure supports, as well as providing the potential to exploit different technologies where the local broadband infrastructure provision is insufficient. Members have also benefited from increased mailbox sizes and improved reliability of remote access solutions. The SPCB also recognises the impact of unplanned IT downtime on members, and the corporate body receives regular updates from officials working with suppliers to ensure that service availability is optimised. IT staff will also continue to work with individual members to tailor services to meet their needs and to seek feedback from members to help ensure that future IT strategy is member focused.

I know that the member takes a great interest in these matters. He is right to say that theyworkforyou.com helps to publicise the work of the Parliament and members’ individual contributions. One of the advantages of the changes to our website design is that they will allow us to work to ensure that information is available to external organisations. However, the current format of our data means that external organisations cannot automatically get the information that they wish to have. The member makes a very good point, which I will raise at the next meeting of the corporate body.

In 2007, the corporate body commissioned and received official security advice about the measures in place at the Parliament in relation to current risks and threats. In 2011, we asked our security adviser to review the recommendations received in 2007. We received clear advice from our adviser, other official security sources and the police that the risks and threats that had been identified were still relevant. We have also received professional architectural and construction advice, as well as advice from the solicitor to the Scottish Parliament about the corporate body’s responsibility to ensure the safety of employees and visitors.

I know that Mr Pearson takes a great interest in security matters because of his background as a senior police officer in Scotland and London. The corporate body has a duty of care to MSPs and staff, and to the thousands of people who visit the Parliament every year. We have to live in the real world and acknowledge that, regrettably, the Parliament is a target for a small minority of obsessed individuals. We have to get the balance right between managing an open and accessible Parliament and our legal and security responsibilities to the Scottish public. No final decision will be made on the project until after the summer recess.

Following questions raised by members at previous corporate body question times, we have considered whether the corporate body should become a living wage employer. I confirm that all directly employed corporate body employees and agency-recruited staff are paid above the living wage. However, our legal advice is that to impose a requirement on contractors for them to pay their staff the living wage may be in breach of European Union regulations. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, has written to the EU to seek clarification on the matter, and we will review our position on becoming a living wage employer when that has been received.

I am grateful for that question from Jenny Marra. I know that she has an interest in and a commitment to this issue. I believe that adopting a living wage policy is essentially a gold standard for an employer. As Jenny Marra identified, the challenge is around our contracted services, which are cleaning and catering. That contract is due for renewal in 2015. Currently, 15 catering staff are paid 5p an hour below the living wage and seven cleaners are paid 35p an hour below that threshold. The key is the EU advice. If the EU advice allows us to make the living wage a contractual obligation, that would be a matter for the corporate body to consider in the future.

I will get back to the member on that particular point. The key point is that relatively few staff—even among the contracted staff—are actually below the living wage. My personal view is that we need to look for a solution that means that everybody is above the living wage. I stress that that requires a positive response from the EU first.

I welcome the minister’s comments about the commitment to build new stations. Will the minister consider creating a new station or platform at Dalcross, which would provide welcome integration for air passengers and be a major boost to tourists visiting the Scottish open at the nearby, world-class Castle Stuart golf course?

I was going to say that I have been invited and that I would be happy to give my ticket to the minister in the event that he is not invited personally.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making with the tendering process for CalMac routes. (S4O-01125)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the serious concerns of RMT and Nautilus International about the significant increase in the number of foreign seafarers who are employed to work within United Kingdom waters at well below the national minimum wage and on inferior conditions? Will he undertake to ensure that the new tendering process for the 2013 to 2019 routes is conducted on a level playing field, with no unfair advantage being accrued to one operator? Does Mr Neil share my view that CalMac’s consistent and successful record in investment in and training and employment of seafarers is critical to the future of the Scottish maritime sector?

Has the cabinet secretary estimated what revenue the proposed victim surcharge would bring in in the next few years?

Does Annabel Goldie agree that it is inconsistent that prisoners have their own commissioner but victims do not?

A few short months ago, I had the privilege of meeting Peter Morris, a Scottish champion for victims and a man who is dedicated to the cause of victims’ rights. He was mentioned very vividly by Lewis Macdonald and Mark McDonald. He marched from Aberdeenshire to present his petition to Parliament, ignoring his own health and wellbeing for the needs of others. His march led to a hospital bed and the loss of his leg, and was born of family trauma—the murder of his sister Claire by Malcolm Webster. At the conclusion of his four-month trial, which was the longest ever trial for a single accused in Scotland, Webster was jailed for 30 years. The jury heard how he had drugged Claire before staging a fatal crash just eight months after they wed. She burned to death on a lonely country road in rural Aberdeenshire, as her husband callously told the emergency services that there was no one in the car with him. The death was originally ruled to be an accident, and Webster netted more than £200,000 in life insurance. Webster was also found guilty of staging an almost identical attempt on a second bride in New Zealand. After the verdict was announced, Peter Morris said: “There is now justice for Claire. The guilty verdict of murder has proven that Malcolm Webster is a wicked murderer ... I feel today is a good day as the psychological sadism over me and my family and many other people is now broken. As the truth came out, it broke the web of deception Malcolm Webster had created around him.” For the evangelistic campaigning work of Peter Morris and the memory of Claire, I certainly welcome today’s debate. The consultation paper is sensible, coherent and makes a good contribution to developing services for victims and witnesses. As we have also heard, it builds on Labour’s work in the area: in setting up Scotland’s first dedicated domestic abuse court, in Glasgow in 2004; and in respect of the victims fund in our election manifesto last year. I will focus on a gap, which has been mentioned several times: the lack of a Scottish victims commissioner. Many members will be aware that my Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill was introduced just over two years ago and had a legacy hearing at the Justice Committee shortly before the end of the previous parliamentary session. The bill’s main objective was to promote, protect and safeguard the interests of victims and witnesses and to ensure that they were projected to the heart of the justice system in Scotland. The objective is to have a champion who ensures that the needs of victims and witnesses are met. I believe strongly that the champion must have a high profile, be difficult to ignore and ensure that the needs of victims and witnesses are centre stage. In a sense, I believe that I have seen the future, in that I have met the previous victims champion for England and Wales, Sara Payne, and Louise Casey, who was the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses for England and Wales. l have also taken part in a videoconference with one of the four victims commissioners for Northern Ireland. My motivation has two elements. First, I have been inspired by the work that Victim Support Scotland and other voluntary organisations, such as Barnardo’s and Scottish Women’s Aid, have done to deliver support to victims and witnesses throughout Scotland. Victim Support Scotland’s 2007 manifesto call for a victims commissioner inspired me to introduce the bill, and I have a couple of years’ personal experience of working at senior level in a national charity. Secondly, I have been greatly affected by the experiences of constituents. We have heard from many members about constituents who have been forced into the criminal justice system through no fault of their own and who have been left hurt, confused and angry. I will give one more example. I recently saw a young woman constituent who, with her daughter, was awakened in the middle of the night by the noise of petrol being poured through the letterbox. They escaped the inferno that the house became purely because neighbours found a ladder outside, which allowed them to escape, literally as the house went up in flames around them. When I talked to that constituent, the worrying thing for me was that she thought that the court was another ordeal in her cycle of humiliation and that she was a bit player in a drama in which she had no script. I concede that the situation for victims and witnesses in Scotland has greatly improved as a result of a range of initiatives, such as the victims strategy, the use of victim statements and the victim notification scheme. However, although improvements have been made, a great deal more needs to be done. A number of important and effective voluntary organisations work in the interests of victims and witnesses, but there is not one co-ordinating voice and no one has the statutory power to examine failures. I believe that there is a gap between victims and victims organisations, and the Government. Can we say that every relevant authority is meeting the requirement to protect victims under existing legislation and that there is a good balance of power between those who work in the interests of victims and witnesses and others in the criminal justice system? I believe that a commissioner would enhance the work of existing organisations and take it to the next step. A commissioner would be central to the justice system. I mentioned the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses for England and Wales, Louise Casey. In evidence to the House of Commons Justice Committee in November 2010, she said that her role as victims commissioner was “to challenge the whole of the Criminal Justice System to do right by victims and witnesses.” That was the intention of my bill. The commissioner would be responsible for championing the rights of victims and raising awareness of their situation. The commissioner would work with voluntary organisations, politicians, the police and others throughout the sector. It is important that victims are protected from an uncaring bureaucracy that is often unintentionally hurtful and damaging at a time of great suffering. Witnesses suffer trauma, too. About 40 per cent of witnesses are victims and many offenders are victims, too. The proposed role is that of an independent champion, operating with victims, service providers and the Government, working outside, but looking in. The role would provide a new route map for victims, reflecting the new European rights, as covered by the Stockholm programme. It would be a move towards a system change, so that, in Louise Casey’s words, victims would no longer be “the poor relation” of the criminal justice system.

A couple of Sundays ago, I was reading acres of newsprint on the euro zone crisis and the personal tragedies that are faced by Greek families. What grabbed my attention was not the statesmanlike editorial in The Observer with its chiselled prose, which could have been passed down from Mount Olympus itself, or the three-page comprehensive analysis in The Sunday Times, which painted a picture of the human misery in Greece behind the economic meltdown. Instead, it was a cartoon showing the G8 leaders, including President Obama and Chancellor Merkel, holding a massive chart marked “Eurocrisis firewall”. Behind them was the angel of death, strangling Greece with one hand and setting fire to the chart with the other. That is a dramatic picture—overstated, perhaps—but the bigger picture is not about Greece at all; it is about the need for an assessment of the structural problem in the euro zone and, indeed, the EU as a whole. What are the implications for Scotland, particularly in the run-up to the referendum campaign in 2014? What is the worst-case scenario? Implosion in Greece spreading to Portugal, Ireland, Italy and Spain—the so-called PIIGS countries—a run on domestic banks and a stock market crash despite Government guarantees. Weaker countries could abandon the euro and restore their former currencies.

I have great concerns about the so-called PIIGS countries because they are in a very weak economic situation. I will come on to answer the member’s point in a bit more detail. Some people have argued that the euro zone could end up in two camps: a super-integrated core of single currency survivors and an outer ring of satellite states that revert to their former currencies. Greece has experienced a political crisis every bit as serious as an economic one. The public have deserted in droves the politicians who have preached austerity, and next month’s general election may see a victory for growth over austerity. Nikolaos Karamouzis, of the Greek Eurobank EFG, said: “We depend on the EU and the ECB ... funding to keep everything from banks to hospitals to traffic lights working. If the EU stops funding us, we will simply run out of money and the economy will stop functioning.” There is a real danger of currency flight from struggling members of the euro zone. Last week, in Greece, more than €1 billion was withdrawn from accounts, to be stashed under mattresses or used to purchase foreign currency. A return to the drachma would involve immediate, drastic devaluation, which would double import prices overnight and make it harder for businesses to borrow. As members said, the Greek economy is facing meltdown. Wages have been slashed by a third, pensions by 30 per cent and employment by 22 per cent. What really concerns me is that half of 16 to 25-year-olds are on the dole. We all know that Greece is the birthplace of democracy and city states and of Plato and Socrates. However, in more recent times, from 1967 to 1974, there was a dictatorship by a military junta. Could democracy seriously be snuffed out again if the crisis escalates? Although the Greek economy is only about 2 per cent of the euro zone, as we heard from the cabinet secretary, I very much worry about the C-word—contagion—which Johann Lamont talked about. European leaders looked at creating a firewall, through the European stability mechanisms and European financial stability facility. That is worth about €750 billion, but is it enough? It might cover Spain or Italy’s borrowing for a year or two, but it would not cover both countries’ borrowing. Could Greece be Europe’s Lehman Brothers? We remember the slogan, “too big to fail”. What will be the effect on the UK and Scotland? As we heard, only about 0.5 per cent of UK exports go to Greece. However, what concerns me is that British banks hold around $10 billion of Greek Government bank and private sector debt. What is the future? There is a fundamental flaw in the euro zone. We have, of course, a single currency, a single central bank and a single interest rate, but borrowing varies significantly across the zone. Where is the convergence? The year 2014 has been proposed as perhaps the most optimistic date for our economy to emerge from recession, but a euro zone apocalypse would badly hit recovery and lead to business uncertainty, a reluctance to invest and a fall in earnings. We all know that 2014 is a significant year. What is needed across Europe is an old-fashioned Keynesian pump-priming growth policy. Bringing forward capital projects and growing and protecting jobs are the best ways to reduce the deficit in the long term; cutting too fast and too deep kills demand. What we have in Greece is the euro zone’s frailest member being forced onto an austerity diet in an isolation cell, which threatens to kill the state before it cures the economy. Since the euro crisis began in early 2010, no fewer than nine of the zone’s 17 national leaders have been ejected from office. In effect, there is a democratic deficit. Who stands up for the workers and families in Greece, Spain and Italy, who face a crisis that they did not create and austerity that they do not want?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member share my view that one of the fundamental problems in this debate and in the euro zone is the argument that neither Italy nor Greece complied with the original debt rules for going into the euro?

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that there is a strong case for hubs in the current Northern Constabulary and Grampian Police force areas that emphasise the comparative advantage that they would bring to a single police force in relation to, for example, rural roads policing, wildlife crime, finance and information technology?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on the recent outbreak of Clostridium difficile at Raigmore hospital. (S4O-01012)

Members will be well aware that C diff can be a serious intestinal disease, particularly for the old, the frail and the vulnerable. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the Roslin institute study that highlighted the risks of C diff for patients who transfer from large to small hospitals, which is a regular occurrence in the Highlands and Islands? Will the cabinet secretary confirm what detailed screening protocols are in place to protect patients who move from one hospital to another, in order to prevent outbreaks of C diff across Scotland?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the potential for the production of medical isotopes. (S4O-00976)

The World Nuclear Association has shown that more than 10,000 hospitals worldwide use radio isotopes in medicine and that about 90 per cent of the procedures are for diagnosis. As a result, there is strong worldwide demands for this material. However, as the cabinet secretary knows, there is no Scottish production and only one English facility. Will she agree to ask Highlands and Islands Enterprise to carry out a full economic appraisal of the prospects of manufacturing medical isotopes in Caithness using the skills, talents and experience of the Dounreay workforce who are currently engaged in nuclear decommissioning?

Does the cabinet secretary support the bid from the Highlands and Islands to gain structural funds under the new programme as a transition region? Does he share my view that access to a new generation of structural funds is vital for the Highlands and Islands economy and can help us to reach Europe 2020 targets for jobs, growth and a low-carbon environment?

I welcome this opportunity to debate the future of the Crown estate. I thank the members from across the political divide who have signed my motion. To those who have not, I say that I very much welcome sinners who wish to repent. I place on record my thanks to the Scottish Affairs Committee for its excellent report, which is based on widespread evidence sessions from Shetland to Stirling and interviews with myriad expert witnesses from the Scrabster Harbour Trust to Scottish Renewables. At first glance, it seems from reading the evidence to the committee that the Crown Estate has a whiff of a heady mixture of feudalism and paternalism. Angus Campbell, the leader of the Western Isles Council, said: “Well ... quite frankly, from our local authority point of view there is no relationship and it is as blunt as that. All we have done in the Western Isles in terms of development of any harbour has been done at the hands of the local authority, and what you quite simply get at the end of the day is a bill for the extra rental.” That view was echoed by Councillor Cluness, the leader of Shetland Islands Council, who said: “Our only basis for complaint against the Crown Estate is that, in essence, they derive considerable incomes not only from anything we do within the oil industry and the considerable developments that come there - of course in addition to renewables - but also in relation to salmon farming. We have not yet seen any return of any size from the Crown Estate in relation to the fees that we have paid them.” More bluntly, Councillor Michael Foxley, the leader of Highland Council, quoted a prominent developer of offshore marine, who said: “Now I know what it is like to have dealt with a medieval feudal baron because they have the power to say yes or no with no right of challenge, no right of recourse.” Members will be well aware that the range of the Crown Estate’s responsibilities and powers is simply breathtaking. They range from sea bed ownership out to the 12-mile limit with the exception of hydrocarbons, rights over the continental shelf to 200 nautical miles, rights to gold and silver mining, and more modern acquisitions such as west Princes Street gardens and the King’s park in Stirling, about which there has been some controversy recently. The Crown Estate Commissioners is a public body that was set up in 1956 and is governed by the Crown Estate Act 1961. It operates commercially and all surplus revenues are transferred to the United Kingdom Treasury. For example, in 2009-10 the UK revenues figure was around £210 million. The Crown estate in Scotland accounts for around 5 per cent of the Crown Estate’s annual revenue. To give members a cash sum, the surplus in Scotland was £9.9 million, which went to the UK Treasury. Is there a case for reform? What does the evidence say? The evidence to the Scottish Affairs Committee, which—in addition to just reading the committee’s report—I found quite fascinating, ties in closely with the Crown estate review group report in 2007, the Calman commission report in 2009, which we heard about in the previous debate, and the Treasury Select Committee report in 2010.

The member makes a fascinating point. I know that she has taken a great interest in the issue. Evidence was taken about what she describes. I refer the member to the 19th century case of Balfour, for example, which she might find interesting. Is there a case for reform? It is important to note that both the Scotland Bill Committees of this Parliament added a bit more spice to the evidence for reform of the Crown Estate. Why should it be reformed? There is a consistent picture of a lack of accountability and a lack of appropriate management of assets, development and working with communities; and there is limited benefit from the Crown Estate’s involvement in Scotland. Is there a solution? The Scottish Affairs Committee’s view was quite clear after considering the evidence, and it made a number of points, which I will summarise. First, the Crown Estate’s responsibilities for the administration and revenues of Crown property, rights and interests in Scotland should end; secondly, a key role should be given at the Scottish level for strategic decisions and to Marine Scotland in particular, and there should be accountability to this Parliament; and thirdly, we should go further with what I describe as secondary and tertiary devolution to the local authority and local community level. Members will be well aware that, at local community level, there is a high level of democracy. It is vital to flag that up at this stage. Those points echoed the views of the Crown estate working party, which was made up of Highlands and Islands local authorities and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. The Minister for Environment and Climate Change will be well aware of Community Land Scotland, which represents Scotland’s community land owners, who own and manage 500,000 acres of Scotland, of which all but 2 acres, the chairman told me earlier today, are bounded by coastline. Community Land Scotland has also called for radical reform of the Crown Estate and, in its evidence to the Parliament’s Scotland Bill Committee and to the Scottish Affairs Committee, it called for the principle of subsidiarity to be part of the management of the interests of the Crown Estate. In my region of the Highlands and Islands, many community owners now manage considerable land assets and, in my view, they do so professionally and responsibly. There is no reason why they, as democratic and accountable owners, should not manage the waters that adjoin their land. They are calling for the right to do so and I hope that the minister, in summing up, will reaffirm the Scottish Government’s commitment to the management of the Crown Estate’s assets being devolved to communities as part of the further devolution of the Crown Estate’s interests. Donald Dewar’s speech at the opening ceremony of this Parliament had grace, rhyme and stature, but it also had an element of foresight when he said: “Devolution is not an event but a process.” He did not want to tell Scots what country to live in, but he wanted them to have the chance to have the country that they live in work better. The Crown estate argument is part of a bigger argument about centralisers versus devolvers, subsidiarity and working in partnership with local communities. My favourite historian, Jim Hunter, who is in the public gallery, quotes in his new book a west coast crofter saying that they “hate us in London but ignore us in Edinburgh.” We must ensure that that crofter and many others have nothing to fear from Edinburgh and that this Parliament is fully behind the devolution of responsibility for the Crown estate. All we need now, to paraphrase Sir Walter Scott, is the will to do and the soul to dare.

It might seem to be a great leap of imagination to compare this consensual stage 1 debate on the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill with the radical, pioneering and tempestuous work of the Highland Land League of the 1880s, but I will show that there is a link, if members are patient. As members will know, the Highland Land League was the radical crofters’ movement that won a clutch of Westminster seats, including my home city of Inverness, in the 1885 general election. Members will probably know that the Highland Land League was instrumental in the passage of the Crofters’ Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886, which gave tenants—mainly crofters—security of tenure, rights and compensation for improvements, which survive today. I understand that the league’s best-known slogan was: “The people are mightier than a lord”. It has a contemporary ring to it, and would not be out of place in this week’s edition of the West Highland Free Press. The relationship between landlords and tenants, access to land, security of tenure and the role of community ownership have all radically changed since the days of the battle of the braes, when the famous dispute between crofters and landlords on Skye in the 1880s culminated in that battle between the police and crofters. As members may know, that led to the Napier commission, which radically changed crofting legislation. Coming to the present day, one of the great successes of devolution has been community land buyouts, from the island of Eigg to Eriskay in the Western Isles. I agree with other members that the bill is not, on the surface, contentious, but there are deeper and wider issues, which many members have raised. That was touched on in particular by the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association, which I will come to later. I congratulate Rob Gibson—who, unfortunately, is not in the chamber—and his committee for their thorough work on the stage 1 report. As we have heard, the committee has asked the Scottish Government to re-examine the definition of “near relative” to consider including, for example, nieces and nephews. As for rent reviews, the committee is right to support the removal of upward-only rent reviews. The other main substantive area in the bill is the disapplication of VAT-rate changes from being variations in rent that prevent rent reviews. I welcome the theme that emerged in the committee’s evidence sessions that the bill will not end the need for further reform of agricultural tenancy law. However, a number of fundamental issues need to be resolved in future legislation—dispute resolution being the main one. As members will know, until 2003 arbitration was a statutory requirement. The Scottish Land Court is—outwith the Court of Session appeal powers—the only body that is able to rule on disputes, but that is not a very practical option for most tenants. There has been only one order setting the rent in one rent review since the 2003 act came into force. Clearly, expense and time are huge barriers to tenant farmers. What is needed? I believe that alternative cheaper methods of dispute resolution are required, including facilitated dispute resolution and mediation. Perhaps the minister could say whether other opportunities that could be helpful are available under the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010. I am also concerned about the current tenancy laws. We have heard about the Court of Session ruling in the case of Salvesen v Riddell. Lord Gill ruled that section 72 of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 was not compatible with the European convention on human rights. The STFA’s chairman, Angus McCall, has said that the mood among farm tenants is now one of despondency. That is not surprising, given how the law has failed them and is sending out the wrong messages to wealthy and powerful landlords. It is of great concern that talented and able young tenant farmers are being lost to the sector. I support the bill, but it is a work in progress. Future legislation is required to deal with the issues of new entrants, access to land and dispute resolution.

Does the member share my view that tenants are concerned about Lord Gill’s decision in the Court of Session, which effectively says that the Scottish Parliament’s first civil act was actually outwith its legislative competence? In other words, the 2003 act needs to be remedied—and soon.

The Court of Session overturned the Scottish Land Court in relation to the role of single farm payments and argued that they are a factor in open-market rents. Does the member share my concern that that will affect new entrants’ ability to get into the market?

As he kindly compared me to someone from the 1880s, will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary clarify the position on Lord Gill’s judgment? I take it that the cabinet secretary is reluctant to make decisions about on-going court cases, but Lord Gill has made a ruling, so the case is not sub judice. Is the cabinet secretary looking to correct the 2003 act so that it is compatible with the ECHR and still protects tenants who are in limited partnerships?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Thank you. Does the cabinet secretary accept that Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd has the ability to lease vessels on the international market, and that it is important that the Scottish Government considers better utilisation of vessels, so that we can exploit new opportunities for routes?

The member will be aware that when Huw Francis gave evidence to the Public Petitions Committee he made the strong point that piloting the route on a temporary basis was an excellent way of assessing the real demand, rather than the demand that is picked up in some abstract economic report.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what analysis it has made of the impact of the creation of a single police force on the allocation of major function hubs across the country. (S4O-00839)

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that the distribution of hubs across Scotland should be based on what works best for service delivery to the public? Any objective analysis of comparative advantage among police authorities would conclude that a hub in the Highlands and Islands could cover mountain rescue, corporate services, firearms licensing, wildlife crime and rural road policing. Does the cabinet secretary agree with my analysis?

I welcome this debate and the recent committee report on EU priorities for 2012. I congratulate the convener and the members of the committee on the quality of their work. The committee stressed that one element of its future work would be reform of EU structural funds. I would like to touch on that, particularly in the context of the Highlands and Islands. In passing, I flag up the useful evidence that the committee heard yesterday on structural funds; I was an interloper in the gallery for that meeting. As we have already heard from the minister, we are at a crucial time because we are coming to the end of the current programme. Structural funds will be used to help member states to achieve Europe 2020 targets during the next programme. As we heard from Fiona Hyslop, those targets are promoting smart, sustainable and inclusive growth in the European Union economy. As members know—irrespective of where they represent—my region covers an area that is one third of Scotland’s landmass; an area that is larger than Belgium but with a population that is less than that of Brussels. It is an area of contrasts, having stunning natural beauty in its lochs, hills and glens, along with thriving and innovative communities such as on the Isle of Eigg. It also has very challenging geography with a coastline that is longer than that of Brazil and more than 100 inhabited islands. Depopulation has, historically, been a running sore in the Highlands and Islands, with the departure of whole communities—for example, that of St Kilda, which is the most dramatic example. One of the great achievements of Harold Wilson’s first Government—I would say that, wouldn’t I?—was the vision that he and Willie Ross had of the creation of the Highlands and Islands Development Board, which was asked to stem the tide and to attract new jobs and opportunities to the area. Historically, the region’s per capita gross domestic product has lagged behind that of the rest of Scotland and the rest of the UK. In the 1990s, its per capita GDP was below 75 per cent of the EU average, so the region qualified for objective 1 support between 1996 and 1999. The programme between 2000 and 2006 created or retained 17,000 jobs, assisted more than 9,000 businesses and supported 11,000 trainees. I am strongly of the view that European funding is not some paternalistic sop from Eurocrats; it is a crucial economic tool to lever up to the EU average the per capita GDP of lagging regions. It provides a planning and economic opportunity to exploit emerging markets such as life sciences, renewable energy, and the creative industries. I have mentioned this before, but I flag up in particular the stunning new Disney Pixar film “Brave”, which is based in the Highlands. European funding has also supported the creation of a new university and centres of excellence in research and development such as Sabhal Mòr Ostaig in Skye. What are the next steps? Proposals for the next programme budget are now at member-state level at the European Parliament and the European Commission. The Commission, in which I am particularly interested, is proposing an intermediate category of funding for regions whose per capita GDP is between 75 and 90 per cent of the EU average. I am interested to hear the minister’s view on that. The current figure of 84 per cent could mean that the Highlands and Islands would qualify for the enhanced support instead of having to look for money from the same pot as the rest of Scotland. That could be a vital win-win scenario for the region and for Scotland as a whole and it would maximise our drawdown of European funds. The great strength of the previous programme was the involvement of local voices from local campaigns using the expertise, skills and knowledge of partners to ensure that initiatives worked. I hope that the minister will say, or write hereafter, that the changes in the Highlands and Islands partnership programme will mean that jobs will remain in the Highlands and Islands. I should declare an interest as a former HIPP director. I wish the committee well in its future deliberations and I hope that it will support transition region funding for the Highlands and Islands.

On Tuesday evening, l attended the tourism reception that was held in the garden lobby. I was struck by the enthusiasm and passion that all the speakers had for the industry and that was echoed by guest after guest during the evening, not forgetting in the strong contribution from Murdo Fraser, who is perhaps one of the best known ex-members of the IRA, by which I mean, of course, Inverness Royal academy. Not for the first or last time, I will concentrate my remarks on the Highlands and Islands. Members need no lectures from me on the fact that the Highlands and Islands have a world-class product with outstanding natural beauty from the Cuillins to the Cairngorms national park; lochs, hills and castles; eco-tourism; the stunning Eden Court theatre in Inverness; film tourism; the Royal National Mòd; and the world mountain bike championships in Fort William. The area can produce iconic wildlife images. Visitors can watch the flight of the graceful osprey and the whooper swans wintering at the RSPB’s Insh marshes reserve. Those natural assets provide a fantastic base for the most important industry in the Highlands and Islands. Vital jobs are provided throughout the Highlands and Islands in bed and breakfasts, guest houses, hotels and visitor attractions such as the Landmark visitor centre in Carrbridge and the outstanding Culloden battlefield visitor centre. However, as any fresh-faced MBA student would tell us, business has to address the five Ps of product, price, place, promotion and position. They are vital for the tourism industry. I agree with the comment that Peter Lederer, the previous chief executive of VisitScotland, made when he said that, to fulfil our potential, “we must always look at ourselves from the visitor’s perspective.” I endorse his view.

I strongly agree with the member’s comment. We must develop the five drivers for the industry. We must extend attraction hours, increase the length of the season, accelerate marketing, promote high-value quality goods and persuade businesses to promote others’ goods. One fascinating statistic is that, if 10 per cent of visitors spent the same amount as the average visitor to Switzerland, that would be worth half a billion pounds to the Scottish tourism industry. New investment is vital, and I welcome the extra £30 million that VisitScotland will spend over the next three years to capitalise on the winning years, which many members have mentioned. From the Olympics to the Commonwealth games, there is a rich potential harvest for the Scottish tourism industry. I take members back in time to last year’s Scottish open, which was held at the superb, state-of-the-art Castle Stuart golf course near Inverness, which is a long par five from my home. There was so much demand from tourists for accommodation that a party of Americans stayed in Perth and travelled to Castle Stuart every day—a round trip of more than 200 miles. We must have the right balance between inward investment and support for indigenous industry. Most businesses have hard choices to make. They have to differentiate their product by price or quality, but not usually by both. From the humblest one-room bed and breakfast in Corpach to Culloden House Hotel, where Bonnie Prince Charlie allegedly once stayed—although I suspect that that was not an online booking—quality must be the watchword and there should be no more, “You’ll have had your tea.” Tourists have to get to the area. From the industry and this week’s conference, we know that we need road and rail improvements, and stronger incentives in the form of a new air route development fund to get tourists from the superhubs of Amsterdam, Paris and Heathrow to Scotland. We need to build on our strengths in the creative industries. I welcome the £7 million campaign to help tourism to capitalise on the Disney Pixar film “Brave”, which is set in the Highlands. I saw a brief clip on Tuesday, although I was a bit concerned that one of the lead characters is called King Fergus. I do not know whether there is any connection with the minister, although I know that Fergus Ewing is always a king, at least in his own eyes. Does the minister have any plans to develop film studios, particularly in Lochaber and Inverness? That would allow film crews that are doing location shots for films like the Harry Potter films, “Braveheart” and “Highlander” to not just film and go, but extend their stay and use the backup technology that is available. The BBC series “Monarch of the Glen” was filmed in Badenoch and Strathspey. At its height, it had 9 million UK viewers and 50 million viewers around the world. I must declare an interest because once upon a time, I was an extra in that show, so I must have the most famous right foot of any member. The Badenoch and Strathspey area was very successful in promoting itself as “Monarch of the Glen” country and I strongly support that. Location tourism is vital. We must also fight the curse of seasonality. Last year, I met the chairman of Nevis Range Mountain Resort and we talked about the great development in mountain bike course racing, which is absolutely excellent. I see that my time is coming to an end. Tourism is a crucial driver of Scotland’s economic success in general, and of the Highlands and Islands in particular. The pathways to success are quality, skills and training, marketing, infrastructure improvement, and big bang events, such as the Olympics. We know the route to the next stage in the development of tourism but, to paraphrase Sir Walter Scott, what we need now is the will to do and the soul to dare.

I am pleased to speak on behalf of the Public Petitions Committee in its first chamber debate of this session of Parliament. I welcome the opportunity that has been given to the committee today to highlight the issues that are raised by Mrs Andrea MacArthur in her petition on pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency, especially as I understand from the Scottish Parliament information centre that this is the first-ever debate of its kind in the chamber. PE1408 calls on the Scottish Government to review and overhaul the current outdated and ineffective method of diagnosing and treating pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency. The committee initially considered the petition at its meeting on 15 November last year, and we heard evidence from the petitioner, Mrs MacArthur, and from Martyn Hooper, the executive chair of the Pernicious Anaemia Society. The committee agreed to seek time in the chamber for a committee debate on the issues that were raised, so I appreciate the opportunity to have the debate this afternoon. Vitamin B12, which we normally obtain from food, is important for production of red blood cells and maintenance of the nervous system. B12 deficiency can result in anaemia, with symptoms including fatigue, lethargy, breathlessness, headaches, disturbed vision and mouth ulcers. Some of my committee colleagues will be able to talk in more detail later in the debate about the symptoms and effects of the condition. The most common cause of vitamin B12 deficiency is pernicious anaemia. It is an autoimmune disease in which the body attacks the stomach cells that produce intrinsic factor, which is a binding protein that is needed for absorption of vitamin B12. That leads to vitamin B12 deficiency because the body can no longer absorb it from food. Diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency, or pernicious anaemia, is usually done by way of blood tests. A blood sample is examined for several things, including the amount of vitamin B12 in the blood and the antibodies against stomach cells that might appear in pernicious anaemia. I understand that an alternative test has become available in England—the active B12 test—which measures the amount of vitamin B12 that is present in the form that can be taken up and used by the body. The test appears to address the problem of blood levels of vitamin B12 appearing to be normal when the amount that is available for use by the body is actually very low. It appears that there are no exact figures available for the number of patients who have been diagnosed. However, in answer to a parliamentary question by Mary Scanlon in August 2011, the minister who is here today—Michael Matheson—advised that an estimated 12,200 people had face-to-face consultations on pernicious anaemia in 2009-2010 in Scotland. In the petition, Mrs MacArthur quotes the Scottish Government’s prescribing data for 2011, and states that about 109,000 patients were identified as having pernicious anaemia. That gives us an indication of the numbers of people involved. Treatment of non-diet-related vitamin B12 deficiency is normally done through injections of the vitamin. The injections are given every other day for two weeks or, if there are neurological symptoms, until there is further improvement. They are usually then given every two to three months. However, Mrs MacArthur points out in her petition that the prescribing data show that the cost to the national health service of treating those 109,000 people was just over £800,000, half of which was spent on treating just 9 per cent of patients with the least effective form of treatment available, which, according to the petition, is oral tablets. In Mrs MacArthur’s words, it is ineffective because the body is unable to absorb the vitamin B12 in tablet form while the serum levels are elevated, making it appear to the doctor that everything is well. I understand that vitamin B12 injections are direct and cost around 50p. We heard from Mrs MacArthur that she lodged the petition as a result of her own experiences of being unable to get effective diagnosis and treatment for her own suspected vitamin B12 deficiency. The petition therefore calls for the current diagnosis and treatment procedures that are in place to be reviewed and updated. Mrs MacArthur made the point in evidence that “Doctors have very little knowledge of the condition, so they stick rigidly to the little guidance on treatment that they are given. The guidance itself is incomplete.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 15 November 2011; c 229.] Mrs MacArthur contends that there are major failings in the treatment and diagnosis of the condition and that many patients are dismissed or treated as being hypochondriac, neurotic or depressed and that failure to get proper diagnosis and treatment only allows the condition to worsen. The Pernicious Anaemia Society told us that it hears frequently of patients who struggle to get the diagnosis and treatment that they require. Mr Hooper, the chairman of the society, told us that “Treatment of the condition is so consistently bad that to hear of someone who has managed to get their doctor’s co-operation to treat them more effectively is a most surprising and rare event.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 15 November 2011; c 228.] After considering the petition and hearing the oral evidence from the petitioner, the committee agreed to write to stakeholders to seek their views. We received evidence from a range of organisations, including Highland NHS Board, Lanarkshire NHS Board, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, the Royal College of General Practitioners in Scotland and, of course, the Scottish Government. The written evidence that we received was very interesting. The responses are on the petition’s web page and are available to all members, should they wish to consult them for more detail. In the brief time that is available, I will highlight points from the written submissions that the petitioner feels support the points about inconsistency that she makes in her petition. First, in relation to the tests for diagnosis, NHS Highland writes: “We accept that the diagnosis of B12 deficiency is not foolproof at the present time.” Likewise, NHS Lanarkshire states: “It is well recognised within the Haematology Service that the vitamin B12 assay does not completely reflect the tissue availability of vitamin B12. More complex and detailed assays are available which will more accurately reflect the body’s vitamin B12 state but these assays are beyond the scope of the general Hospital Laboratory at this time.” Incidentally, Wikipedia tells me that an “assay” is a “procedure in molecular biology for testing ... the activity of a drug or biochemical in an ... organic sample.” In contradiction to the first two quotes, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde states: “The current diagnostic tests and treatment are considered by the medical profession to be up to date, accurate and evidence based. There is no question that the current diagnostic methods are ‘outdated or unreliable’.” I will again quote NHS Highland. It states: “Whilst we cannot support an ‘automatic trial’ of B12 injections in patients with no laboratory evidence of B12 deficiency, better diagnostic techniques would allow treatment to be targeted appropriately.” Those points in themselves lead one to believe that there are, indeed, inconsistencies of approach throughout Scotland. They also seem to indicate that there is no consensus across the NHS boards. However, I was pleased to note that the Scottish Government, in its response, indicates that it takes the issue very seriously and that it is committed to improving awareness, diagnosis and treatment for people, irrespective of their condition. I would like to ask the minister to address in his winding-up speech whether that commitment could be demonstrated by the Government’s reviewing the research that the petitioner refers to as having been undertaken and available for review; by its finding out exactly what is happening to patients in advance of the British committee for standards in haematology’s guidelines on the diagnosis of B12 and folate deficiency, which I understand from the Scottish Government is due to be published in March; and by its working with health boards to raise among health professionals awareness of diagnosis and treatment of the condition. I welcome the opportunity to debate the issues that have been raised in the petition and I look forward to hearing the views of colleagues from across the chamber this afternoon. I move, That the Parliament notes petition PE1408 in the name of Andrea MacArthur on the issue of vitamin B12 deficiency and pernicious anaemia; congratulates the petitioner on her efforts to highlight what it considers to be a concerning issue, and commends the issues raised in the petition to the Scottish Government for further consideration.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Four cold winters ago, I was sitting in a draughty room in the Corran halls in Oban, taking evidence on the future of ferries with other members of the then Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. I see that Rob Gibson, who was with me at the time, is also here today. The hall was packed, and everyone had something to say about ferry services. Commuters were worried about buses leaving as the CalMac ferry steamed in to Oban pier, hauliers were worried about the costs and capacity of ferries, and there was general concern about timetabling, availability, frequency and types of vessels. That meeting followed an overnight NorthLink ferry from Aberdeen to Orkney and Shetland, a videoconference with business and council leaders in the Western Isles and a conference with the CalMac and Western Ferries boards. That all led to a comprehensive report, which was, in fairness, fully accepted bar one point by the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson. More recently, in autumn last year, I attended a massive public meeting in Dunoon, along with Mike Russell, at which there were more than 500 people campaigning on concerns about the Gourock to Dunoon ferry service. There are many lessons to be learned from all that. Ferry services are not just another mode of transport; they play a crucial role in stimulating economic development, attracting inward investment, sustaining indigenous jobs and providing lifeline services. In short, they are a key and vital driver in rural development, which is why I welcome the debate and the opportunity to raise the concerns of hauliers, local residents and the Western Isles Council. First, however, there is the obvious question: what is RET? As we all know, it has, in its pure form, been around for a while. I note—as the minister may do—that at least one SNP Highland councillor claims to have invented the principle of RET. Perhaps it is like the old concept from our school days: in history lessons we were asked about the Schleswig-Holstein question and told that only two people understand it, and one is mad and the other has forgotten it. I understand that RET in its pure form works extremely well in Canada, particularly in Newfoundland, but the Scottish Parliament information centre tells me that the key issue is road equivalence. Taking the example of the Stornoway to Ullapool route, one would measure the distance on the sea route, work out the cost of driving that distance, and use published tables from the Automobile Association and the RAC to come up with the ferry fare. One could do exactly the same with commercial transport. How, then, can the Scottish Government justify the crippling fare increase for hauliers? The admirable Outer Hebrides transport group, which has—quite rightly—been mentioned several times today, quoted to me an increase of 172 per cent on the Uig to Lochmaddy route before the 50 per cent cap was brought in. Have fuel costs increased by 172 per cent, or have Uig and Lochmaddy all of a sudden moved closer together? I am not sure whether even the resourceful Alex Neil could manage that great feat of geology. That is how RET works. Why does the minister not admit that we do not have a pure RET system, but a system of fare-subsidy control masquerading as a principle of transport economics? Do not take my word for it; I am sure the minister will not. David Wood, the owner of Woody’s Express Parcels, who has been mentioned already, said: “The rationale for the government plan to withdraw RET for commercial vehicles is based on a false prospectus ... The claim that haulage companies haven’t passed on the benefits to customers is a falsehood and must be challenged robustly”. Finally, there are some key questions that I would like the minister to answer in his wind-up. Does the Scottish Government still support the principle of there being a ferries regulator? If so, when will the regulator be in post, and does the minister think that an independent regulator would allow the crippling fare increases for commercial traffic?

The corporate body undertakes regular auditing of the building’s accessibility, which helps to determine areas of the building where further action or investigation may be required. That is incorporated into an accessibility action plan, which parliamentary officials monitor regularly. The latest audit, which was carried out in October 2011, involved a group of blind and visually impaired people who represented the Royal Blind school, Guide Dogs Scotland and the Edinburgh access panel. They audited various parts of the building and made a number of suggestions to improve the building’s accessibility, including more visual aids in the public cafe and a tactile surface on the stairs up to the chamber, and increased lighting levels in the stairwell that leads up to the chamber gallery. The outcomes of that audit are being considered as part of the on-going review of the building’s accessibility requirements.

The doors to the MSP block are obviously necessary for security reasons. They are used to secure the members area and allow for only authorised access to that part of the building. They are also fire doors, which are central to the fire safety procedures in the building. However, I appreciate Dennis Robertson’s concerns about the doors being extremely heavy, and how that might affect various users of the building. At this stage, we have no plans to do any work on the doors. However, we are exploring what options are available to address the member’s particular concerns. In doing so we must, of course, take account of any practical and financial considerations, including budget availability and security requirements, before any firm commitments can be made to alter the doors. Mr Robertson also raises an important point about replacing the pull handles with push plates. I understand that having door handles on both sides can make it difficult or confusing for someone to establish whether the doors open inwards or outwards. I will, therefore, raise the issue with the corporate body. I am also happy to update the member on the outcome of any further investigations on the matters that he raises.

The Parliament relies heavily on information technology in order to function efficiently and effectively. The corporate body is aware of the crucial role of the parliamentary IT system in supporting the business of the Parliament in Holyrood, in the regional and constituency offices and, of course, through remote working. Like all organisations, we keep our IT systems under review to ensure that the service that we provide best meets the needs of members, attains value for money, and takes advantage of proven, contemporary technologies.

The key point is that the SPCB is here to serve members, not the other way round. I will undertake to ensure that the member’s concerns are raised with IT specialists. I want to flag up a couple of points in which members might be interested. The first is that the new year saw a new contract for voice and data communication suppliers. We are now with Virgin Media—a change that represents a saving of £70,000 a year to the corporate body. The other point, which is, perhaps, of more importance to members, is that that gives us increased capacity—two links, rather than one—improves resilience and gives us a greater ability to have high-speed broadband. That is important for our offices in the constituencies and regions. I know, from talking to members from across the political divide, that that is a key point. I will certainly ensure that we listen to members more efficiently. It is important that management walks the walk and that it talks to members regularly. On a wider matter, I know that there will be a review of the issue of tablet devices and other projects later this year.

I thank the member for contacting me at the end of last year with a list of complaints about the IT system. I am grateful for her courtesy. I stress that the key point is that the corporate body is here to serve members, and it is important that the officials whom we employ consult and listen to staff. From talking to officials earlier today, I know that consultation is taking place as we speak, and the officials will take on board the points that the member has raised. I also stress the key point that the new contract gives us new capacity and new resilience. I think that members will notice a big difference in broadband speed and accessibility to remote offices.

The member makes an excellent point, which I undertake to raise at the corporate body’s next meeting.

Will the spectrum auction be a key factor in access for rural Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this vitally important debate on broadband. Highlands and Islands Enterprise rightly described broadband roll-out as “transformational” for the Highlands and Islands. I agree, and I will concentrate on the Highlands and Islands almost exclusively, but I will also touch on three best-practice examples, which include Eigg and Cornwall. I will do so in the spirit of consensus, as the cabinet secretary, Alex Neil, is the model of calm and the master of conflict avoidance. Some have said that he would put Henry Kissinger in the shade, but perhaps I overstate my case. There is much to be welcomed in the infrastructure action plan. I do not think that anyone would disagree with a commitment to “a world-class, future proofed infrastructure that will deliver digital connectivity across the whole of Scotland by 2020.” However, I have a few questions for the cabinet secretary on the detail, which I will touch on in a few moments. In my earlier years in politics I remember dealing with a small community in Lochaber that could not get television reception because it was literally surrounded by Munros—of course, I mean the mountains and not the clan. The solution was eventually found by using a self-help transmitter in the village, and “Coronation Street”, “EastEnders” and “Match of the Day” were soon beamed into every single household. Is that not an analogy for broadband roll-out in rural areas? The last 2 per cent of locations will be the most geographically challenging—our island communities, isolated valleys and hillside hamlets. As BT has said, we need a mixed economy of technologies, including fibre optic, satellite, wi-fi, 3G and 4G. However, as BT tells me, the number of slow-spots, where speeds are less than 2 megabits per second, as they are for 12 per cent of the population, could be further reduced by highly technical solutions such as television white space—the utilisation of spare TV channel frequencies—long-reach fibre, and the development of 4G. However, there are a number of challenges. What about gap funding in situations where there is no economically viable case for commercial organisations independently to implement next-generation broadband? Does the cabinet secretary agree with BT’s evidence at the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee that the target of significantly improving access to faster broadband speeds by 2015 needs to be more specific and defined in order to judge progress? The target is to improve Scotland’s broadband uptake so that it is above the UK average by next year. As we have heard, that is a big challenge. Scotland is about 13 per cent below the UK average uptake of 74 per cent. What assessment has the cabinet secretary made of the level of funding available through the challenge fund under the Scotland rural development programme’s LEADER scheme for broadband roll-out? There are several best-practice schemes across the UK. For example, in Cornwall, BT and Cornwall Council aim to deliver 100 per cent coverage of superfast broadband by sourcing over £50 million from the European regional development fund, along with £78 million from BT. It has been described by a probably very ambitious press officer as the “world’s most ambitious rural next generation broadband project.” It is worth emphasising two key points. First, people in Cornwall are using satellite and wireless technologies to in-fill areas where fibre optic development is not practical. Secondly, it is a good example of gap funding, which meets the difference between what is and what is not financially viable. We all know that the market cannot possibly solve all the problems of broadband roll-out. I flag up the excellent project that Mary Scanlon mentioned in the Highlands and Islands, where the work of BDUK and EDF will make a revolutionary change. Let me give another example. Some time ago, a resident of Eigg conducted a survey of all users on the island. He looked at broadband speed, service reliability and the cost of service and found that there was massive dissatisfaction regarding all three aspects. There is good news, however. Following the survey, the resident, working with representatives of the University of Edinburgh, developed and established an alternative service for Eigg. He sent my office a letter saying: “This is acting as a pilot project for the wider roll-out network over the small isles, Knoydart and Loch Hourn area, for which we have yet to achieve any funding. The Eigg network is now almost fully operational, with over 20 households currently connected. For Eigg alone, when 40 subscribers are connected, the total net cost will have been less than £200 per household”. As the cabinet secretary said, Professor Peter Buneman of the University of Edinburgh has recently spoken about the Tegola project, otherwise called the “last mile” solution. That is an excellent example of a local initiative. I welcome the seed fund initiative, which appears in the action plan for local solutions. The network has been running for four years and covers Corran and north-west Knoydart, serving about 60 households. It delivers speeds of about 25 megabits per second—although it is slightly limited by backhaul problems—and excellent voice over IP through services such as Skype. Professor Buneman makes the very relevant point that rural communities need the internet as much as urban communities, partly because there are more businesses in rural communities. Of course, there is also a greater reliance on online shopping and other forms of communication. One of the key issues is how to avoid isolation. He gave an excellent example of a resident of Knoydart who uses teleconferencing to communicate with his grandchildren in New Zealand every weekend. New-generation broadband is arguably the most important tool for rural development, particularly for our super-rural and fragile mainland communities. There is much to commend in the action plan, which is written in the spirit of the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report “Digital Scotland”. I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to respond to my remarks. Finally, the wider question that the Royal Society of Edinburgh addresses is whether broadband infrastructure is a means to an end rather than an end in itself. How can we work together to narrow the digital divide among the over-55s and the lower-income groups to implement a world-class infrastructure that will cultivate Scotland’s social, cultural and economic sectors?

I think that the member is just coming to this point, but I stressed that fibre optic cannot possibly be the whole answer for the Highlands and Islands. A whole suite of alternatives must be used. In the past, satellite was used through an ISP. Does the member agree that satellite, wi-fi and 4G must be considered to ensure that the last 1 per cent is covered?

Does the member share my view that students in the Highlands and Islands have had a big boost from the University of the Highlands and Islands through its high-speed broadband, which utilises JANET? Does he agree that everyone should be able to access that form of communication?

The minister knows of my interest in the subject as a co-convener of the cross-party group on diabetes. Further to Hugh Henry’s point, I am concerned about provision of insulin pumps for young people; the minister will know that the level is at zero in some health board areas. What will he do to ensure that young people have equality?

I warned the cabinet secretary that I have a brief point to make. What are his views on what the voluntary modulation rate and the rate of co-financing will be in the new CAP procedures? The rules and responsibilities in that regard lie with the Scottish Government.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate on the common agricultural policy. I congratulate Rob Gibson and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee on their novel approach of initiating a pre-committee report debate. I will focus my remarks on the Highlands and Islands and the pillar 2 rural development programme. It is worth pausing the debate for an instant and looking into history. Agricultural support—more specifically, support for farmers and the development of agricultural produce for the export market—was arguably an early driver for the treaty of Rome in 1957. The powerful dynamic between France and Germany, which is also reflected in foreign affairs and defence, demonstrates the strength of those countries’ relationship, which presents major challenges for the review, reform and renewal of the CAP. The bigger question for us is simply this: what is the purpose of public support for agriculture? That was well covered in the evidence to the committee on 30 November last year, when Alyn Smith MEP said: “National security is predicated on food security, and that must be our absolute north star in the negotiations.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 November 2011; c 448.] The international picture is a crisis in global food price inflation, which has led to food riots in every continent but Europe. Instability in the middle east has hit the price of oil and affected transport and fertiliser costs. The key point is that security of supply is not an issue for the energy markets alone. Many members have commented on the current CAP budget. Perhaps we would need the Brahan seer to predict the budget, but the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing makes it clear that the budget for each pillar will decrease by around 9 per cent. In his evidence to the committee, George Lyon MEP estimated that the fall will be around 12 per cent compared with the budget for 2006 to 2013. Although we do not know exactly what will be in the budget, the omens are not good. More than a year ago, even before the euro crisis, the net contributors to the EU—France, Germany, the UK, the Netherlands and Finland—wrote to the President of the European Commission making it clear that the EU budget should remain static in cash terms or decline in real terms over seven years. As I said in my intervention on the minister, the actual budget for each pillar will depend on the rate of modulation—the transfer of support from pillar 1 to pillar 2. The total modulation this year is 14 per cent, 10 per cent of which is compulsory and 4 per cent voluntary. I thank the minister for making some points about voluntary modulation and co-financing, which is in the Scottish Government’s hands and can affect the level of the budget. A number of members, including Claire Baker and Rob Gibson, flagged up the changes to pillar 1. I will concentrate on pillar 2 and the rural development programme. In Scotland, support is paid through the Scotland rural development programme. The new European agricultural fund for rural development will fit into the new common strategic framework. That is also applicable to other funds, such as the European social fund and the European regional development fund. The support will have to set a clear link to performance and be linked to the six priorities, with 5 per cent being held back for performance reserve. In addition, 25 per cent of the rural development programme will be focused on land management and, quite rightly, the fight against climate change. The six priorities include enhancing competitiveness, promoting ecosystems and promoting social inclusion and poverty reduction. Pillar 2 has a crucial role to play in supporting and developing the delivery of public goods and services by agriculture but, as a number of members have stated, the UK receives the lowest share of all the EU member states and Scotland has the lowest share of the four countries in the UK. Whatever the final EU framework, there will be an element of subsidiarity to member states and, of course, devolved Governments. Should there be a status for and recognition of mountains and islands, as the Scottish Crofting Federation has argued? Is there room for sub-programmes in a future SRDP? Could we construct targets to increase the numbers of crofters and small farmers? Does any member seriously suggest—I do not think that they do—that food production is inherently in conflict with the protection of the environment and climate change mitigation? As William Houstoun from Angus Growers told the committee: “We are going to need more food, but the arable areas of Scotland have the ability to become more intensive at the same time as becoming more environmentally beneficial”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 23 November 2011; c 414.] I want a future rural development programme that has strong environmental stewardship, works actively to secure biodiversity and manage landscapes and habitats and stresses the needs of people in rural and remote areas. We all know what the rural development challenges are—distance, remoteness, low population density and lack of access to services—but my greatest concern is the loss of young people from remote and rural areas. The hills and glens are important, but this is more about the character of the people. Rural development needs the people’s intelligence and individuality, but we also need to develop life sciences, create green jobs, form clusters of renewables, stimulate research and development, and link industry with higher education. The acid test for the new CAP and SRDP will be how they deliver for our most fragile and remote rural areas and for the young, the dispossessed and the disadvantaged.

As the member knows, the Scottish Government has control over voluntary modulation and co-financing. Would she like the Scottish Government to maximise its discretion in those areas?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce its ferry strategy. (S4O-00545)

The test for any strategy is not what looks good in the ivory tower of the ministerial office but what happens when strategy meets reality. Will the minister fully fund a replacement ferry for the northern isles during NorthLink’s dry-dock period? Ferry connections to Orkney and Shetland are lifeline services, and the local communities are rightly concerned about the prospect of a nine-week reduction in service. Will he intervene and speak today to the conveners of Orkney Islands Council and Shetland Islands Council to allay their fears?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what actions it is planning to stimulate domestic use of solar panels. (S4O-00498)

I agree with the minister that the UK Government’s reduction of the feed-in tariff has been very damaging to the solar panel industry. Does the minister share my view that the three crucial benefits from the solar panel industry are employment, its helping us to meet our climate change targets and its being excellent in relation to our renewables targets? Would the minister consider using the fossil fuel levy of £110 million, which has now been ring fenced, for a Scottish equivalent of the feed-in tariff scheme that would ensure that over the next 12 months there is employment in the solar panel industry and that we continue to meet our climate change targets?

I appreciate the member’s giving way. What is Stuart McMillan’s view on the role of the major supermarkets, such as Tesco and Sainsbury? In many cases, they have a UK-wide policy on consistent petrol prices. Volume is a major factor that relates to pricing. The member mentioned economic rules. I would be interested to hear his views on those two factors.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress there has been in relocating Inverness College to the Beechwood campus. (S4O-00465)

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that the new Beechwood campus is a vote of confidence in the students and the staff of Inverness College, and that it opens up huge opportunities for a wider range and mix of teaching? Does he agree that, through Highlands and Islands Enterprise and local councils working together, it will provide economic and social benefits across the Highlands and Moray?

On specialist services, does the member acknowledge the tremendous work that is done by the Inverness Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Centre, which has tremendous input from paid and unpaid staff? The third sector also plays a vital role in such fantastic services across Scotland.

If, after dialogue with the Government, the European Commission decides not to cut days at sea, how would the cabinet secretary prove to the maritime and fisheries commissioner that conservation of stocks and the wider maritime environment are at the heart of the Scottish Government’s fisheries policy?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way because he is “that sort of minister”. My point is on fallow fields, which—as the minister will be aware—are fields for which companies have licences to develop but have not done so. When Labour was in power we introduced the licence information for trading—LIFT—policy, which allowed companies to swap licences. Is the minister concerned about that situation? There is potential in the North Sea that is not being developed because some companies are sitting on fields and not developing them.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member will be aware that, in the 1970s, the Offshore Supplies Office was set up to try to ensure that British industry got its fair share of work on the UK continental shelf. Sadly, it was abolished. Does the member share my view that we need the son of the Offshore Supplies Office to do a lot more to help Scottish and British industry?

On parochialism, I will also flag up the Highlands. As the member will know, Nigg, where a facility is reopening, had a tremendous track record in fabrication, for example in making jackets. On the member’s earlier point, Nigg is also setting up a skills academy, which is an example to the whole of Scotland and the UK.

This has been an excellent debate on a crucially important subject that is vital to the future prosperity of Scotland and the UK. Members from across the chamber have spoken with passion and understanding about the oil and gas sector from a variety of perspectives. For example, Gavin Brown talked about finance, Mark McDonald spoke eloquently about tax and stability, and my colleague Sarah Boyack raised the environment. Lewis Macdonald had excellent points to make on skills and training, and I was impressed by those that Kevin Stewart and Dennis Robertson made about the regional economic impact of the industry, particularly in the north-east. We should not forget, either, the eloquent contributions of Maureen Watt and Tavish Scott on health and safety. The industry has a history and culture all its own, which were etched into the Scottish consciousness by the radical theatre group 7:84, which produced the popular community play, “The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil”—I remember watching it as a very young student in the mid-70s. On the same theme, Bill Forsyth’s “Local Hero” gave a vivid account of the industry’s impact on remote communities. With more tragic overtones, Sue Jane Taylor’s sculpture in Aberdeen’s Hazlehead park remembers the victims of the Piper Alpha tragedy. The history of the industry has been well documented by Lewis Macdonald and Fergus Ewing, but its early history, which is less well known, has not been mentioned, so I will touch on it briefly. In the 19th century, James “Paraffin” Young had a shale-oil industry in the central belt; arguably, he was the pioneer of the current industry. Perhaps even less well known is the secret US/UK Government operation during world war two that produced hundreds of tonnes of oil in Sherwood forest in Nottinghamshire, which supplied the fuel for allied fighters and bombers. Churchill is alleged to have said that it was the best kept secret of the war. Last week I had another look at the Tony Benn diaries, which I am sure that many members have looked at. In reading them, I was really struck by the sense of optimism and expectation that existed in the public psyche in the early 70s around the discovery of oil and, indeed, gas in the UK continental shelf. Members will all be aware that Tony Benn was the Secretary of State for Energy. It is alleged that he had been demoted to that post by Harold Wilson. I looked at a tabloid cartoon from the time, which said that, because energy was so important, his next demotion would be to the position of Prime Minister.

Surprise, surprise—I could have predicted that that would be the question that the member would ask. If I had been the minister in the 1970s, I would have had to decide whether I wanted a capital fund or a revenue fund. It might have been valid to have set up an oil fund in the 1970s, but Tony Benn came up with two initiatives that are worth looking at, on which the member may wish to comment. The first was to have a nationalised British National Oil Corporation, which was vital at the time, and the second was to set up the Offshore Supplies Office, which I referred to earlier. Sadly, as members will know, the Tories privatised the production business in 1982 and Britoil was taken over by BP in 1998. The minister will be aware that I lodged a series of questions to him on the Offshore Supplies Office on 28 September. In his answer, the minister referred to Professor Alex Kemp, who in my view is probably the leading academic guru on the oil industry.

I am glad that I got some support from Kevin Stewart. That is reassuring. I will quote from the minister’s response to my question. It states: “the work of the Offshore Supplies Office lead to an increase in the share of the UKCS market obtained by British industry and many companies obtained benefits which enabled them to flourish both domestically and overseas in later years”, and cites “the development of sub-sea technologies as a particular success story.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 21 October 2011; S4W-03020.] My question to the minister is this: do we need a new Offshore Supplies Office to support Scottish industry and manufacturing and help them to grow and develop, particularly with a view to increasing supply chain capability? I take Kevin Stewart’s point about obsolete EU procurement rules; nevertheless, I still feel that there is a gap in the market. Gavin Brown made some excellent points about the contribution that oil and gas make to the UK economy. As we heard, oil peaked in 1999 and gas peaked in 2000. I agree with the many members who referred to the fact that vast resources remain. There is a range of views: Oil & Gas UK estimates that between 15 billion and 24 billion barrels of oil and gas remain, and the Department of Energy and Climate Change estimates that about 20 billion barrels remain—the estimates are within a range of accuracy. As many members have said, the industry is clear that it does not like surprises from the Government and that fiscal stability is key. Members should not take my word for that—the Westminster Energy and Climate Change Committee, which has MPs of all colours, criticised the Tory-led Government for its attitude to the oil and gas industry in the 2011 budget, which included a windfall tax on the oil and gas sector. Maureen Watt made a good point about the danger of having a two-speed UK continental shelf, which would mean that large, robust projects go ahead but marginal and difficult projects stall. It is also vital that we talk about skills. Lewis Macdonald, among others, spoke clearly about the issue. In an intervention, I mentioned the great example of the work that Roy MacGregor of Global Energy is doing in Ross-shire by reopening the Nigg yard. That is a very important development for fabrication in both oil and gas and renewables. We should not forget other crucial yards, such as Arnish on Lewis. It is important to set up the skills academy to provide not only vital modern apprenticeships but skills for older workers and to create linkages with hospitality and life sciences. In the oil and gas industry, we have a global centre of excellence; key skills in engineering, manufacturing and technology; a significant and established provider of primary energy, employment and investments; and a key industry for exports and tax revenues. I make a plea to the minister to reconsider his view on our amendment. He said earlier that he does things because he is “that sort of minister”. If he is “that sort of minister”, please will he reconsider our amendment? We would appreciate his support for it.

Does the member agree that it is vital that a supply of defibrillators is available throughout rural areas, in particular? If so, does she support the great work of Skye-based charity Lucky2BHere, which is providing training and defibrillators throughout the island?

Does the minister support my campaign to introduce a graduated driving licence scheme to help to stop the carnage among young drivers, particularly on our rural roads? The minister may be aware that I am launching a DVD campaign tomorrow in Inverness. Every school in the Highlands and Islands will receive a copy of my road safety DVD. Will the minister send words of support to tomorrow’s official launch?

I congratulate Liam McArthur on his initiative in securing the debate on the air discount scheme. I strongly support and endorse his comments and hope that my speech will add cross-party support to the campaign to keep business, local authority and third sector air travellers within the scheme. The European Commission approved the ADS for the Highlands and Islands on 11 May 2006 on the basis that it was aid of a social character. It was an initiative by the previous Administration to make air services more affordable for remote communities and was aimed at addressing low gross domestic product and peripherality. There is good custom and practice throughout Europe for similar schemes. We have heard about schemes in Corsica and Madeira and for the German islands. I spoke recently to Councillor Angus Campbell from Western Isles Council, who told me that he could find no definition of “aid of a social character”. However, in its decision on Corsica—Liam McArthur mentioned this as well—the Commission said: “the Commission considers that living on an island can be a disadvantage which justifies transport aid”. In that announcement and all other relevant announcements, no restriction is imposed on the purpose for which an individual travels, so I have a simple question for the minister: where did the decision to exclude business passengers—by which I mean private, public and third sector employees on work activities—come from? In his reply to my written parliamentary question on 29 September, the minister said that excluding the above groups would save around £2.7 million. Let us put that another way: that means additional costs of £2.7 million for business, local government and the third sector in the Highlands and Islands. Let me be straight: the minister should come clean, stop blaming Europe and accept that it was a simple cost-cutting exercise. I have spent a lot of time examining the matter. The European Commission approved the scheme in May 2006. More importantly, it reaffirmed that the scheme was correct under state-aid rules in 2008 and agreed it again in March 2011. However, there are some exemptions. Public service obligation routes, people who live outwith the area and national health service funded trips are not covered. That is clear and no one disputes it, but there is no mention at all of an exemption for business trips. The European Commission wrote to William Hague and said that it did not encounter any problems in the scheme. I ask the minister to confirm that the Scottish Government did not take it upon itself to consult the European Commission before making the sea change in policy that has hurt island businesses so much. If the minister disagrees with me—I suspect that he does—will he agree to put the advice that he has received in the Scottish Parliament information centre? Why can business users in Corsica but not in Castlebay access the scheme? The Scottish Government asked Halcrow Group Ltd to review the scheme in August 2007. It said: “ADS has been well received in the eligible regions and has had a positive impact on making air services more affordable in the most peripheral regions of the Highlands and Islands”. The review concluded that the scheme should be continued in its current form beyond March 2008 as part of a long-term strategy of increased connectivity to more outlying communities within the Highlands and Islands. There was no mention of cutting business users out of the equation. That review was sponsored by the Scottish Government—the minister’s own Government—so where did the idea come from? I do not know whether the minister is a smoker but, if he is, it looks like the idea appeared as a small doodle on an equally small fag packet. Unfortunately, it has had large implications for the Highlands and Islands. There has been outrage throughout the business community because of the changes. I have stressed the effect on business, but let us not forget about local government. Western Isles Council tells me that the cost per year of the measure will be £75,000 and Shetland Islands Council tells me that the cost will be £250,000.

Do I have time to give way, Presiding Officer?

I would be happy to raise that issue directly with Western Isles Council’s chief executive, but that is not my point today. My point is about why the change has been made, because it is inconsistent with European Union rules. Orkney Islands Council tells me that the change will cost it £140,000. I will conclude, as I am running out of time. The ADS was well received across the Parliament when it was introduced in 2006. The aim of making air services affordable for remote communities in the Highlands and Islands is a vital plank of social inclusion. As I said, the scheme received a glowing assessment from the Scottish Government’s own review in 2008 and there was no intention to withdraw it. My suspicion—which is shared by many who are, like me, interested in aviation—is that the changes are cost driven and that the European Commission was perfectly content with the scheme in 2006, which it approved with no business exemptions.

No—I am in my last minute. I challenge the minister to show evidence to the contrary. He has some explaining to the Highlands and Islands business community to do. I thank Liam McArthur again for his initiative in securing the debate.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister might be about to touch on this. I just want to put this simple point to the him. I can understand that his Government might wish to remove business travel as a cost-cutting exercise—that is a decision of the Government. My point—and, I think, Liam McArthur’s point—was that he should not blame Europe for that. My strong understanding from senior officials in the European Commission is that no such application was made. The scheme was approved, with business travel in it, in March. It is the minister’s Government that has removed it. The European Commission did not advise or instruct it in any way; if the minister chooses to make an application and removes business travel, that is another thing. My point is, can he be clear with us today that the move was not initiated by the European Commission?

It is very clear that the Commission looked at this three times and approved the scheme with business in it. There is a world of difference between that and the Commission recommending to the Government that it change the scheme because it does not comply with EU rules. If a member state goes to the European Commission with an approved scheme and wishes to withdraw an element of it, the Commission will approve that. The minister’s civil servants recommended the change—not the European Commission.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to extend the provision of defibrillators. (S4O-00251)

A defibrillator can literally mean the difference between life and death. Does the minister share my view that we need a comprehensive, cross-Government risk assessment of the placing of defibrillators in areas of high incidence of cardiac arrest and areas where ambulances cannot respond quickly, such as rural areas, as well as on long-distance trains, buses and ferries?

A cynical observer, reading that we were to discuss the digital future of Scotland’s heritage, could easily dismiss our proceedings as dry, irrelevant or out of touch. As people say in the Highlands and Islands with heavy irony, “Aye, they talk about little else in Fochabers.” However, cynics should look at the Scottish ten project, which uses cutting-edge technology to create digital models of Scotland’s five UNESCO world heritage sites and five international sites, and think again. They should look at the 3D scan of the Mount Rushmore national memorial, which has been developed into a photorealistic 3D animation for public education and information, and think again. They should also look at the stunning point cloud format of 3D New Lanark, and think again. Cynics should also look at the breathtaking work that is being carried out on Skara Brae. As members know, it is one of the most impressive prehistoric sites in Europe and has been well preserved for more than 5,000 years. The scanning will allow preservation and conservation. It will also digitally reproduce what the original site once looked like. I am sure that we all remember the dusty, traditional and—to be frank—boring museums and libraries of our childhood. Things are different now with our state-of-the-art 3D scanning, which can be used in 3D animation and prints. As we have heard, it has a wide range of uses, such as virtual reality interpretations and interactive education.

I am happy to share memories of dusty museums with the member. The scanning technology can also be used for mobile applications and remote access to inaccessible sites. Yesterday, at the excellent presentation that Clare Adamson mentioned, I met Ruth Parsons, the chief executive of Historic Scotland. She told me that, in the near future—indeed, probably very soon—it will be possible to use an iPhone app that uses satellite tracking to provide a personalised tour around New Lanark, for example. I will give another example. I recently visited Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, the Gaelic college in Skye that is part of the new University of the Highlands and Islands, which is in a stunning location. I was shown the well of heritage development, which is a major collaboration involving UHI, the school of Scottish studies at the University of Edinburgh, the National Trust for Scotland and the BBC. The project committee is chaired by the former Runrig star Donnie Munro. The project, which was launched on 9 December 2010, has taken a wealth of Gaelic and Scots songs, stories, radio programmes, instrumental music and folklore and delivered it live to people all over the world. The aim of the team running the project is to preserve, digitise and make available online thousands of hours of Gaelic and Scots recordings from the 1930s onwards. The team has done five years of intensive work, and I was told that it has 11,500 hours of material that it wants to catalogue—a great task. The website is a major resource for musicians, researchers and learners of all levels, and it is enjoyed and commonly used by community groups and individuals. The project includes both Gaelic and Scots languages and contributes to economic development. When I visited it, I was given a small gift—which of course I duly declared, Presiding Officer—that included the songs and stories of the oral tradition of Skye and Lochalsh. One of the recordings was of the famous Sorley MacLean, the internationally renowned Gaelic poet and—interestingly enough—an ex-headteacher of Plockton high school. I certainly recommend it to all members. Such projects are not just a source of information and a portal for our cultural heritage; they are important for employment all over Scotland, from South Uist and Skye to Edinburgh. It is vital that we retain the skills of the people who work on those great projects and use them for the long term. It is also important to involve everyone in digital projects in the future. Several members, not least Jamie McGrigor and Ruth Davidson, have mentioned the importance of the roll-out of broadband. The cross-party group on digital participation has also mentioned that issue. I will be positive because I believe that the Highlands and Islands Enterprise pilot, which gained funding from broadband delivery UK, is vital. We still have to get the exact locations, but I understand that around 50 villages and towns across the Highlands and Islands will be part of the pilot. We have to be flexible because we know that there are huge barriers to broadband. It is often slow and expensive, and sometimes the service is intermittent. We need a flexible approach—we have to look at fibre optic, ADSL, wireless and satellite technologies—but I believe that by using all the different technologies we can have much greater access to broadband across the whole of Scotland, particularly in the Highlands and Islands. I believe that this has been an important debate on which there is a lot of consensus across the chamber. The models that we have discussed, particularly the Scottish ten, are fantastic models for the future. I am personally excited about some of the developments that are happening, and I warmly support the Labour amendment.

I share Sandra White’s concerns, which were highlighted to me two weeks ago by The Inverness Courier after Inverness sheriff court was cleared of all press and media during the disposal of one case. Does the Solicitor General share my view that coverage of court cases is an essential element of transparency in justice and that the press should be removed from a courtroom only in the most unique and unusual cases?

The number of recorded crimes at the Parliament building since 2003 to date is 158. The numbers were substantially higher during the period when the site was under construction in 2003 and part of 2004. Not all incidents requiring action by the police are recorded as crimes. Information about the number of incidents is recorded separately. A new recording system was introduced in November 2007 and to date 298 incidents specific to the Parliament postcode have been recorded. Lothian and Borders Police has advised that it is time and cost prohibitive to produce data that is prior to 2007. In April 2009, the Parliament police unit started to maintain records of items surrendered to the police at the public entrance. To date, 368 various items have been surrendered by visitors to the building. Surrendered items that have not been returned to owners from April this year include 126 items that are mainly illegal knives and blades. Surrendered items are not recorded as incidents or crimes.

I thank the member for his interest in security in the building. As the member will know, the nature of the terrorist threat facing the Parliament has changed in recent years and there is increased concern about the threat from fixated individuals. On the numbers of vests, following a procurement exercise one vest has been supplied for each member of the security staff. The total cost to date is £35,500. Security vests are worn at the public entrance and the car park. I stress that all training has been carried out and that the staff trade unions fully support the move, because the SPCB has a duty of care for all its members of staff.

I know that the member has a great interest in this particular area. All directly employed corporate body employees and agency-recruited staff employed on a temporary basis are paid above the living wage. In the case of contractors, such as Sodexo, it is their responsibility to set the terms and conditions of their own staff, with the caveat that in both cleaning and catering contracts we have specified that wages must be at least at the minimum wage level.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body is not signed up with the living wage foundation as an accredited living wage employer. The member makes a convincing case for why we should be signed up. I undertake to raise the matter at the corporate body’s next meeting. I will request that, in future, the corporate body costs a living wage option prior to the award of new contracts. As far as current contracts are concerned, there is a yearly review of the costs of wages for each contract that we have.

In the terms of the contract we make it clear that the minimum wage must be paid. Because of commercial confidentiality we do not know the wages of individual members of the contract. However, I stress that the contract terms for cleaning and catering specify that the minimum wage must be paid.

Is the minister aware that the new Argyll Ferries service from Gourock to Dunoon no longer holds a defibrillator on board? As the minister will be aware, for those suffering a heart attack a defibrillator means the difference between life and death. Will the minister raise the issue with Argyll Ferries and make a defibrillator a standard contract issue on all new contracts for ferry services issued by the Scottish Government?

I place on record my thanks to members across the political divide who have supported my motion and to colleagues who have stayed behind this evening, who have shown their interest in and concern about the road safety of young drivers across Scotland. It is a truism that is not depleted by repetition that there is no greater tragedy, sorrow or loss for a parent than the death of a young son or daughter, as I know from my own personal experience. However, let me tell you why I am here tonight debating young driver safety. In early spring last year, I was approached by the Matheson family from Inverness and asked to do what I could to stop the carnage on Highland roads. Their son Callum and his friend died in March 2010 in a fatal road collision in the city of Inverness. The car involved was a high-powered, 2-litre Skoda Fabia and the driver was only a provisional licence holder. I had a discussion with my local team and we decided to launch a major campaign to raise awareness among young people of their responsibilities for their passengers, not in a top-down, patronising way but by involving them in the campaign. I will give three or four examples. Last week, I went to Anderson high school in Shetland and spoke to the whole sixth year about the campaign. They were really enthusiastic and wanted to take part. We managed to get a car from a local firm—Macrae & Dick—which changed the livery of the car to reflect the campaign, which was great; we managed to get hundreds of leaflets sponsored by a local nightclub; we managed to get a local bus company to put 150 posters in all the local buses; and we also hope to involve the Scottish Youth Parliament. Finally, through the support of the business community, a DVD is being sponsored; part of tonight’s debate will feature on it, and I promise that each member who wishes one will get a copy. Our first step was to consider best practice across the world. We discovered that one in five newly qualified drivers crashes within six months of obtaining a full driving licence; that most newly qualified drivers are under 25; and that in the United Kingdom four people a day are killed or seriously injured in road collisions involving young drivers. There is a rural component. As we all know, rural roads across Scotland are more likely—in terms of road collisions per passenger mile—to be the scene of a fatal injury than urban motorways or dual carriageways. If we ever needed an argument for the dualling of the A9, that is it. However, road design and engineering are only one part of the equation—we also need to consider driver safety, training and education. Elsewhere in the UK, Wales has an excellent and innovative initiative called deadly mates, which warns young drivers that their passengers are their responsibility. Dr Sarah Jones of Cardiff University has, for 10 years, carried out research into road collisions involving young drivers in Wales and Scotland. As part of that research, she has considered a graduated driver licensing scheme. She has revealed that, if such a scheme were introduced in Scotland, 1,500 fewer injuries would occur each year, 22 lives could be saved, and £80 million could be reinvested in the Scottish economy. In short, the graduated driver licensing scheme is a system that allows new drivers to gain further skills in driving under conditions in which the risks are reduced. To use a very simple analogy, it is like a nursery slope for drivers—an apprenticeship designed to increase skills and reduce the risks for new drivers. It works by adding an intermediate stage between the learner stage and the full licence stage. There are restrictions on the number and age of passengers allowed to be carried, and the driver is not permitted to consume any alcohol. There is no consensus across the world on whether such a scheme should apply to all new drivers or just to young new drivers. New Zealand has one view; Australia has another view. However, the evidence from Dr Jones shows clearly that young drivers are more likely to be involved in a collision at night if they have passengers of the same age. As we all know, the drivers most at risk are male drivers under the age of 25. Across the world, the graduated driver licensing scheme has been demonstrated to be effective in reducing collisions and casualties. However, we have a problem here in Scotland. Current practice is not having an impact on young driver crash rates. Between 2000 and 2007, there was no change in the number of collisions for young drivers. However, among older drivers, the numbers dropped dramatically—by around 15 per cent. Enforcement is essential to reducing collision and casualty rates. In other countries, sanctions take the form of penalty points, fines, and, in some cases, the seizing of vehicles. Keith Brown, the minister, will outline the Scottish Government’s view on my proposals. However, his predecessor—Stewart Stevenson—in reply to a parliamentary question on 26 October 2010, said: “The legislation for graduated licensing is reserved but in our reply to the Driving Standards Agency ... we highlighted that there is strong support for regulated driving for new drivers amongst the road safety community”. He continued: “Transport Scotland is in the final stages of awarding a contract to facilitate a national debate on young driver issues.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 26 October 2010; S3W-36632.] Perhaps the minister will confirm the timescales. I believe that a graduated driver licensing scheme is an innovative idea whose time has come. Tom Paine, the American revolutionary author, once said: “We have it in our power to begin the world over again.” For families who have lost loved ones, unfortunately we cannot turn the clock back. We can, however, adopt a new, safer, proven driving regime, aimed at slashing the carnage on our roads and preventing the deaths and injuries of our young drivers.

Perhaps I can add another element to Mr McMillan’s speech. The member will be aware that we are losing the Nimrod aircraft, whose fantastic fixed-wing capability for search and rescue was used, for example, in the Piper Alpha incident. Does he share my view that such a move will reduce Scotland’s—and indeed the UK’s—search and rescue capability even more?

Further to Jamie Hepburn’s point, is the cabinet secretary aware that the Public and Commercial Services union has initiated a judicial review of the UK Government’s switch from using RPI to CPI in its calculations, which will cost public sector workers an average of 15 per cent of their pension benefits? Does the Scottish Government have a view on that switch and has it made representations on it to Westminster?

There are concerns in the north that the strategic defence and security review could result in the Ministry of Defence closing Fort George barracks, home to the Black Watch, and breaking the link between the Army and the Highlands that goes back to the 1700s. Will the First Minister agree to make urgent representations to Liam Fox to keep the base open, and to meet the chief executive of Historic Scotland to ensure that a survival plan is prepared to save Fort George as a premier league tourist destination?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in extending the living wage across the public sector. (S4O-00033)

Will the cabinet secretary consider the situation of agency staff, such as security personnel at Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, who have recently been offered an increase only up to £6.85 per hour, so that they can be on the same terms and conditions as directly employed mainstream Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd employees?

I agree with the member that the RSE report is excellent. Does he agree with the conclusion that we really need a fibre optic backbone, similar to a trunk road or electricity network, across Scotland?

If we take the example of broadband, there was competition throughout the United Kingdom. There were 60 bids, and the best bid was from Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which won over areas throughout the UK. I do not follow the member’s logic that we are down on a pro rata basis. HIE has shown the way. It can win bids in competition with England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

I congratulate Angus MacDonald on his excellent maiden speech. He is clearly a member to watch. His speech was well structured with a lot of humour, and I was touched that he mentioned my colleague Cathy Peattie. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this important debate. I will concentrate my remarks on the roll-out of superfast or next generation broadband in rural areas. However, I first place on record my welcome for the developments that are mentioned in the motion, such as BBC Alba becoming available on Freeview and cable, the work of the Scottish digital network panel, and the Scottish Government’s report “Digital Future”. Although “Digital Future” is a good report, I have a few technical issues to raise with the cabinet secretary on areas such as targets, broadband speed and funding. Patricia Ferguson rightly mentioned the important role of film in Scotland and how excellent revenues can be generated from film tourism. In the past, I was closely involved with the BBC’s “Monarch of the Glen” series, which many members may recall. At its height, it had 9 million viewers across the UK. I confess that, because it was filmed in my local area, I was once an extra for a day, the whole of which I spent watching what was going on. I can reveal that my left foot was shown for only a millisecond—even my mother did not recognise me when the episode was shown. Perhaps I have the best-known left foot in the chamber. I acknowledge the work of my former colleague Peter Peacock, who, as members will know, has retired from Parliament. He was an early advocate and pioneer of broadband in rural areas, both as education minister, through the development of the pathfinder network, which connected rural schools and libraries throughout Scotland, and through his campaigns, speeches and research, in which he sought to add to the development of superfast broadband in rural areas. What is meant by “next generation” or “superfast” broadband, and why is it important for rural areas in particular? As the Scottish Government’s “Digital Future” report rightly says, there is no fixed definition of what speed constitutes next generation broadband, but the European Commission has set a speed of 30Mb as a minimum target, and Westminster aims to achieve the best next generation broadband in Europe, taking into account factors such as speed, coverage, price and choice. As we all know, the Scottish Government target is for NGB to be delivered to all by 2020. Will the cabinet secretary confirm what the minimum speed will be for that target to be achieved? I accept that other issues will be taken into account and that meeting the target will depend on more than just speed, but it is clear that too low a speed causes problems for businesses and domestic users. The other Scottish Government target is for “significant progress” to be made by 2015. What is meant by that?

I thank the member for that highly technical intervention; perhaps he will explain to me what it meant later on. It was extremely worthy, nonetheless. High speed digital connectivity is perhaps the single most important tool to battle geographic exclusion, to improve access to services and to stimulate the rural economy and sustain tourism. As many members have said, it is crucial that the digital divide is tackled but, as has also been said, we have a particular problem in Scotland. As the Scottish Government’s report mentioned, Ofcom reports that broadband use in Scotland is the lowest in any nation in the UK. Within rural Scotland, the divide is stark. For example, a resident of the Isle of Eigg, which is in the Highlands and Islands region that I represent, conducted a survey of all users on the island, looking at broadband speed, service reliability and cost of service. On all three aspects, there was massive dissatisfaction. However, there is good news. Following the survey, the same resident, working with representatives of the University of Edinburgh, developed and established an alternative service for Eigg. A letter that was sent to my office said: “This is acting as a pilot project for the wider roll-out of the network over all the Small isles, Knoydart and Loch Hourn area, for which we have yet to achieve any funding. The Eigg network is now almost fully operational, with over 20 households currently connected. For Eigg alone, when 40 subscribers are connected, the total net cost will have been less than £200 per household, although this excludes any labour element—it has been done entirely by voluntary effort. Our network is a terrestrial wireless system, and is capable of ‘super-fast’ broadband speeds of over 100 Mbps. It is limited only by the non-availability of suitable backhaul on the mainland.” As I said in my earlier intervention, I congratulate HIE on its first-class, successful bid to Broadband Delivery UK to implement one of the four UK superfast broadband pilots. The project has now gone to procurement under European rules.

I absolutely agree with the cabinet secretary. We had a briefing from HIE last night and heard that that is a key element of the proposal. Will the cabinet secretary also support the Highlands and Islands receiving new rounds of funding under the intermediate category of structural funds, which can be used for broadband projects in the future? Superfast broadband is a transformational product for the Highlands and Islands. What is required is collaboration between the public sector and the private sector to ensure that we reach the most remote and isolated parts of rural Scotland. Let us not ignore the voices of dynamic local communities, such as the community on Eigg, which are using initiative and innovation to develop community information technology projects with existing LEADER resources.

As an Inverness Caley Thistle fan who often watches my team on BBC Alba, I wonder whether George Adam agrees that your team can be rubbish in two languages. [Laughter.]

I share the cabinet secretary’s view that rural schools are much more than bricks and mortar; they are the bedrock of our communities and an essential ingredient in rural development. Given the tight financial straitjacket within which our local authorities operate, how does the cabinet secretary intend to safeguard the sustainability of the 918 schools that are classified as rural and, more important, the quality of learning for pupils in rural communities?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on the Gourock to Dunoon ferry tender. (S4O-00004)

The Gourock to Dunoon ferry tender has had more twists and turns than a trip over the Rest and be thankful. The minister does not need to take my word for that; he need only read the letters page of any edition of the Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard over the past 12 months. Does the minister accept that the route from McInroy’s point to Hunter’s Quay on the Clyde is eligible to be treated as a public service route under the European Union’s maritime cabotage regulations of 1992, should Scottish ministers deem it appropriate? Will the minister support my call to refer the matter to the Office of Fair Trading for a full, comprehensive and independent inquiry?

As we have heard, this evening’s debate is on an issue with widespread implications for rural development, climate change and, of course, integrated transport. Indeed, as Cathy Peattie and others have pointed out, high fuel prices affect all of Scotland, but the effects are much more acute in our super-rural and peripheral areas, particularly our island communities. In that respect, I recall Donald Dewar’s story of his visit to Brian Wilson’s mother-in-law in the Western Isles. When he remarked that her house was extremely remote, she replied, “Yes, Donald, but remote from where?” There is an issue about where our rural areas are in connection with the rest of Scotland. High and unstable fuel costs are a very real problem not only for business, as the National Farmers Union Scotland made clear to us in this afternoon’s briefing, but for local families and tourism in Scotland. At 12 o’clock today, I took a snapshot of petrol prices around Scotland. In Skye, diesel was 143.9p; in Lewis, 149.9p; and in Galashiels, 136.9p. Of course, when we talk about high fuel prices, we need to consider the combination of factors that make up the fuel price itself.

The member makes a very strong point. In fact, when it was in power in the Scottish Parliament, Labour introduced a series of measures to support rural petrol stations, including rates relief and vapour removal and recovery tanks, which, although they sound techie, are extremely important to those businesses. We need to borrow some examples from countries such as Scandinavia, which has unmanned petrol stations with closed-circuit television. The resulting cut in labour costs has ensured the survival of supply, which is also crucial. The fuel price is made up of the spot crude oil price, distribution and marketing costs, VAT, refining costs and fuel duty. Fuel duty and VAT are reserved and, of course, the spot crude oil price is set by the markets. This whole debate could have focused on the role of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries and cartels and how the spot price is arrived at, but the relevant concern is, as other members have mentioned, the current problems in Libya and Iraq, which are reducing the available supply of fuel. Under the simple laws of supply and demand, those issues will play a role in increasing the fuel price in the short term. That is very worrying and there is frustration at the amount of control that individual Governments have over the spot price of fuel. What can be done about price? In Europe, as we know, harmonisation policies have been introduced in an attempt to achieve common tax rates and environmental necessity has led to a general trend, which most of us with our environmental views would support, towards increasing tax on road use. As other members have pointed out, there is no simple one-size-fits-all solution to this problem. Like my colleagues Charlie Gordon and Cathy Peattie, I support reducing VAT to 17.5 per cent—but more of that later, perhaps.

As I said, there is no one-size-fits-all solution, but I think that that straightforward, practical step could help. I point out to the minister an example of where it has helped. When Labour was in opposition and John Major was the Prime Minister, we defeated the Tory Government at that time and reduced VAT on heating oil to 5 per cent. If my memory serves me correctly, it is still at that rate. It is important that we see VAT as a useful vehicle in reducing cost. As I mentioned earlier, one of the biggest factors in the price of oil is the role of the cartel, of OPEC, and political instability. It is hard to control the overall price of fuel because of that factor. Another issue that members have not raised but which I think is important in the Highlands and Islands, as well as in other rural areas, is the suggestion that competition might not be as good as it could be in the wholesale market and within distribution. In the past, the Office of Fair Trading has pursued inquiries into that and, if the evidence supports it, I would support further inquiries by the OFT into petrol pricing in rural areas. In the past, some anomalies have been raised, especially in the Western Isles—Alasdair Allan will be familiar with them—through the OFT inquiry. I support the view of the ex-Minister of State for Industry and Energy, Brian Wilson, that oil companies should have regard to a whole series of factors when it comes to determining the price of fuel. He has argued that oil companies should build ultra-peripherality into their pricing—in other words, the oil companies themselves should have a role in addressing the supply of fuel to marginal rural areas. I am not suggesting that that is the whole solution; I merely think that it is a reasonable way forward in trying to get an individual solution.

I will go straight to my conclusion, Presiding Officer. There are some things to be welcomed in derogation and I support the current pilot in our island communities. It is not easy to deal with derogation in the European Union, as members know. There must be a unanimous decision by EU finance ministers. The key is to have a reduction in VAT, to have an inquiry by the OFT and to build up alternatives in rural transport to provide solutions for rural consumers.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made to alleviate flooding in Moray. (S3O-13099)

I welcome the news that the Elgin flood alleviation scheme has begun, as it will protect local residents against the trauma of flood damage. The minister will be well aware of the serious financial concerns that Moray Council has raised. Will she clarify when the Forres scheme is due to begin? Will she review again the funding of such schemes in the future?

17. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made by national health service boards in increasing access to insulin pump therapy in line with the latest clinical guidance. (S3O-12989)

The minister will be well aware of my long-term interest in this area. Although I welcome her comments, she will probably agree that the results are still not great throughout Scotland, as provision varies from 1 per cent to 5 per cent. I am particularly concerned about the low use of insulin pumps for young people. It is crucially important that those who are reliant on insulin can use insulin pumps as a way of normalisation, which is in the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines. Will the minister accept my view that we should increase the use of insulin pumps to at least the English level of around 5 per cent?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how links are being strengthened between Scotland and Malawi. (S3O-12894)

Will the minister join me in welcoming to the gallery Constance Kilimo? She is the first parliamentary intern from the National Assembly of Malawi. The minister will, of course, be aware of the recent very successful and constructive cross-party visit to Malawi. There are challenging issues there, such as the conditions in the women’s prison in Chichiri. Will the minister undertake to discuss with the Scottish Prison Service how to export best practice in areas such as training and prison visiting?

As a fellow Invernessian, I recognise Mr Fraser’s description of the road’s construction. I agree with his points about construction being important, but does he share my view that driver training, particularly among young drivers, is crucial? Will he support my campaign to have a graduated driving licence to ensure that young drivers get more training and therefore have fewer accidents on the roads, particularly the A9?

The member will be aware that many young and inexperienced drivers use the A9 every day. Does he share my view that we should introduce a graduated driving licence scheme to increase skills and therefore reduce accidents on the A9?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on electricity market reform. There can be few more important debates than that on the future of energy in this nation, particularly now that the UK, as we all know, is a net importer of oil and gas. The debate draws out strong emotions—although we have not heard too many of those in what, to date, has been a well-tempered debate—about one technology or process versus another. It is also quite complicated, involving the technospeak of product life cycle, proven technology, carbon capture and storage, security of supply and—my own favourite, as I have mentioned before—avoiding Russian-end supply chain, which I am sure that Mr Mather will explain when he sums up. However, sometimes we miss out consideration of the energy needs of the ordinary Scottish citizen in Leith, Lerwick or Lossiemouth. It might be true that the lights will not go out all over Edinburgh, but if we get the energy balance wrong in the next decade, we will be paying over a barrel—or, indeed, over a therm of gas—to countries with the political stability of Burma and the civil liberties record of Zimbabwe. Perhaps one of the most fluent and well-argued documents on the subject, which goes back to last year and earlier, is the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report on its inquiry into energy. Members will be aware that it concluded that the challenge is to meet the growing aspirations of the developing world, not least China and India, while mitigating the impact of global climate change. The UK is now more reliant on imported energy, at a time when the international market is much more competitive. To widen the debate from earlier discussions, I believe strongly that the developed world has a strong responsibility to carry the torch and to show leadership in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For that reason, I welcome the reform consultation. I believe strongly that, as the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change said last month, now is the time to act. We need to increase investment in greener technology and energy supply, to reduce our dependence on carbon-based energy and imports. We cannot sit on the sidelines if we are to become the green powerhouse of Europe. I welcome the Scottish Government's view that we should work with the  UK to ensure effective and efficient development of Scotland's low-carbon energy potential. As we have heard from all members so far this afternoon, the reform proposals identify four key areas that need to be addressed to ensure both security and decarbonisation of energy supply, while maintaining low energy costs. Those areas were well identified by Lewis Macdonald, Gavin Brown and Liam McArthur. As has been identified, there is a clear structural problem in the industry. We know that there will be a reduction in the number of coal and nuclear sites, due to closures, that we face issues relating to security of supply and that we must look at demand issues and consumer prices. Rightly, Gavin Brown said that demand for electricity is likely to double by 2050. There are real worries that, without new capacity in the longer term, we may have interruptions of electricity supply at peak periods in the future. However, in my view, the UK electricity market as a whole is much stronger than many others in Europe and abroad. All of us remember the stories more than a decade ago from California, which had major energy disruptions. The key is to have a strong balance of energy sources, combined with a rigorous and comprehensive grid of the sort that we have here in the UK. I share Chris Huhne's perspective that we should analyse our future energy needs using three yardsticks—we need to look at affordability, security of supply and carbon reduction. I will give the chamber two examples of security of supply problems in the gas industry; they will be well known to members, but I would like to flag them up nonetheless. Just last month, the Russian-controlled gas company Gazprom cut 80 per cent of Belarus's gas supply over a disputed debt. This month—only a few days ago—Russia cut gas supplies through the interconnectors, which badly hit Bulgaria, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Croatia and Turkey. I argue that there are particular strategic threats that need to be part of the wider energy and industry master plan. As we have heard, we need to incentivise producers to create a greater capacity to decarbonise or to produce low-carbon electricity. However, as we have seen in other industries such as telecommunications, transport and banking, the needs of the producer are often in conflict with the needs of the consumer. Recently The Sunday Times reported on the scandalous costs of domestic heating oil to consumers, with huge mark-ups by distributors. That is a particular problem in the Highlands and Islands, given our weather patterns. A report this week by Save the Children concluded that families on low incomes are paying £1,300 more a year for basic goods and services such as heating—up by a fifth from its survey in  2007. The charity said that about one fifth of the poverty premium comes from fuel bills alone. Why is that the case? The reason is that gas and electricity companies routinely charge more for repayment meters than for direct debits. As all members know, low-income families are forced to use repayment meters to manage their budget. With expected rises in gas and electricity prices over the next year, the number of households in fuel poverty, which are defined as those that spend more than 10 per cent of their income on heating, will go through the roof. Power giant E.ON will increase electricity charges by 9 per cent next month. Yesterday, The Scotsman reported that critics such as Energyshop.com believe that "energy suppliers are not taking chances with their profits, and offloading the bulk of their increased costs on to the consumer." I welcome Ofgem's investigation into power companies' charges for domestic customers, which is due to report in March. Although 2011 is only in its infancy, already consumers have been under siege from Christmas price hikes and the new VAT increases. We know from studies by Consumer Focus that 750,000 people are living in fuel poverty. Heating a home is a necessity, not a luxury. That is why I strongly support the adoption of the new European legislation, allowing Ofgem to force the big six energy suppliers to disclose the price that they pay for energy. I welcome the consultation and I believe that our energy strategy links into our industrial strategy. Where are the Scottish manufacturers of wind turbines—with the exception of Skykon in Campbeltown? The debate should be about not just new capacity, but reducing energy demand. We need to be able to develop co-ordinated offshore grids and better interconnection with Europe, as a springboard for the development of renewables. We all know that the task is great, but Scotland has the opportunity and skills to achieve it, not in a self-serving way but as a partner in the UK. With appropriate development and the right technology on a sustainable scale, and using the skills of our Scottish workforce, we can take a lead in Europe and beyond as we contribute to meeting our global climate change responsibility.

To ask the Scottish Executive what financial and other assistance it has in place for  people unable to complete their apprenticeships due to a company entering administration. (S3O-12566)

Does the minister share my view that skills development through modern apprenticeships is a vital tool for industry and commerce? When Rok went into administration last year, 35 young people who were employed in the Highlands and Islands lost their jobs and their apprenticeships. Does the minister support my call for an apprenticeship summit to be held in Inverness next month? Would she or her officials attend that? If not, will she agree to meet me in Parliament to discuss the problem in more detail?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has recently had with Highland Council regarding the proposed Inverness bypass. (S3O-12525)

The minister will be well aware that the city of Inverness desperately needs a bypass because of the staggering population growth in the area over the past decade. Does he share my view that a bypass would slash traffic congestion and provide well-needed stimulus to business and tourism? Can he offer any message of hope today as an early Christmas present for the Highlands?

I warmly welcome the new minister to her post. The minister will be well aware that the community in Moray is facing devastating economic problems with the closure of RAF Kinloss and the possible demise of RAF Lossiemouth. Will she reassure me, in a spirit of Christmas generosity, that there will be no diminution of service by SDS in Moray?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last had discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the island local authorities regarding the future of the inter-island ferry services. (S3O-12402)

The minister will be well aware of the importance of the inter-island ferry services, which are vital to business, job creation and tourism. He will also be aware that, in October, Western Isles Council was on the verge of scrapping its commercial ferries scheme, which has invested £125,000 in the area over the past four years. Does the minister share my regret at the uncertainty that is hanging over the scheme, whose demise would be a serious blow to the business community? Will Mr Brown agree to include inter-island ferry services in the wider road equivalent tariff pilot initiative?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Of course, it is a truism that the new Forth crossing is a vital infrastructure project but, as I said in the stage 1 debate, we need to have a balance—a balance that takes account of Scotland's strategic transport needs, the interests of residents of North and South Queensferry and beyond, and our climate change obligations. I would like to focus my remarks on the financial aspects of the project. As we have heard, it is estimated that the bridge will cost around £543 million, which is approximately 26 per cent of the project cost. As Hugh O'Donnell said, the often-quoted figure of £2.3 billion is the estimated total, which includes the combined cost of the three separate contracts, risk allowance, optimism bias and VAT, which, as we all know, is to increase to 20 per cent in the new year. The original contract was priced when VAT was at 17.5 per cent. When he winds up, perhaps the minister could confirm whether the new VAT rate will mean a higher range of costs for the project. If that is the case, what will the new cost parameters be? Optimism bias is an interesting concept, the definition of which should be pinned to the forehead of every new minister and official in charge of a public sector contract. Wikipedia defines it as "the demonstrated systematic tendency for people to be over-optimistic about the outcome of planned actions ... Excessive optimism can result in cost overruns, benefit shortfalls, and delays when plans are implemented or expensive projects are built."

I appreciate that, but I saw a slightly worried look on the minister's face when I mentioned cost overruns. It was remiss of me not to welcome Mr Brown to his new position. In  addition, as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, I put on record my thanks to Mr Stevenson for the important contribution that he has made through his work on the project. The issue of cost overruns was raised during committee evidence sessions. As we all know from the history of many—but not all—large public sector projects, not least the one that involved the construction of the Parliament building, it is extremely difficult to keep costs within budget, particularly in transport. Other factors that should be borne in mind during the Forth crossing project are the impact of the variable inflation rate on the cost of steel in the world market and weather conditions during construction. There are a variety of concerns and unanswered questions, some of which I have given the minister advance notice of. Financial issues are one such matter. On such a huge project, how can we determine value for money? There are only two consortia, which comprise eight individual businesses in total. Does the minister seriously think that the successful tender will come in at less than the upper estimate of £2.3 billion for the total project, even with the caveats that I have mentioned? What if one consortium pulls out, as individual elements have done already? What effect will the capital spend on the bridge have on the rest of the capital programmes, such as health and schools? Will the proposed Calman borrowing powers be used for the project? Like others, I take some comfort from the fact that the crossing will be a level 3 item in the budget and will therefore have a separate budget line. Stewart Stevenson made a commitment to report to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee every six months and to make a statement to Parliament at the point of engaging contractors. Will Mr Brown confirm that he will honour those commitments, and will he say when the contracts will be awarded? Is there a possibility that the award of contracts might slip until after next year's election? When will the project be advertised in the Official Journal of the European Union ? How long does it need to be advertised for? Will that occur immediately after royal assent? There will be an opportunity to create more construction jobs. How can we, as a Parliament, maximise jobs for the Scottish construction sector and involve smaller Scottish firms as well? Does the Government intend to use the adopt an apprentice scheme that was launched last year by Fiona Hyslop? Finally, have Mr Brown's officials made a further application for EU trans-European transport network—TEN-T—funding under priority axis 13?  Grants are up to €1.5 million, so the funding is certainly worth looking at. The bill is history in the making. If approved, it will commence the largest public sector infrastructure project since devolution. As a member of the committee, I thank the other committee members and Sarah Robertson and her clerking team. Finally, I would like to acknowledge the professionalism of the community councils, business groups and private individuals who submitted well-researched and polished evidence. I commend the bill to Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what economic assistance it will provide the local community in Kinloss with to offset the impact of the proposed closure of the Royal Air Force base. (S3O-12210)

Will the minister join me in congratulating the Moray task force on its tremendous efforts to date, and the Moray community generally, whose strength and resilience were exhibited in the outstanding rally in Lossiemouth last month? Does the minister share my view that, as well as fighting to keep the Nimrods at Kinloss and the Tornadoes at Lossiemouth, we need a three-point strategy—a Government job relocation to Moray; assisted area status; and diversification in the Moray economy by using European social funding to retrain redundant RAF personnel and to create new skills for Moray?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there has been an increase in the number of patients receiving insulin pump therapy in the past three years and, if so, what the cost has been to the national health service. (S3O-11853

Does the minister accept that the uptake and availability of insulin pumps across NHS board areas is a serious issue? What further steps is the Government undertaking to avoid a postcode lottery for patients who have insulin-dependent diabetes, particularly in terms of paediatric provision?

I place on record my thanks to all members from across the political divide who have signed my motion and those members who have stayed behind this evening to debate what is an important subject. I congratulate the four party leaders—Alex Salmond, Annabel Goldie, Tavish Scott and my party leader, Iain Gray—on committing to supporting the RAF Lossie rally on Sunday, which I believe will be one of the most important and significant rallies that Moray and Scotland have experienced in the past decade. RAF Kinloss and RAF Lossie have great personal resonance for me. My father did his national service with the Royal Air Force as a fresh-faced 18-year-old, and his first posting was at Kinloss. During my time at Westminster, I was honoured to serve with the RAF as part of the armed forces parliamentary scheme. I had placements in both bases, as well as in Basra, and flew in Tornado, Nimrod and Sea King search and rescue aircraft. On my last day with the RAF, the Sea King had an emergency to attend at Glencoe. I spent eight hours in the air watching the bravery, expertise and professionalism of the pilots and winch crew as they saved the lives of a young Swiss couple who had suffered facial injuries in a mountain accident. I will touch on the strategic defence and security review, before referring to the social and economic  impacts of the base closures. As all members will be aware, Kinloss is the home base of the Nimrod fleet of maritime aircraft. The new MRA4 Nimrod came into service this year and a fleet of nine had been ordered from BAE Systems. The decision in the SDSR to scrap the MRA4 will, in effect, close Kinloss as an RAF base. As members will recall, Kinloss also hosts the aeronautical rescue co-ordination centre as well as NATO exercises several times a year. One of the world's most respected defence commentators, Jane's Defence Weekly , has said that the cancellation of the Nimrod programme would not save significant amounts of money from the £3.65 billion procurement costs of the aircraft, because almost all of it has already been spent on development and production. If we add the cancellation fees to the mix, it makes more economic sense to keep the programme than it does to cancel it. It is Alice in Wonderland economics to stop a scheme under which one aircraft has already been built and delivered to Kinloss and the other eight are 90 per cent complete. The Nimrods are being built at the BAE Systems plant in Woodford, Cheshire. The Unite convener there, Kevin French, was quoted recently on BBC Manchester as saying: "It looks like they are going to cut them up. They will probably bring in a big company to crush them and cut them up, chop their wings off. It will be as crude as that. It will be the most expensive scrap metal they will have ever paid for. It is such a waste of money—why would you pay almost £4bn and not put the planes into service?" The new MRA4 is intended to provide the nation's long-range search and rescue capability. Fixed-wing aircraft such as the Nimrod are capable of getting into the search area quickly and covering large areas efficiently and, of course, of remaining on the scene for several hours. We all know about the sterling work that was carried out by the pilots, the air crew and the aircraft during the Piper Alpha disaster. Who and what will cover the gap? The other assets that we currently have either lack the range, in the case of helicopters, or the necessary electronic search equipment, such as night-vision cameras. However, members should not take my word for that. As recently as September, the Secretary of State for Defence, Liam Fox, stated in a leaked letter to David Cameron: "Deletion of the Nimrod MR4 will limit our ability to deploy maritime forces rapidly into high-threat areas; increase the risk to the deterrent; compromise maritime CT (counter terrorism); remove long-range search and rescue, and delete one element of our Falklands reinforcement plan." Just along the coast from Kinloss, as members will be aware, RAF Lossiemouth is home to the  largest fast-jet base in the United Kingdom, containing three operational squadrons of Tornado GR4s and Sea King search and rescue aircraft, as well as an extensive range of operational, logistic and administrative support functions. The SDSR argued that in the future the fast-jet fleet will be made up of the Typhoon and the new joint strike fighter. In the transitional period there will be a reduced Tornado fleet.

I agree with those points. When the base was opened more than 60 years ago, it was sited there not only for social and economic reasons—which I, of course, agree with—but for good defence reasons. Fast jets needed to be placed there for good geographic reasons. During the Westminster debate, Opposition back benchers referred to a leaked document from the Ministry of Defence that said that the Tornado fleet, along with aircraft maintenance, would be centralised at RAF Marham in a year's time. I will move briefly to the social and economic impact. Highlands and Islands Enterprise's independent economic impact analysis has identified that both bases support more than 5,500 full-time jobs—16 per cent of all the full-time jobs in Moray—and that the economic impact will be more than £158 million a year. The report concludes: "It is clear that the economy and population of Moray are heavily dependent on the RAF, probably more so than any other region of the UK." Let us now talk about the way forward. We all know that 18 years ago the American naval base in Dunoon closed with a loss of 4,500 American personnel to the Argyll and Bute economy. At that  point, a dynamic economic committee was set up with European Union and Government funding to look at alternatives. Let me place on the record my applause for the work that the Moray task force has done to date. There is much that we can learn from Dunoon and from the US, where the Government takes responsibility to rebuild and reboot local areas when defence bases close. That functions as a form of social covenant with the local community. Tonight, I am calling for such a social covenant with the people of Moray. There need to be myriad economic levers to attract inward investment, to stimulate local business initiatives and to offer ex-RAF and civilian staff retraining and support, which John Swinney referred to last week. We need to seek to draw down more EU funding, we need to consider relocating more Scottish Government posts and agencies to the area and we need to look at the timescale for the special enterprise zone for Moray. Moray is a strong and resilient community with businesses—such as whisky, fishing and farming—strong local councillors, churches and trade unionists and a dynamic voluntary sector. In closing, I will paraphrase Canon Kenyon Wright: What if the Government said the bases should close, and they are the Government, but the community of Moray said no—and they are the people?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his constructive and helpful statement. Further to my question to the First Minister earlier today, could Mr Swinney estimate the timescale for creating special enterprise zone status for Moray and say whether there are plans to relocate Scottish Government posts there? Finally, is Skills Development Scotland in discussion with the European Union, through the European economic recovery plan, to draw down additional structural funds, such as European structural funds?

Will the First Minister look at three particular issues to help the Moray economy: first, the granting of assisted area status; secondly, whether there could be any further civil service or agency job relocations; and finally, whether he could approach Europe? As the First Minister will know, one can apply for extra structural funds when there has been economic decline in an area.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the timetable is for the tendering of the Gourock to Dunoon ferry service. (S3O-11755)

The minister will be well aware that in accordance with article 18 of the European Union procedural regulations, the Scottish Government was required to launch a public tender for the route before 2009. The subsequent public service contract should start before June 2011. Will the Government comply with that timetable? If not, is the minister aware that that will cause widespread disappointment in Argyll and Bute and beyond?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support victims and witnesses. (S3O-11613)

What proportion of the cabinet secretary's budget is spent on victims?

I place on the record my thanks and congratulations to Gil Paterson on securing this evening's debate to mark, as we have heard, the 25th anniversary of the Scottish Cot Death Trust. I also recognise the work of Fiona Brown, the director of the trust, and her colleagues, who have made such an incredible difference to the families who have faced such a terrible tragedy. The key objective of this evening is to raise awareness of cot death and the work of the trust during the past quarter of a century. As we have heard, one baby dies every nine days—29 children have died so far this year. Over the past 25 years, more than 1,500 children have died suddenly and unexpectedly, and no definitive cause of death can be found. My youngest son Liam died from cot death in 1991. He was eight months old. I remember the horror and the trauma of the moment; it has never left me. A series of images are frozen in time: the ambulance; the faces of the doctors and nurses at accident and emergency; the police; and, later, the cold and remote manner of the pathologist during the post mortem. All that contrasted with the support of friends, family and neighbours, the  phone calls and visits, and the hundreds of cards of condolence. Many other bereaved parents have told me of the tremendous support that they received from the Scottish Cot Death Trust during the crucial first few months after their loss. That was certainly my experience. As we have heard, the number of deaths has declined since the 1990s. They are now recorded as "sudden unexpected death in infancy". Such deaths can occur in every part of Scotland and in all social strata. Of course, most occur within the first year of the child's life, and can occur whenever an infant is sleeping. Twice as many boys die as girls, and second or later-born children are more at risk, as are pre-term, low-weight babies. What can the trust do? It has invested £3 million in research and development and has educated thousands of parents and professionals about cot death and how to reduce the risk. It has a range of resources, providing support, home visiting, counselling and befriending services. I particularly highlight the important work done with apnoea monitors and resuscitation training for parents. Of course, every bereaved parent reacts differently. Some may want contact support to last longer than others. When I met parents through the Scottish Cot Death Trust, they told me that, having received support, they were better able to support their surviving children and to search for help elsewhere, through a general practitioner or private counselling. At times of acute grief, it is easy to forget about surviving children, grandparents, aunts and uncles and, with older children, those children's pals. I praise the trust for its case review study, commissioned in 2000, which called for a multidisciplinary approach, getting all the agencies to work together to minimise distress to families. I understand that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will attempt to roll that out throughout Scotland. Losing a young, healthy baby is one of the greatest traumas that parents could ever face. For 25 years, the Scottish Cot Death Trust has been counselling, supporting and educating parents, as well as supporting the professional agencies that work with the families. Let us never forget its pioneering research work. We owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to all who are involved with the trust—the befrienders, the fundraisers and the health professionals. The work that they do is truly outstanding and makes a real difference to many families. We honour their contributions and commitments here today.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how many committee meetings were videoconferenced in the last 12 months. (S3O-11094)

Does Mr Johnstone share my disappointment at the low number of full committee meetings that have been videoconferenced? Will he ask the corporate body to encourage committee conveners to make  greater use of videoconferencing, both to save costs and as a contribution to carbon reduction targets? Does Mr Johnstone share my view that it is important that the Parliament joins the new revolution in communications technology?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the Scottish diabetes action plan. (S3O-10674) [ Interruption .]

Can the minister confirm whether the Scottish diabetes action plan will contain specific targets for each national health service board to increase insulin pump availability over the next three years? In particular, will there be increased access for children and young people? What plans does the minister have to apply the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence criteria to ensure that those who are considered to be eligible for an insulin pump have access to one? Finally, can the minister advise me what systems and checks are in place to ensure that NHS boards are trying to achieve their targets for increased access to insulin pumps and get above the poor rates that boards such as NHS Highland and NHS Ayrshire and Arran have at present?

From Mary Scanlon's question, the minister will be aware that there is acute traffic congestion in Inverness at peak times on the Kessock bridge. That will graduate to traffic gridlock in 2012, when the Kessock bridge is resurfaced, effectively losing half its capacity. Will the minister support a mitigation package, including permanent park and ride, expansion of the Kessock roundabout and a temporary ferry service between North and South Kessock, to boost business and tourism and to aid the local community?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister recognise that one of the problems in vessel commissioning across the world has been the scarcity of engines? As that is now getting slightly better in the world market, will that help to speed up the commissioning of new vessels?

I congratulate Mary Scanlon for securing the debate and I strongly endorse the text of her motion. She mentioned my old friend and  colleague, Lord George Robertson, who was very helpful and influential to me when we were at Westminster together. He is, of course, well known now for his many roles, particularly as a director Western Ferries. As we have heard, Pentland Ferries was set up by Andrew Banks in 1997. Initially, he ran and serviced routes between Invergordon and Orkney. At that stage, Pentland Ferries found it difficult to generate sufficient freight. However, Mr Banks is a man with vision and a determined nature, and he obtained a 99-year lease at Gills Bay terminal, about 3 miles from john o'Groats. In May 2001, the MV Pentalina-B started sailing into St Margaret's Hope. Mr Banks understood the important role that ferries play in rural development and in attracting inward investment and sustaining indigenous jobs by providing lifeline services. At one stage, I was a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee with Rob Gibson. In the past, the committee has argued that we need a national ferry strategy if we are to break away from the Cinderella service feel and atmosphere that ferries have had in the transport family, compared with road, rail and aviation. The mantra of better integration of different modes of transport has echoed through the lecture halls of every transport conference in history. However, we have a system that cannot co-ordinate the end of the winter timetables for bus, rail and ferry services with the start of the summer timetables, so the ferry sails into Oban just as the train departs. Andrew Banks understands that ferry customers want comfort, speed, frequency and reliability. The MV Pentalina, which was built in the Philippines, is the state of the art. As Mary Scanlon pointed out, it has a capacity of 350 passengers. It can take either 32 cars or eight articulated lorries, and has an impressive speed—compared with ferries in the west of Scotland—of 18 knots. The ship has been designed to handle rough waters and will sail all year round. This debate and previous debates about ferries generally have highlighted the need to develop new routes, as Mr Banks has done; the need to improve the frequency of services; the need to utilise vessels better; the need for a common design of vessels, with greater automation; the need to upgrade piers, as has happened at Gills Bay, to allow greater turnaround in harbours; and the need to cut the time for commissioning new vessels. Mr Banks has shown how a private individual can locate a gap in the market and develop a viable service there. By his hard work and imagination, he has highlighted wider issues relating to ferry services in Scotland.

As a member of the Forth Crossing Bill Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I echo the comments of Jackson Carlaw and thank the other committee members, the minister, the committee clerks and the witnesses for their help and insight. On a personal level, I was particularly struck by the professionalism of the community councils, business groups and private individuals who submitted well-researched and polished evidence. Not least of those individuals were Mary Mulligan and Margaret Smith, who are with us today. I welcome representatives of local interest groups to the public gallery. The bill is history in the making. If Parliament approves it, it will result in the largest public sector infrastructure project since devolution. As we have heard, if we take into account risk allowance and optimism bias, the cost is near enough £2 billion—not £2 million as we perhaps heard earlier. Some might ask what optimism bias is, and that is a good question. I had a look at Wikipedia earlier, which defines optimism bias as "the demonstrated systematic tendency for people to be over-optimistic about the outcome of planned actions. This includes over-estimating the likelihood of positive events and under-estimating the likelihood of negative events." The minister will be able to relate to those comments. Wikipedia continues:  "Excessive optimism can result in cost overruns, benefit shortfalls, and delays when plans are implemented or expensive projects are built. In extreme cases these can result in defeats in military conflicts, ultimate failure of a project or economic bubbles such as market crashes." This project throws up a series of policy questions about development versus environment and national projects versus local communities—a little bit like Scotland in miniature. As we have heard from other members of the bill committee, much of the evidence was about the effect on local communities from noise, disruption and traffic management. We also heard about the human rights aspect, which some see as being about Big Brother government versus local communities. We heard about the role of the new crossing in economic development and the Confederation of British Industry's view on that. We also heard about the effect on the environment from issues such as the embedded carbon in the bridge and the loss of benthic habitats. We heard evidence on the effectiveness of traffic modelling and the question of how successful public transport strategies will be in generating real modal shift—I understand that Napoleon once said that strategies never survive the first sound of gunfire. In the brief time available, I will focus on two aspects in more detail: consultation and public rights, and finance. On consultation, like other members, I was struck by the strength of feeling among local residents about the variable quality of consultation. In fairness, various private bills have been criticised on that aspect. Is there a bigger-picture problem about how consultation can be improved? The scheme, as an amalgamation of different paths, appears not to be well understood. Could things have been explained in a better way? The bill has to comply with the European convention on human rights, but several witnesses have argued that the consultation process did not follow the Aarhus convention in respect of consultation and the accessing of environmental information, as George Foulkes mentioned in an intervention.

I thank Lord Foulkes for his comments. Of course, the dissolution honours list will be up at the end of this week, so I thank him for his advance warning.  It is important that some of the changes that we recommended will be in force at stage 2. I think that the minister hinted at that. I agree with Lord Foulkes. As far as finance is concerned, we have heard already that the crossing will be a conventional capital-funded project rather than a PPP project. Some members have debated whether a replacement crossing is necessary and, if so, whether a tunnel would be more appropriate. I was interested in the points that were made by the ForthRight Alliance, which argued that the new bridge will represent 20 per cent of total Scottish Government capital budget spending at its peak in 2014-15. Perhaps, in winding up, the minister will outline the effect on other capital budgets such as health and local government. What will be the role of the Scottish Futures Trust, the Government's agent for capital projects? How competitive will the final successful tender be, given that there are only two bidders, albeit that they are made up of two consortia? How justifiable is the unsuccessful bidder premium of up to £5 million? How realistic is it that cost overruns will stay within 3 to 4 per cent? Will the minister perhaps look again at applying for EU trans-European transport network—TEN-T—funding under priority axis 13? I understand that the route from Belgium via the Rosyth ferry and the Forth road bridge would be an eligible route. Grants are up to €1.5 million, so the funding is not to be underestimated. Notwithstanding my above comments, I recommend that the principles of the bill be agreed to and that the bill proceed as a hybrid bill.

I thank both members for their contributions to this short but important debate. The debate has highlighted the important issues that the committee considered. The invaluable work that is conducted by the facility and how the bill will support its future development have also been described. As we have heard, the promoter has informed the committee of the need for the service that is provided at William Simpson's home to be extended to younger people and women. Witnesses who appeared before the committee supported that development. Falkirk Council and Stirling Council explained the increasing demand for the specialised support that the home provides. We also heard from Falkirk Council that, without the kind of service that the home provides, younger people would be placed inappropriately in older people's care provision. We have heard that, throughout its consideration of the bill, the committee has been mindful that it was Francis Simpson's original gift of his estate that ensured that the home could be established. Nanette Milne touched on our examination of how the promoter would ensure that Francis Simpson's original vision would be remembered and how the original ethos of the home would continue. The committee was assured by the promoter's commitment to staying true to the intention of the 1864 act. However, there was a particular issue that we wished to examine: we wanted to establish how ex-servicemen and women would be included in future developments, given that a preference for ex-services personnel was built into the 1864 act. The committee was pleased to note that strong links with ex-services personnel remain and that the promoter intends to continue that emphasis in the new constitution. We heard in the evidence that was given how the home will be able to update its facilities and move into phases 2 and 3 of its development.  Marion Robinson of Forth Valley Advocacy said that she thought that there is, among the home's residents, "a positive feeling about the future." Dennis Canavan, the home's patron, explained how he and other members of his family could personally vouch that "the standard of care that is provided at the home is excellent."—[ Official Report, William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc) (Scotland) Bill Committee, 27 April 2010; c 22.] That the bill will allow governance arrangements to be updated to allow for broader community input into its operation is a positive development for the home. The committee recognised the commitment and expertise that that fresh impetus might bring. As the convener of the committee mentioned, we support any opportunity that that might bring to involve users and their families in the home's operation. The committee welcomed the opportunity to consider this private bill. However, during the debate on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill—I had the honour of convening the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill Committee—we touched on the requirement to ensure that we respond appropriately to the needs of small charities that wish to make similar changes to parent acts. We need to monitor the number of charities that face a similar situation in which an alternative to a parliamentary route is not available. Earlier, we heard about other vehicles that are available, such as the Scottish charitable incorporated organisation. Subsequent to our evidence session, I lodged a written question to which the Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, replied. He said: "The Scottish Government recently consulted on policy proposals developed by the Scottish Charitable Incorporated Organisation (SCIO) Working Group for the implementation of the SCIO. In light of the responses received and views expressed at consultation events, we will develop draft SCIO regulations, built on the policy foundations of the SCIO's Working Group's preferred model." He also said that "Under current plans, we do not anticipate that the SCIO will be introduced before the end of 2010."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 11 May 2010; S3W-33447.]  Finally, I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee, my fellow members of the committee and the clerks for their support. I ask that Parliament agree the general principles of the bill, and that the bill should proceed as a private bill.

The debate is important. It is not just about the mechanics of the living wage in isolation but about the bigger picture of social justice, fighting inequality, tackling low pay and the basic concept of liberty that is embedded in the Beveridge report and the Attlee Government's creation of the welfare state. Of course, no one suggests that the living wage is a magical golden bullet that will solve all Scotland's most intractable social inequalities at a stroke, but I strongly support the work of the Scottish living wage campaign and of organisations such as the Poverty Alliance. Some might say, "Doesn't the minimum wage already look after low-paid workers?" The minimum wage was a major achievement by the Labour Government in 1998 and of course it addressed extreme low pay. I remember leaving the Commons bleary-eyed at 9 am after 28 divisions in an all-night sitting before the National Minimum Wage Bill was finally passed. I felt proud—not in a self-serving sense—that politics could make a difference for the thousands of low-paid staff in the Highlands and Islands and throughout the UK who received an immediate boost, such as bar staff in Aviemore, catering workers in Fort William and shop assistants in Inverness. The minimum wage worked for extreme low pay, but a living wage is another tool to tackle the plight of low-waged workers in Scotland. We do not need a crystal ball or to search for the ancient predictions of the Brahan seer to work out whether the living wage will work. We have only to examine the experience in London, Oxford and Glasgow or, on the international stage, in Calgary, Los Angeles, Maryland, San Francisco or the 120 other cities throughout the United States and Canada that have a living wage policy. In Calgary, economic analysis after the introduction of the living wage reported increased income for lower-paid staff; improved health and quality of life; and reduced dependency on Government assistance. The study showed that Calgary was able to attract better workers and improve productivity. The results were consistent with many of the other living wage cities in the US and Canada. To come back to the Scottish context, where did the £7 an hour figure come from? Patrick Harvie covered that. Work by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found that a single adult working full time needs more than £7 an hour to reach a minimum socially accepted quality of life. What is the scale of the problem? Frank McAveety referred to that in our previous debate  on the matter, but the figures vary according to which survey is used. The Scottish living wage campaign quotes the figure of 700,000 low-paid workers in Scotland, based on labour force survey data. The Scottish Government—as I hope the minister will testify later—uses the annual survey of hours and earnings, and the most up-to-date figure from that survey that I could find from the Scottish Parliament information centre yesterday was 386,000 low-paid workers. Let us consider snapshots in other sectors: there are about 5,000 low-paid workers in the NHS. Figures that I got from written answers show that, in my region, there are 869 in the Highland Council area, 407 in Moray, 631 in Argyll and Bute, 360 in Orkney and, interestingly, none in Shetland. What about the effect on business? Private sector suppliers to local government, the NHS and the Scottish Government should be encouraged to build a living wage into contracts. A Scottish living wage employer award should be developed to encourage uptake by employers in the public, private and voluntary sectors. Guy Stullard, a director from KPMG Europe, is quoted by the Fair Pay Network as saying: "We have found that paying the Living Wage is a smart business move as increasing wages has reduced staff turnover and absenteeism, whilst productivity and professionalism has subsequently increased." A number of organisations have incorporated that into their procurement policies. Poverty wages are bad for business and communities and have no place in Scottish society, which is part of the sixth-biggest economy in the world. Making work pay is the route out of poverty. My experience on the doorsteps is that people want a hand up not a handout. It is about fairness and equality. More than 60 per cent of low wage workers in Scotland are women. Finally, Presiding Officer, as I am running out of time—

The living wage provides a virtuous circle, using the multiplier effect. We estimate that between—

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to expand the rights of and protection for victims and witnesses. (S3O-10000)

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that victims often feel that they are the forgotten people in the Scottish criminal justice system? Does he support Victim Support Scotland's call for the creation of a victims commissioner? If so, will he and his party support my proposed commissioner for victims and witnesses (Scotland) bill?

The cabinet secretary is well aware of the unsuccessful bidder premium of up to £5 million that will go to the losing bidder. Does he share my view that that must count as the oxymoron of the day and that it is a case of the taxpayer subsidising failure?

I am delighted that the bill has reached this final stage, and I am pleased to open the debate. To recap briefly on how we got here, the Ure Elder Fund for Indigent Widow Ladies was set up in accordance with the wishes that were set out in the will of Mrs Isabella Elder. It was constituted by an act of Parliament in 1906 and is a registered Scottish charity. Currently, its main purpose is the relief of impoverished widows who are connected with Glasgow or, specifically, Govan. However, one problem that the trustees of the fund encounter is that they are constrained by the terms of the fund to paying a maximum of £25 per annum to each beneficiary. The fund was set up last century in the context of its being a modern and forward-thinking charitable body. Looking at the fund and its aims today, the trustees could see that the gap between its original intentions and the spirit of those intentions and its achievements was steadily widening. Having explored how to remedy the situation, the trustees concluded that the fund should be restructured so that it could help more people and undertake a broader range of activities. However, the statutory nature of the charity meant that the only way to achieve that was for the trustees to introduce legislation, through the private bill procedure, that would transfer the assets of the existing fund to a new charitable trust and dissolve the existing fund. The Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator concurred with the plan and, accordingly, a bill was introduced to the Parliament on 1 October 2009. The bill is very straightforward—its single purpose is to transfer the rights, properties, interests and liabilities of the Ure Elder Fund to a new charitable trust, the Ure Elder trust. In doing so, it will dissolve the fund. A few weeks ago, we debated the preliminary stage report by the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill Committee. Parliament agreed to its general principles and, in the usual course of events, we would have moved on to the consideration stage to deal with amendments to the bill. In this case, no amendments were lodged, so we have used provisions in the Scotland Act 1998 and the  standing orders to enable us to truncate the procedure and move straight to the final stage. As was mentioned in the preliminary stage debate, the bill has not taken much time to pass through Parliament, and some may say that it has not excited great interest in committee or in the Parliament—despite my best intentions. However, it would be wrong to equate the time that has been spent on the bill and the interest in it with the outcome, so I thank the other committee members, Nanette Milne and Shirley-Anne Somerville, and the clerks, particularly Sarah Robertson, for all their help in administrating the bill's passage. The changes that will be wrought if Parliament passes the bill this evening will be significant for the trustees and for future beneficiaries of the trust. That said, before I move the motion in my name, I want to return to one aspect of the process that the bill committee raised in its preliminary stage report, which relates to the situation of other charitable bodies that were set up under an enactment and which may require modernisation. The Government has said that it will in due course review the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005, and that it will consider whether there is a more efficient method of reorganisation for certain types of charity. It is questionable whether bodies that work hard to raise funds and are mostly set up to benefit the public should spend time and resources on pursuing private legislation, with the attendant costs and time commitment that that process demands. However, that is a debate for another day. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill be passed.

I am pleased to open this preliminary stage debate on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill. It might not set pulses racing across the chamber, but it is, nevertheless, important. The bill is the 11 th private bill in the Scottish Parliament and the first in the current session. From a personal perspective, it has been interesting to work on it and see how the procedure for public bills, which form the majority of our legislative work, varies from the private bill procedure. I will set the scene for the need for the bill and then briefly recap some of the main points of the committee's preliminary stage report. Generally, private bills propose laws that apply to a particular individual, group of individuals or corporate entity. According to my research, about 11,000 private acts—or personal acts, as some of them are known—have been passed in the UK since 1539. Private bills were fairly common in the 19 th century, but they are now very rare, because new planning legislation that was introduced in the 1960s removed the need for many of them. However, some organisations and bodies still need to take private bills through the Parliament. The Ure Elder Fund for Indigent Widow Ladies is one such body. The fund was constituted by an act of Parliament in 1906 and is a registered Scottish charity. Its main purpose, as the name suggests, is the relief of impoverished widows connected with Glasgow—more specifically, Govan. However, the trustees of the fund are permitted to pay a maximum of only £25 per annum for each of the selected beneficiaries. In 1906, £25 was a reasonable sum of money, as you might recall, Presiding Officer. To put it in context, the average wage in the early years of the 20 th century was about £1.40 per week. In the modern context, £25 per beneficiary per annum does not give the trustees scope to provide the benefit that they wish to provide, or that was  intended when the fund was set up by Mrs Isabella Elder. Mrs Elder was concerned—rightly, in my view—that the financial legacy should be put to good use and managed properly. At the time, the best way in which to ensure that seemed to be by setting up the fund through legislation. However, as members will be aware, charity law has been reviewed and changed in the many years since the fund was established and charities are now subject to tight and rigorous scrutiny. It is unlikely that a charity would be set up today under an act of Parliament. The charitable sector in Scotland is regulated by the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator. Our committee took evidence from OSCR and heard that, although there are several historical reasons for charities to be constituted by enactment, most of those reasons no longer apply because of legislative changes. As I said, few charities would nowadays be constituted under such an enactment. To modernise the fund and maximise its benefit, it is clearly necessary to reorganise it. Therein lies the need for private legislation. The bill will transfer the property, rights and interests of the fund to a new charitable trust. Once the transfer has taken place, the bill will allow for dissolution of the fund and the repeal of the Ure Elder Fund Order Confirmation Act 1906. The committee considered the steps that the trustees of the fund took in relation to reorganisation. We examined the pros and cons of alternative solutions and are content that a private bill is a reasonable way forward for the fund. We were reassured that the new charity will stay true to the spirit of Mrs Elder's intentions while giving the trustees the means to help more people with a more appropriate level of grant. The committee understood that, when more people can be helped, the trust will become more widely known and will attract more applicants, so Mrs Elder's legacy will indeed be put to good use. We were also reassured that the new charity will be well regulated and open to greater scrutiny and accountability than was imagined by Mrs Elder when she set out her intentions. Accordingly, the committee agreed that it would recommend to Parliament that it agree to the general principles of the bill. Before I close, I will touch on two other issues in the committee's report. In taking evidence, the committee learned that around 185 charities were set up under legislation. Some could be in similar circumstances to the Ure Elder fund, requiring an act of Parliament to reorganise and move forward. It was put to the committee that there might be scope for a different process to help such bodies, which could be looked at in the context of a charity law review. The relevant minister, Fergus Ewing,  has written to me and confirmed that the Scottish Government is committed to reviewing by 2015 the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005. The committee also recommends, should the Parliament agree today to the general principles of the bill, that the Parliamentary Bureau consider suspension of the relevant standing orders, which would allow us to leave out consideration stage and move to the final stage. As members are aware, consideration stage is about considering objections and amendments to a bill. As we have none, the committee considers that to be a sensible approach that will still allow scrutiny of the bill by Parliament at final stage. I thank my fellow committee members, Nanette Milne and Shirley-Anne Somerville, and the clerks for their assistance in deliberations on the bill. I am confident that the bill is necessary and that it is appropriate for the Ure Elder Fund for Indigent Widow Ladies. I therefore move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Private Bill.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what progress has been made in upgrading the Parliament's videoconferencing facilities. (S3O-9557)

What progress has been made in assessing the benefits to members and the public of the new generation of videoconferencing systems, which are known as telepresence systems? Does Mr Johnstone share my view that it is important that Parliament should join the new revolution in communications technology?

Richard Baker makes an important point about article 19 of the directive, which allows public  sector contracts to be reserved for workforces where more than 50 per cent of the workers have a disability. Does he share my view that supported workforces such as that of Highland Blindcraft in Inverness are looking for a hand up rather than a handout and that, by using article 19, local authorities throughout Scotland can allow supported workplaces to trade out of their financial difficulties?

The minister will be well aware that the Barra service is a classic example of a crucial lifeline service that is kept alive by a public service obligation and the skills of the Twin Otter pilots in landing on the windswept beach, often in severe weather conditions. Does he recognise that the three-year contract for the service could impede operators bidding for the route in future? Will he undertake to hold a review with the aim of extending the contract period, which would give a huge boost to the community of Barra and places beyond?

What special consideration has the minister given to the fact that the power line reinforcement runs through the Cairngorms national park, which is an area of extreme environmental sensitivity, a vital asset for tourism and a stunning location for the international film industry? Did the minister consider the use of new-generation underground cable technology such as cross-linked polyethylene installation, which requires less maintenance and is less hazardous to the environment? Does he share my view that it is possible to provide a springboard for renewables without scarring the landscape of Scotland?

Does the minister share my view that there is demonstrable public support for an unrestricted passenger and vehicle service between the town  centres of Gourock and Dunoon? Can he confirm that Government policy is consistent with European Union regulations, which stipulate that the successful tendering company should provide vessels without frequency restrictions and compatible with the Dunoon linkspan?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to identify and support the 600,000 people estimated to have pre-diabetes. (S3O-8304)

The minister will be well aware of the figures that have been released by Diabetes UK, which estimate that some 15 per cent of the population has pre-diabetes or impaired glucose regulation. That includes 37,500 people in the Highland NHS Board area. Does the minister share my view that people with pre-diabetes have the chance to reverse the condition through losing weight, adopting a healthy, balanced diet and increasing their physical activity? Is the long-term solution early intervention through targeted high-risk screening for type 2 diabetes, particularly focused on those who are overweight, over 45 and have a family history of the condition?

I reinforce Liam McArthur's point, and stress that European Council directive 98/18/EC will not, although it allows retrofitting of Orkney's internal ferry fleet, prevent the inevitable need to replace all nine vessels in the fleet. Orkney Islands Council has already contributed a quarter of a million pounds for the programme. Will the minister make a commitment today to replace the fleet and save the first-class lifeline inter-island service in Orkney?

I strongly support the points that the minister has made. Will he respond briefly to my question about the timescale within which he expects university title to be granted to UHI?

I strongly agree with the points that the member has raised. With regard to new technology, is he familiar with the new state-of-the-art telepresence system of videoconferencing, which the Open University is considering? It is a fantastic way of interacting with educational facilities throughout the world.

I accept and agree with many of the points that the member has made. Does he accept my point that some students are turned away from colleges throughout Scotland because of the cap on HE numbers? Does he share my view that now is the time to review the cap and  allow students who want to go to college to do so and be fully funded to do that?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to today's debate. I will argue that the big picture in global terms is that, in times of recession and downturn, we must invest in skills, training and the education of our workforce. John Maynard Keynes, the most famous of the counter-cyclical economists, argued that countries are not like individual householders, who tend to cut back during times of crisis and economic downturn. Instead, Keynes said, the bottom of the economic curve is the very time at which to provide deficit funding and pump priming.

The cabinet secretary is trying to tempt me down a rather dangerous road. She will find that later in my speech I will refer to some of the issues that she has raised. President Roosevelt's new deal and public projects such as the Tennessee Valley Authority are perhaps the best examples of the philosophy outlined by Keynes.  There is perhaps no greater area on which to target investment than education. It is almost a truism to say that Scottish colleges are a key economic driver in the recession. In my view, we must aim to develop an economy that competes internationally on the basis of the quality of the skills and strengths of character of our workforce, not on the lowest common denominator of sweat shop wages and conditions. I will touch on the role of colleges at Scottish level and conclude by focusing on an area of particular interest to me—the role of the UHI Millennium Institute and its partner colleges in the Highlands and Islands. As Margaret Smith and others pointed out, Scotland has 43 colleges delivering learning in more than 4,000 locations. According to the previous Labour Government document "Unlocking Opportunity: The Difference Scotland's Colleges Make to Learners, the Economy and Wider Society", 90 per cent of the Scottish population lives within 30 minutes of a college location. There are some negative issues but, overall, provision in Scotland at FE and higher education level is excellent. I particularly welcome moves over recent years to create more progression routes—in other words, the lifelong learning agenda—so that people can enter and exit at the times and levels that are appropriate to their individual circumstances and in line with labour market requirements. The issue is particularly relevant at a time of recession. It is crucial that we avoid having a lost generation of young people, as happened in the 1980s—a generation of school leavers who go straight on to the dole, are unable to gain any experience of work, do no training and, after a few years, become unemployable. Nowhere can that be seen more than in my area of the Highlands and Islands. In rural areas, these facilities of jobs, expertise and learning are vital to economic development and recovery. Now is the time for us to invest in them. Jobs sustained by Highlands and Islands colleges are crucial to the sustainability of fragile communities. The partnerships that are offered in expertise to businesses are the key to future economic growth.

I suspect that we could have a debate solely on the subject of whether the great depression was more difficult than the current economic climate is. Investment in education has a phenomenal return. I think that every £1 of education spend returns £3.20 in terms of overall  economic benefit. It is great to invest in education; we get money back at the end of the day. Of course, UHI cannot satisfy all the demand for HE in the Highlands and Islands and beyond. That said, it can offer customised niche provision that reflects the demands of and comparative advantage in the Highlands and Islands. I will explain that in a bit more detail by taking members on a quick tour around the colleges in the Highlands and Islands. In one or two words, I will give a snapshot of what they provide. In Moray we have fantastic fine art facilities and in Inverness we have a focus on life sciences, business and forestry. In Dornoch, in an establishment that I know well, Professor Jim Hunter, who is known to many members, has done groundbreaking academic work on the Highland clearances and the role of Scots in Canada, America and Australia—the so-called diaspora. North Highland College has tremendous experience in renewables and life sciences; its environmental research institute is training specialist engineers whom, it is hoped, will work in the Pentland Firth, which will provide the jobs when Dounreay is fully decommissioned. A few weeks ago, I visited Lews Castle College with Iain Gray. I was impressed with the innovative research there, particularly into hydrogen. Argyll and Bute has a specialist marine research focus, with the Scottish Association for Marine Science. The focus in Orkney is on Nordic studies and, in Shetland, it is fisheries research. Other innovations contribute to economic development. I am thinking of business clusters and collaborations between education and business such as the development of the diabetes institute at Raigmore hospital in Inverness and that between the national health service in Scotland, UHI and Lifescan Scotland. Does the minister share my view that we need a high-profile, visible tertiary element in Inverness and that the proposed campus at Beechwood meets that requirement as a state-of-the-art, integrated facility with high economic added value?

I would never disagree with an ex-member of Inverness College, and a well-respected one at that. Mary Scanlon has a point. At the end of the day, the decision is for the board of Inverness College. Of course, wider issues are involved. My view is that the wider economic gain is at Beechwood.  Another key element about which I am very keen—the cabinet secretary knows my views on the matter—is that of having full university title for UHI, which would move it towards the next stage in the development of its academic journey. Such an award would stimulate growth, encourage potential students and retain people, particularly young people, in the Highlands. As members across the chamber will know, the loss of young people from Highland communities, particularly on the islands, has blighted economic development for generations. I am aware that the matter of achieving full title for UHI is one for the Privy Council. However, the Scottish Government has an important role to play in all this, particularly given the role of the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education, HIE and the funding council. In winding up the debate, will the cabinet secretary indicate the timescale that may be involved? I have a couple of quick points to make before I conclude. UHI continues to deliver higher education in local areas that were previously underserved. It needs to recruit more students if it is to grow to a viable size. At the moment, UHI has 3 per cent of all HE students in Scotland, but 8 per cent of unfunded, fees-only students. UHI is therefore carrying a burden that is disproportionate to that of other colleges in Scotland. I ask the cabinet secretary to refer to the matter in winding up. Further education colleges receive a premium that is based on island and rural remoteness. Can that premium be extended to HE? Colleges play a vital role in regional development. A knowledge-based economy requires a university at its core. Living in a rural or island community should not be a barrier to university education. We need to keep young people in the countryside. Our aim should be to provide lifelong learning across Scotland so that adults of all ages can maximise their potential. Education is the greatest agent of economic development. Long-term, sustainable decisions are needed if we are to revitalise our rural areas.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what progress has been made to equip all committee rooms with telepresence systems. (S3O-8164)

Yesterday I took part in a videoconference with Boston via telepresence. The technology is breathtaking—it is like watching a digital film in high definition—and it meets the three tests of high quality, ease of use and reliability. Will Mr Johnstone ask the SPCB to assess the technology in terms of the benefits to the public, the gains for our committees and the reduction in our carbon footprint, so that Parliament can join the new revolution in communications technology?

I welcome the opportunity to debate access to insulin pumps and thank members throughout the chamber who signed the motion and who have deferred travelling to their constituencies and regions to be here this evening. I warmly welcome to the gallery members of the insulin pump awareness group and representatives of Diabetes UK. On a quick personal note, I welcome my son, Andrew, to the gallery. He is doing a PhD in neuroscience at the University of Edinburgh. This is his first time in the Parliament. I hope that he is not after my seat. Why have another debate on diabetes? As members are aware, Scotland has the third highest incidence of diabetes in the developed world. Diabetes is the main cause of blindness in those of working age in Scotland. Also, half of all non-traumatic lower limb amputations are due to diabetic complications. According to NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, diabetic care now costs £1 billion, which is 10 per cent of the national health service budget. As members will be well aware, diabetes is a condition where the body cannot use glucose properly. If untreated, it l can led to heart disease, stroke and kidney complications. There are, of course, two forms of diabetes: type 1, or early onset diabetes, which—as the name  suggests—usually develops in younger people, and type 2 or maturity onset diabetes, which in the main affects people over 40 and which is the most prevalent form of the condition. Many members will be aware of my campaign, and that of Diabetes UK, for a high-risk screening programme for type 2 diabetes for those who are over 45 and have a family history of diabetes or are overweight. The purpose of the debate is to argue for the greater use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion or—as is perhaps easier to pronounce—insulin pump therapy for eligible type 1 diabetics. The campaigning slogan from Diabetes UK Scotland is pump up the volume—it is about ensuring that those who could benefit from the improved quality of life provided by a pump are not denied one. In its submission to the Government's consultation on better diabetes care, Diabetes UK Scotland quoted the mother of a 13-year-old boy with type 1 diabetes, who said: "Scotland is in the dark ages as far as access to pumps is concerned. This must be addressed. Rates of type 1 diabetes on pumps is amongst the poorest in Europe—there is a real postcode lottery." What does an insulin pump do? The pump is an external device that continually infuses insulin into the user's body and controls glycaemic levels, which many users would otherwise struggle to do. With the pump, insulin levels can be increased simply by pressing a button on the pump instead of using a pen needle, which can be embarrassing for individuals, particularly when they inject in public. I heard earlier from the pump action group that it is greatly reassuring for parents whose children have pumps to know that they have their pump with them when they are out and about at weekends and so on—that is especially the case with teenagers. Insulin pumps empower users to have greater control over their condition as it gives them a more flexible and reliable means of managing their glycaemic levels. Improved control over health means an improvement in the quality of life, fewer hospital visits, a more productive work life and less stress at home. Fewer hospital admissions and a reduction in primary care contacts mean that there is less strain on the national health service. Diabetes UK Scotland has argued that more than £23,000 could be saved over two years, which would comfortably offset the initial cost of providing pump therapy. It is important to consider the big picture and to compare the cost with that of poorly controlled diabetes: a one-night stay in hospital following admission to accident and emergency for a diabetic emergency costs about £410, one course of laser treatment for retinopathy  costs about £850, one procedure of dialysis treatment costs £500 and renal dialysis for one year costs more than £15,000. The National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines estimate that between 10 and 15 per cent of Scotland's 27,500 type 1 population is eligible for pump therapy, yet only 1.6 per cent of type 1 diabetics—roughly 448 people—have a pump. The English figure has been estimated by one consultant to be around 5 per cent. Why is there such a disparity? Do people with type 1 diabetes in Scotland have a lesser need than patients over the border? The user group for insulin pumps tells me that more than 40 per cent of eligible type 1 patients at a paediatric clinic in Leeds are on pump therapy. I did a little international comparison. In the United States, 40 per cent of eligible type 1 diabetics have a pump. In Israel, the figure is 20 per cent, and in Germany it is 18 per cent. As the minister will be aware, in July 2009 I asked a parliamentary question on pumps. It was a simple question about the percentage of type 1 diabetics who are users of pumps, broken down by health board area. I shall give a quick summary of the response—I am glad that I have Cathy Jamieson next to me; she has taken an interest in the issue. The figure for NHS Ayrshire and Arran was a disgraceful 0.1 per cent—a dunce's cap for that health board. In NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde it was 1.9 per cent, in NHS Fife it was 2.4 per cent, in NHS Lothian it was a bit better at 3.2 per cent and in NHS Tayside it was 4.2 per cent. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will take an interest in the figure for my local NHS board—a pitiful 0.9 per cent. I ask the simple question: if it is good enough for Hollywood, Honolulu and Houston, why is it not good enough for Highland? Type 1—or early onset—diabetes has a peak age diagnosis of around 10 to 14 years, so those with type 1 will have a lifetime experience of the condition. A close relative of mine was diagnosed with type 1 when he was 12. He died in 2007, aged 75, having had 63 years' first-hand experience of the condition. He told me about the regular pen needle injections and having to balance each dose. As we all know, too little insulin can lead to hyperglycaemia, coma or death. Insulin pumps give greater control over blood glucose levels, which reduces the chance of diabetics developing complications. Pumps give precise doses, which lowers blood glucose and increases life expectancy, as was confirmed by the recent diabetes control and complication trial study. An insulin pump is about the size of a pager—and, as someone recently said to me, it is probably less irritating. It is also the closest substitute to the body making and delivering its  own insulin. I accept, of course, that the cost is initially higher than the alternative, but in the long term there will be savings through fewer hospital admissions. The big picture is to seek an end to postcode prescribing. We need to monitor what health boards are doing more closely. I am sure that the minister will mention that in her summing up. We need to ensure that health boards implement national targets. In its response to the "Better Diabetes Care" consultation, Diabetes UK Scotland said: "The difficulty appears to be the result of a number of pressures to the system: local resources are inefficient, business cases are slow to be made; there are pockets of professional scepticism about the effectiveness of pump therapy that spring more from a historical basis ... It appears that questions around costs and accuracy of quality of life measurement remain with the health service." I think that I have made the benefits of pumps clear. They are simply these: a decrease in blood glucose levels; a reduction in insulin levels; a reduction in severe hypoglycaemia episodes; and a fall in the number of hospital admissions. I ask the minister to pump up the volume, to spread the word on the effectiveness of insulin pumps and to give hope and confidence to our young people and to diabetics of all ages about being able to live their lives free of diabetic complications.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with the Western Isles fishing community and processing industry on the future of prawn fishing. (S3O-7686)

The cabinet secretary is well aware of the relative fragility of the Western Isles economy and the important role that the fishing and processing sectors play in the area's economic prosperity. What assessment has he made of the revised total allowable catch quota for prawns? Will it be sufficient to allow the current fleet and processing industry to survive in the Western Isles?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to provide marketing support for airports to develop further air routes to Europe and beyond. (S3O-6921)

The minister is well aware that the Scottish route development fund, set up by the previous Administration in 2002, was a great success. More than £7 million was spent, and 52 routes went ahead. There were great successes such as the Glasgow to Dubai route. Notwithstanding his earlier reply, does the minister share my view that a new route development fund—which could incentivise lower-emitting aircraft—would be a huge boost to tourism, inward investment and the indigenous business community in Scotland?

Has the member analysed what happens in France? There may be a reduction in fuel prices in one part of France but there must be a higher price in urban areas, so the net effect on the French Government is zero. Is the member arguing that higher costs should be imposed on motorists in our urban areas?

I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the debate. I thank Liam McArthur and his team for giving us an opportunity to have the debate today. I am a Highlander whose first job was in Dumfries. I must confess that I was once a fresh-faced councillor in my 20s. I am well aware of the effect that—

I thank Jamie Stone for that sedentary remark—I appreciate it. I am well aware of the disproportionate effect that high fuel prices have on rural communities—on the haulier from Lerwick and the pensioner from Lossiemouth. I start with a slight health warning. Rural areas cannot be easily packaged as a single, uniform area across Scotland. To be fair, the Scottish Government recognises that in its classification system, which goes from urban to accessible rural to remote rural. There is a world of difference between Inverness and Ardnamurchan and between Dumfries and Eskdalemuir. I want to touch briefly on the work that was carried out by the previous Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee for its 2001 report on fuel prices, and consider briefly the Office of Fair Trading and EKOS reports from the same era. I make a passing reference to the important EU context for the debate, namely article 19 of the energy products directive. Some members have already asked what determines the price of fuel in our rural filling stations. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee considered that in detail in 2001. As we all know, the price is determined by the elements of duty and VAT, along with upstream elements—for example, the cost of extraction and refining—and downstream retail elements. As Lewis Macdonald and other members have pointed out, there is also the element of the price of crude oil on the spot market in Amsterdam and  the technical issue of the exchange rate between the pound and the dollar—international fuel prices are quoted in dollars. In addition, individual petrol stations operate individual agreements with suppliers, leading to discounts, rebates and price support. As a general rule, prices in larger towns in rural areas, such as Dumfries and Elgin, are the same, within a few pence, as prices in cities such as Glasgow and Edinburgh. Why? Because suppliers provide price support there. However, lower-volume rural sites with standalone petrol stations that have no immediate competition have no price support and a higher retailer mark-up because volumes are lower, which leads to the higher price. For the technocrats among members, there is a good worked example of that process in appendix A of the OFT report of July 2000. Obviously, the prices were different then, but the underlying logic remains the same. As members have pointed out, that pricing effect is amplified in our super-rural and island communities. The motion focuses on reserved issues and EU derogations on fuel duty. However, as Lewis Macdonald said, surely the emphasis should be on what the Scottish Parliament can do to promote social inclusion, economic development and community cohesion in Scotland, particularly in our remote rural and island communities. When the proposed fuel duty derogation was debated in Westminster, a series of issues was raised. Perhaps Mr Stone can address some of them in his winding-up speech. For example, what are the qualifying criteria for retail outlets? What guarantees will there be that the fuel duty reduction will be passed on to the customer? Danny Alexander MP quoted a cost of £35 million for the measure.

I will just finish this point. Is that to be a new Liberal Democrat spending commitment?

I am glad that the member has raised that point, because I hope to touch on what happens elsewhere in the EU in a few seconds. That will answer the member's point. What will happen with leakages across the borders between urban and rural areas? Who will qualify—will they be domestic users, businesses or tourists?  Finally—I see that my time is running out—there are other proposals that would benefit rural motorists. I flag up, for example, the rural transport fund that the previous Administration introduced, the rate relief that was introduced for rural petrol stations and the derogation from EU legislation that the UK Government secured for petrol vapour recovery. In conclusion, I am in no doubt that fuel prices are a major burden, particularly on remote rural and island communities. However, there is no magic bullet. We must develop new public transport solutions—which will also be good for climate change—and support existing petrol stations. We should also consider the Scandinavian model of having unmanned petrol stations and look at co-operative buying, which Highland Council has done in the case of fishing. Of course we must pass on the savings to motorists. We must also pursue the idea of hosting a summit of rural petrol retailers. All those proposals would contribute to sustaining our rural communities.

I thank the member for raising the issue of the Cabinet tour. I can let Mr McArthur know that I have already written to the Prime Minister, inviting him to come to the Highlands to hold a full meeting of the Cabinet there.

I am paraphrasing, but I believe that it was Prime Minister Harold Macmillan who, when advising a young, up-and-coming Tory MP on his political career, warned him, "Beware events, young man,  events." Since our previous forestry debate, a number of things have happened in the wider world outside the Parliament. Two space satellites collided in orbit, a new Minister for Environment was appointed, and the Government dumped plans to lease nearly a quarter of the Scottish forest estate. As I am neither young nor up-and-coming, I will leave it to other members to weigh up the relative significance of each event. Since the previous debate, Mike Russell, who is seen as a rising star in ministerial ranks, has moved on to greater things and Roseanna Cunningham has been handed the poisoned chalice of the leasing scheme. That said, I have not yet had the chance to congratulate Ms Cunningham on her promotion, but I do so now. In my speech, I will focus briefly on the scheme, as other members have rightly done, and will also consider some of the more positive aspects of the forestry agenda, including joint ventures, which have already been mentioned, and tackling climate change. Where did the idea of leasing a quarter of the forest estate for 75 years come from? As others have pointed out, the scale is breathtaking. We are talking about around 100,000 hectares, which is roughly the size of Fife, with, of course, the knock-on effect of the loss of around 35 per cent of Forestry Commission income. In response to a parliamentary question, Mike Russell made it clear to me that "Rothschild approached the Scottish Government with ideas about the national forest estate."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 9 February 2009; S3W-20106]  Subsequent answers have provided evidence that Rothschild, ministers and officials met six times between October 2007 and July 2008. However, I have not received within the time limits a response to my freedom of information request to see the minutes and record of the discussions. Perhaps the minister can speak to her officials to see whether we can move things along. However, to be fair, I received at the eleventh hour an analysis of the consultation responses on the leasing scheme. As members have pointed out, almost 75 per cent of them were negative. For example, one respondent said: "Offering long leases is tantamount to privatisation", while on page 5 of the document we read: "This land is owned by the people of Scotland and should remain firmly in the control and management of the Forestry Commission." Respondents also expressed concern about Forestry Enterprise jobs, with at least 3,500 people signing the Forestry Commission trade union petition; the creation of a less predictable wood supply for processors; and experience from abroad of leasing forest estates. In New Zealand,  for example, lessees went bankrupt and jobs were lost. Also, when the Swedish Government sold off much of its national forest estate to a company, the company raised log prices, which caused sawmills to go bankrupt. Edward Shepherd, the Forestry Commission's trade union secretary, predicted in The Scotsman of 4 December 2008 that the whole 25 per cent would be given out in "one whopping great lease" to an international investment company. He went on to say that "Although the minister"— Mr Russell— "is not attempting to privatise the land, he would be privatising its management and control." Now that the leasing liability is behind us, I welcome the fact that the Forestry Commission will be able to get on with managing our forests effectively in the decades to come. For example, joint ventures in renewables will provide a win-win by raising funding, developing renewable capacity and helping to mitigate climate change. As we all know, timber demand is likely to exceed supply in a few years' time, which means, of course, that more trees will need to be planted. In my few remaining seconds, I ask the minister to confirm in her winding-up speech that all new planting, including planting that is not in receipt of grant, and work under planning consent should meet United Kingdom forestry standards. We have a high-value product with strong export potential. Indeed, I will finish with a snapshot from history: pulp from Irvine was once exported to Manhattan for the production of Time magazine. Through skilful management of the economic, environmental and social dimensions, we can preserve and develop Scotland's rich, natural assets.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what plans it has to equip all committee rooms for videoconferencing. (S3O-6461)

Will Mr Johnstone raise with the corporate body the opportunities that are provided by the next generation of videoconferencing technologies, which are known as telepresence systems—such systems are manufactured by Cisco Systems, among others—and which provide superior sound and vision, to enhance the broadcasting quality and provide members and the public with improved services?

The minister will be well aware of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines that were issued last year, which recommended insulin pump therapy as a treatment option for adults and children over the age of 12 who have type 1 diabetes. As the minister is aware, there are major differences in health board performance on the provision of insulin pumps. What plans does the minister have to monitor health boards' progress to avoid a postcode lottery for patients with insulin-dependent diabetes?

What is the minister's assessment of current borrowing powers under section 66 of the Scotland Act 1998? That provides for the exercise of £0.5 billion of borrowing powers, with the agreement of the Secretary of State for Scotland and the chancellor.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will appoint a victims champion. (S3F-1417)

On Monday, Westminster appointed child protection guru Sara Payne as the first victims champion for England and Wales. She has been tasked with preparing the ground for the new and innovative victims commissioner post that will be established in 12 months' time. In Scotland, prisoners have their own commissioner, but who is  the champion for victims? Will the First Minister support my proposal for a member's bill to create a victims commissioner?

In 1918, in the dying days of the first world war, the country was ravaged by conflict, our young people had been sacrificed on the battlefield, and our economy was in free-fall. That was the context in which the Forestry Commission was born, with the aim of replanting, rebuilding and renewing a crucial asset that appeared impossible to replace. Of course, the idea seemed oxymoronic. How could we replace native Caledonian pine forests that were hundreds of years old? However, in the 1920s and 1930s, those foresters of old did what it said on the tin: they replanted our forests with fast-growing and mainly, though not exclusively, non-native species. As we all know, the picture today is very different. Our living forests play a number of roles in climate change mitigation, industry and construction, job creation, biomass, housing, leisure, and biodiversity. That is why this debate is so important. Politicians meddle with the structure of our forest assets at their peril. As many of us will recall, the Conservative Government of the mid-1980s decided—to its credit, I have to say—not to sell the Forestry Commission. That is why it beggars belief that the Scottish Government has effectively resuscitated a totally discredited idea under the guise—

I am sorry—I do not have time to take any interventions. Today, the minister, who has always struck me as intelligent, diligent and hard-working—

—has the opportunity to reject a proposal that has even the staunchest Scottish National Party supporters scratching their heads in disbelief. I thank my colleagues for their support for that part of my speech. Where on earth did the idea come from? What evidence is there that there is any support for the idea of leasing vast areas of Scotland's public forests to speculators for the next 75 years? I am not saying that we should not explore how to maximise the ways in which our public forests can work for us—indeed, Sarah Boyack has already suggested joint ventures for renewable projects—but I must challenge the minister to explain in his winding-up speech how the overall figures stack up. For example, we have been told that the national forest estate is worth about £850 million and that the Government wants to raise £200 million from leasing vast areas of forest. However, £850 million is the most optimistic valuation of the estate in a stable land market. The market reality is that, by flooding the market with an enormous area of land, the Government will lower the price and value of the assets. Moreover, the creation of leases with the highly restrictive clauses that the minister mentioned will have a negative effect on the value of the assets, which might mean that even greater than expected areas of Scotland's forests have to leave public ownership in order to raise the necessary cash. If the idea is pursued, any future Government's ability to manage the forests will be hamstrung for 75 years, irrespective of new knowledge or developments in climate change, land use or any social, economic or environmental policy. A quarter of our national forest estate will effectively be exempt from public intervention until 2084. That cannot be right. The minister tells us that this is not a back-door sale, because only trees will be sold; the land itself will remain in public ownership. However, the land is relatively worthless without the trees that are planted in it. That fact, coupled with the length of the proposed leases, shows that this is asset stripping of almost eye-watering magnitude. Will the minister explain in his winding-up speech why the Government felt it necessary to discuss the proposal with Mrs Thatcher's favourite privatisation consultants, the City of London merchant bankers Rothschild? Will he also confirm that it was Rothschild that suggested that 75-year leases were the best way of selling off the management rights to Scotland's national forests? I hope that the minister is genuine in his repeated assurances that the leasing proposal is  not set in stone and that he will indeed consider the pros and cons.

As a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill Committee, I thank the other committee members—Bill Aitken, Nicol Stephen and the convener, Keith Brown—for their contributions. Again, like other members, I thank the bill team for all its work and help in giving us briefings throughout a complex process. Sarah Robertson was the committee clerk and, as we have heard, Alasdair Morgan was the member in charge of the bill. Some may ask why we should have a new pension scheme, but our scheme needed a radical spring clean, not least because of UK legislative changes such as the Finance Act 2004 and the Civil Partnership Act 2004. Some may also ask why we should improve pension conditions for MSPs when thousands of Scots are losing their jobs and final salary scheme pensions. However, the improvement from fiftieths to fortieths in the accrual rate for our pension scheme will be fully funded, as we heard, by increasing member contributions from 6 to 11 per cent. As we know, that figure was not a back-of-the-envelope job that was plucked from the sky; it was established by an independent Government actuary. We have heard previously that actuaries have been defined as those who found accountancy too exciting, but the actuarial profession is important. We can argue that there are five key principles behind the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill: it must be modern, equality proofed, attractive to members and cost neutral, and it must involve a pooling of risks. Clearly, the cost to the taxpayer is a key factor. In that regard, I flag up, as other members have done, that the reduction in the pension provision for new incumbents in the roles of Presiding Officer and First Minister will bring substantial savings for the taxpayer. Independent advice and evidence suggested that those savings could be more than £900,000 over a four-year period. I found the consultation on the bill to be comprehensive and enlightening, and it was important that it involved members, ex-members and experts from across the country. I flag up two key developments in the bill: unmarried partners will be recognised in the scheme, and there will no be no loss of pension for surviving spouses who remarry or cohabit. In other words, the spouse pension will continue for life. That is a good example of a modern, caring and equitable scheme. Of course, it is similar to other schemes, such as those at Westminster or  the National Assembly for Wales; those bodies were a number of years ahead of us in revising their schemes. There are other important factors in the bill. I echo the point about trustees. It was important that we sorted out that issue. Of course, the bill will set up a new system for trustees that could well involve existing members and ex-members and which will prevent a potential conflict of interest as far as the SPCB is concerned. Mandatory changes had to be incorporated in the bill, such as the minimum pension age of 55. That was done under the Finance Act 2004 and the Pensions Act 2004, and it will be effective from next year. It is important to flag up, too, the important new changes to pension sharing on divorce. The Welfare Reform and Pensions Act 1999 gave courts powers to split pension benefits on divorce, and the Civil Partnership Act 2004 extended that provision to civil partners. Finally, transfers into the Parliament pension scheme must be from a registered pension scheme. That is a straightforward provision, although it also now allows office-holders who are not MSPs to transfer in a sum from another registered pension scheme. The bill provides an essential uprating of our current pension scheme and it is equitable to members, their partners and, more important, taxpayers by being cost neutral in its improvement of pension conditions for MSPs. The overall package represents a saving to taxpayers. I endorse the bill, which will be supported by Labour members.

I thank the minister for his detailed reply. Does he share my view that it is crucial to complete the missing link in the trunk link route, which will enable traffic to bypass Inverness by connecting the A9 to the A82? Highland Council tells me that it cannot fund that project by itself. Will the minister provide an early Christmas boost to the Highlands and reconsider funding the completion of that project?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Professor Bob Cormack and his team on their tremendous efforts in gaining taught-degree awarding status? Does she share my view that full title will enable the UHI to become an agent of economic and social regeneration in the Highlands and Islands?

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that it is crucial to bring together our scientific communities in universities and industry to create high-value collaborative research and development projects, such as the Centre for Health Science in Inverness, which has an emphasis on knowledge transfer and provides a bridge between town and gown?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Highland Council and what issues were discussed. (S3O-4905)

As the cabinet secretary is well aware, Highland Council has an excellent network of first-class healthy living centres, including the groundbreaking janny's hoose project, which was recently praised by the First Minister. However, the centre is due to close next month as a result of funding problems. Will the cabinet secretary speak urgently to all the public agencies involved in order to provide a lifeline to that project, which is an example of best practice in regeneration and health inequality work?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions have taken place with Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise regarding possible events in the Highlands and Islands during the homecoming Scotland 2009 celebrations. (S3O-4726)

Does the minister share my view that the year of homecoming provides opportunities for the diaspora to visit Scotland and provide a major boost to tourism in the Highlands and Islands and beyond? Will he support my campaign for the Tate gallery to lend Gainsborough's portrait of the famous Highland family, the Baillies, to the Inverness art gallery to provide a focal point for Highland events in 2009?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on flood management schemes in the Highlands and Islands. (S3O-4424)

The minister will be aware that Scotland has only 50 per cent of the high-resolution radar coverage that is required to provide effective advance warning of pluvial flooding, compared with about 95 per cent coverage in England. There are major gaps in Moray and the Highlands and Islands. Will the minister ask the Met Office for an immediate weather radar network review, to provide the technology to give advance warning to residents in Moray and the Highlands before the trauma of flooding occurs? That would be a real historic concordat between the Scottish Government, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and the Met Office to protect our threatened rural communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the latest estimates it has received of the costs of establishing creative Scotland. (S3O-4225)

The minister will be well aware of the important role of film location work in the Highlands and Islands, particularly given the background of "Monarch of the Glen" and "Highlander" to the Harry Potter films, and of the substantial spin-offs that the work creates through film tourism and the boost to the local economy. Will she give an assurance that not one brass farthing will be taken away from film location and promotion budgets to pay for creative Scotland's setting-up costs?

The debate has been excellent and I welcome the Government's initiative in bringing it forward today. Liam McArthur is not in the chamber, but I congratulate him on his promotion to the Liberal Democrat front bench and wish him well in the future. Unfortunately, I will not share many more debates with him, given my free transfer to the whips office. I congratulate Jim Hume on hosting the rural abattoir event this evening—that said, I hope that his standard of jokes has improved by this evening. Members across the political divide have argued that this is a cross-cutting and vitally important debate. Hill farming impacts on a series of issues, one of which is food security, a point that was well made by John Scott and Roseanna Cunningham. The issue of employment in our hill areas and  islands is also important, as is that of biodiversity, which Jamie McGrigor spoke about eloquently. Sarah Boyack in particular flagged up the issue of climate change, and an issue that emerged as a theme of the debate is spending on the public good. Points were also made about the importance of high nature value and about the role of landscape and wildlife. Another important issue is our relationship with EU policy which, as members will probably expect, I will touch on later in my remarks. As NFU Scotland said in its recent "Manifesto for the Hills", it is very important that we look at the future "social, economic and environmental benefits" that flow from the industry. Many members, including Elaine Murray, John Scott and the cabinet secretary, mentioned the series of important reports that have helped to inform our debate this morning. Many members mentioned the Shucksmith report, the Scottish Agricultural College report "Farming's Retreat from the Hills", and NFU Scotland's "Manifesto for the Hills". However, the report that is crucial to the debate is the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report "The Future of Scotland's Hills and Islands". Given that most members mentioned it, I will spend some time running through its recommendations. I am sure that members across the chamber wish to congratulate Professor McCrone and his team on the sheer hard work that went into preparing that piece of work. If someone coming fresh to the debate asked for a briefing, my number 1 recommendation would be that they read the RSE report. The report shares the same quality of clarity and rigorous analysis that is to be found in the Shucksmith report on crofting . I understand that the RSE report provoked controversy; nonetheless, it is well written and its conclusions are well researched. Surely there is widespread support for the proposition that there should be an explicit policy to promote rural community viability under which social, economic and environmental measures for rural areas could be co-ordinated. I believe that many members share such an aspiration, albeit that it will be difficult to achieve. The report proposes a strategic land use policy framework and a land stewardship proofing test, both of which are important. My personal view is that there should be wider and tougher rural proofing of all policy decisions. I understand that both the former and the current Government have accepted that the language of mainstreaming should run through policy making. Rural proofing of all policy decisions is an important way to go.  There has, quite rightly, been much debate about the shape of the common agricultural policy post-2013. We heard contributions from Peter Peacock, John Scott and Rob Gibson on that point. Although the EU CAP health checks can be said to be minor, they represent a start. We have to look at the bigger picture. As all members are aware, the CAP budget is currently 50 per cent of all EU spending. Of course, in setting the CAP for the next financial period of 2013 to 2019, the EU will have to comply with new external constraints. For example, it will have to comply with World Trade Organization obligations. Those inside and outwith the chamber who have become prophets of doom in saying that the world will come to an end post-2013 either are being Machiavellian or have misunderstood the UK Government proposals. I quote from page 4 of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs document "A Vision for the Common Agricultural Policy": "EU spending ... would be based on the current pillar 2". As members will be aware, pillar 2 funding includes expenditure on rural development regulation, agri-environment schemes, farm adaptation, forestry, less favoured area support, marketing of agricultural produce, training and development. Many members, including John Scott, have touched on the historical reasons for the underfunding. I looked into that and found that it goes back to the dim and distant past of the Fontainebleau arrangement. For the anoraks who have not followed that, I will explain that it was one good piece of work by the Tory Government—there may have been more—which ensured that Britain received a fair degree of rebate from the EU, which we still enjoy today. The idea that underfunding suddenly started last week is a myth.

I thought that that might encourage Mr Scott to intervene.

One reason for our historical underfunding is Fontainebleau. The rebate is actually good for the UK, and we have to look at the bigger picture. However, the argument that the UK Government has been sitting on its hands is a complete joke. Let me give members an example. The current objective 1 programme for the Highlands and Islands happened only because of direct intervention by Chancellor Schröder of Germany and Tony Blair. That has brought in  £240 million of new funds and it would not have happened without UK Government intervention. Future retargeting of funds has to be based on the provision of public goods. It is crucial that we keep funding within land management. Integration is key. We have to bring together the environmental and agriculture policies of the EU. Food security and good-quality environment are not mutually exclusive. Aileen Campbell spoke eloquently about the plight of farmers from her own family, and many members have mentioned the vital role that new entrants have in the industry. As the McCrone report said, young farmers form part of the life-blood of the industry and provide innovation and flair. However, the report expresses the worry—which the cabinet secretary may want to answer—that single farm payments are not tied to the land so that new entrants either buying land or taking tenancies have no automatic right to them. That is inequitable. Does the cabinet secretary share the RSE's view that single farm payments should be open to all entrants? In conclusion, I believe that this is an important and timely debate on the day on which the consultation is published. Sarah Boyack ran through the Labour amendment, which is a strong one. It calls for simplification and streamlining of the rural development programme application process, and it calls on the Scottish Government to set targets for public sector food procurement that would deliver a significant increase in locally sourced and fairly traded produce. I would be interested in the cabinet secretary's views on that.

We envisage the public sector, which has an important role in procurement, sourcing local food so that there is a benefit to hill farmers and other farmers throughout Scotland. I see it as another source of income for farmers in Scotland. The Labour amendment also considers the big picture for the industry: the economic, social and environmental factors that are crucial ingredients in securing a sustainable agriculture business for our hill farmers and communities in the future. We will also support the Liberal Democrat amendment.

The debate has been an excellent one with incisive, stimulating and well-informed contributions across the political divide. As a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, I confess to being one of the guilty parties who pushed for a ferry inquiry, although I regretted having done so when one of our number came down with a bad case of seasickness on the NorthLink ferry en route from Aberdeen to Lerwick. Nevertheless, I echo Patrick Harvie's comments and thank the committee clerks, witnesses and operators for their help, insights and understanding. I also echo the points that committee members made earlier about the high degree of professionalism that was exhibited by the ferry crews whom we encountered during the inquiry. I have taken from this afternoon's debate the fact that we need a national ferry strategy if we are to break away from the Cinderella-service feel and atmosphere that ferries have in the transport family compared with road, rail and aviation. Ferries play a crucial role in stimulating economic  development, attracting inward investment, sustaining indigenous jobs and providing lifeline services. Many members made that point, including the minister, Liam McArthur and Rhoda Grant. The mantra of better integration of different modes of transport has echoed through the lecture halls of every transport conference in history but, as we heard from Gavin Brown, we have a system that cannot co-ordinate the end of summer timetables for bus, rail and ferry services and the beginning of winter ones, so the ferry sails into Oban just as the train departs. Surely a Scotland that has the ingenuity and imagination to discover penicillin, radar and electromagnetism has the wit to get transport systems to talk to one another. That is why the committee recommended that public sector ferry services be placed under the remit of Transport Scotland in a new maritime division. I regret that the Scottish Government could not support such a move, which would have aided integration and helped us to develop better co-ordinated services throughout Scotland. However, in fairness, I recognise that the Government has accepted a number of other recommendations. There are, regrettably, too many examples of unco-ordinated services. Indeed, in one example that I have seen for myself, Dunoon's multimillion-pound linkspan and car marshalling area, built at public expense, lies vacant and empty because the 30-year-old CalMac ferry from Gourock to Dunoon cannot use the linkspan. What I have picked up from the debate and from evidence sessions has been, first, the need to develop new routes, about which Charlie Gordon was very articulate; the need to increase the speed of vessels; the need to improve the frequency of services, as mentioned by Alison McInnes, whom I welcome to her new post in the Liberal Democrats' shadow cabinet; the need to utilise vessels better; the need, as Alison McInnes and Jamie McGrigor made clear, to allow for greater commutability—if such a word exists; the need for a common design of vessels with greater automation to make utilisation easier; the need to upgrade piers to ensure a quicker turnaround in harbours; the need both to innovate and to provide greater capacity by using leased vessels in peak summer months; and the need to cut the time for commissioning new vessels. I realise that there is a world shortage in engine manufacturing but, with China coming on stream, there will be greater capacity in the world market. The debate has been wide ranging and time does not allow me to mention every speech or cover every issue. However, almost every member, including Des McNulty, Alex Johnstone, Patrick Harvie and Rhoda Grant, raised the  subject of RET. The pilot study matched "War and Peace" in its length and there was outrage from many constituents, particularly those in Argyll and Bute, who missed out on it. Indeed, one such constituent, Andrew McGregor from Colonsay, wrote: "To leave the routes to Mull, Colonsay, and Islay out of the scheme while including all other long-haul Hebridean routes is highly discriminatory and will distort competition in the tourist trade between the islands." I suppose that a number of unanswered questions remain. For example, who in the public sector is responsible for locating gaps in the market and providing additional service? What, as Rob Gibson, Mary Scanlon and Alex Johnstone wondered, is the future role for private sector companies such as Western Ferries and Pentland Ferries, which has just set up the new Gills Bay catamaran service? As subsidy will be crucial to many, if not most, lifeline routes, we need to find out what determines whether state aid is illegal. Is subsidy EU-proofed as long as it matches the terms of the EU Altmark ruling? Are tenders always required and, if so, are public service obligations necessary? Are they, as Professor Neil Kay observed, a form of driving licence? Although the EU investigation might provide some answers, it might well pose more questions for the industry. In that respect, I welcome the Government's lifeline ferry services review, which was a commitment that was made in the previous Administration's national transport strategy. Although the minister has outlined the various issues that the review will cover, will he confirm in his winding-up speech that an assessment of the use of hydrogen fuel cells for future vessel acquisition will also be considered? We need to aim for a dynamic and responsive industry that not only reacts to consumer demands but predicts future trends. It should be not just a transport system but a crucial driver in the rural development of our island communities and beyond.

Under the national park review, will the minister consider extending the boundaries of the Cairngorms national park to include Dava moor, which, as the minister is aware, is one of the most scenic, environmentally sensitive and iconic areas in the Highlands and Islands?

I will continue on the theme of climate change. I support strongly the points that Robin Harper made. I welcome the First Minister's commitment to bring forward a climate change bill, which is arguably the most important bill that will pass through the Parliament this session. Will the bill include a 3 per cent statutory annual statutory emissions target—a target that was, of course, a SNP manifesto commitment? Will shipping and aviation be included and will we have a basket of all greenhouse gases, not just measures for carbon dioxide emissions? Those measures would make the resulting climate change act an exemplar of best practice not only in Scotland, but in Europe and beyond.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I echo the mostly positive comments of previous speakers. I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and its clerks for all their work in preparing the excellent report on flooding and flood management. Perhaps I should declare an interest of sorts as a substitute member of the committee. In a parallel, perhaps, with my footballing career, I spent the entire season on the bench, although I did dream the adolescent dream and hope that I would be selected to play for five minutes in the cup final and would score the winning goal. In fairness, I was given one game when a Labour member failed a late fitness test and I heard fascinating evidence from the Met Office—more of which later. I want to focus on two main areas: the link between climate change and flood prevention. As other members have said, the debate on flooding must be seen in the context of climate change. At one level, it cannot be avoided: even if all emissions were stopped tomorrow, the greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere would continue warming the planet for generations. If we do not minimise the process and focus on a twin-track approach of adaptation and mitigation, our children will face a future of flood, famine and disease primarily, but not exclusively, in the developing world. What does that mean for Scotland? It means that coastal and riverside communities will be subject to more severe and prolonged flooding, with knock-on effects for the insurance industry. We will see more frequent return periods of severe flooding as occurred in Perth, Moray and Stirling. That can result in tragic loss of life, as was witnessed in the Western Isles in recent years. Climate change will also mean that urban drainage schemes will be unable to cope with increasing volumes of storm water. It will mean that buildings designed for the climate systems of the past will be subject to subsidence and that new buildings will need to meet tougher design  standards. The Stern report made it clear that a 3°C increase in temperature could mean that United Kingdom expenditure on flooding had to increase from 0.1 per cent to between 0.2 and 0.4 per cent of gross domestic product. I will concentrate my remaining remarks on flood warning. There is no real warning system for pluvial flooding in Scotland, and we heard from the committee convener Roseanna Cunningham earlier why that is—the lack of high-definition radar coverage compared with England and Wales. SEPA gives fluvial warnings and operates a national floodline service, which works well in providing information on flood warning and risk. However, as mentioned on page 42 of the committee report, Jennifer Main told the committee that during the floods in Elgin in 2002: "I did not receive any warning. I just saw the flood waters coming nearer and nearer and I warned my neighbours."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 19 February 2008; c 507.] Moray Council has since developed a very good system, in which flood warnings can be communicated by e-mail, text, mobile telephone and fax. SEPA has made a series of recommendations, including those for a national flood warning strategy, a risk assessment of critical infrastructure and work to improve the public's understanding of flood risk. In winding up the debate, will the minister say whether the Government will implement those SEPA recommendations? Is pluvial flooding the poor relation, as the committee described it? We all know that flood warnings depend on a combination of meteorological and hydrological data, but the Met Office told the committee, at the meeting for which I was present, that the best technical standard is for weather radar to be able to detect rainfall at high resolution—about 2km—as that relates to the size of the weather systems that cause the most intense rainfall. As we have heard, the majority of Scotland—with the exception of Shetland, bizarrely—is currently covered by low-resolution radar, which is fine for weather forecasting. In effect, we have 100 per cent coverage on that. However, high-resolution coverage is only at 50 per cent in Scotland, which is very poor. The gaps are mostly in our rural areas, such as Moray—which is, ironically, a high-risk area—the Highlands, Orkney and the south-west. In comparison, England and Wales have 95 per cent high-resolution coverage and so are in a much stronger position to predict floods. We need 100 per cent high-resolution radar coverage, which is recommendation 21 of the report. I do not want our rural areas to become technological no-go zones, so I urge the  minister—if he has a second to listen to the debate—to make blanket high-resolution coverage an urgent priority. My colleague Peter Peacock has been in touch with John Hirst, the Met Office chief executive, who has made it clear that we can conduct an assessment to work out how to take the next step, as has been done in England. We need an urgent assessment and a weather radar network review. That will examine the gaps in Scotland and cost about £75,000. The estimate from the evidence is that we probably need three new radar stations in Scotland. We want to work as efficiently as possible, but the bigger question is how we can afford not to provide the most comprehensive radar coverage to predict flooding and avoid the worst human and financial misery that can result from it. I commend the report to Parliament and urge members to support all its recommendations.

I thank Jim Hume for this excellent debate. The state-of-the-art Ecodeco waste treatment plant near Dumfries is an exemplar of best practice and puts in context the key mantra "reduce, reuse and recycle". Tackling waste and excess packaging is not some obscure policy backwater; it is very much at the heart of the debate about climate change and emissions reduction strategy. As members will be aware, during the previous session, the Environment and Rural Development Committee carried out a detailed study of our national waste strategy. As the committee said at the time, the challenge is to compete with other EU member states in terms of best practice. For example, Austria recycles three quarters of the municipal solid waste that it produces. In Scotland, although the figures vary, the average home produces around a tonne of rubbish each year, which historically has ended up as landfill. However, as Jim Hume pointed out, EU legislation has rightly moved member states away from that poor environmental practice. The EU landfill directive targets are set at reducing annual biodegradable municipal waste to 75 per cent of what was produced in 1995. As we have heard, the aim is to reduce that even further, to 35 per cent of that amount by 2020. The Ecodeco plant has contributed to Dumfries and Galloway Council trebling the amount of waste that is being diverted from landfill. In my region, the third sector has operated services for Highland Council in areas as diverse as community composting schemes and furniture reuse projects. As Friends of the Earth has said, the big picture is that we have, worldwide, a relentless cycle of three killer problems—problems that exist not just in industrial nations but in developing nations. First, we have a major problem with overproduction, which uses up valuable natural resources and leads to deforestation, especially of our rainforests, which is a major contributor to climate change. Secondly, we have bad practice in the excessive use of fossil fuels in the production process, which leads to climate change, and in the  terrible industrial practice of planned obsolescence. I am sure that we have all appreciated that when we have prematurely had to replace products that should have had a much longer life cycle. The third problem is excessive disposal. Believe it or not, the average person in the UK throws away their body weight in waste in three months. Much of that could be reprocessed instead of being sent to incineration or landfill. As I am sure we will hear when the minister sums up the debate, the Scottish Government has proposed a move towards zero waste and is consulting on a series of new targets, such as reducing landfill from municipal solid waste to 5 per cent by 2025. One of the key issues is how we incentivise householders and businesses to recycle more. Members will be aware that my colleague Sarah Boyack has suggested cuts in council tax for householders who recycle more. There is also a strong argument for greater enforcement by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and the Scottish Government on the basis of the polluter-pays principle. Perhaps the minister could confirm in his closing speech whether local authorities that exceed their landfill limits will be fined or allowed to trade allowances, as currently happens in England. It is ironic and disturbing that, while countries such as Ethiopia are reporting widespread starvation, one third of Scottish food purchases are thrown out. We need to change consumers' and supermarkets' behaviour. We need to cut excessive packaging and have tougher producer responsibilities. We need to stop talking the talk and start walking the walk.

The debate is significant. The climate change bill might become the most important legislation that the Parliament passes in the next three years, so I welcome the opportunity to debate climate change. I was delighted to hear the minister say that 21,000 people responded to the consultation—they include the children of the island of Eigg in my area of the Highlands and Islands. I make no apologies for stressing the international context of climate change—to be fair,  the minister did that, too. Greenhouse gases are no respecters of boundaries and no invisible barrier exists at the Channel or Hadrian's wall. A terrible injustice is that the rich, developed north has created the bulk of the emissions while the poor, developing south is experiencing severe climatic events, such as those in Burma and in China. Oxfam is respected throughout the globe for its development expertise. It talks about climate change affecting poor people who rely on crops that require rainfall that is no longer predictable, whether in the Philippines or Zambia, while the residents of Bangladesh struggle to cope with the effects of severe flooding. As Al Gore argued in his excellent film "An Inconvenient Truth", the peer-reviewed scientific community are united on the problem and the solution. We all know—the minister touched on the issue—that it is crucial to keep the average rise in global temperatures to less than 2°C above pre-industrial levels to try to avoid the most serious impacts of climate change. We all know what those impacts are: severe summer droughts, damaging winter floods, the loss of our coastal communities and crippling economic damage. As we heard from the minister, the solution is that greenhouse gas emissions need to fall by between 50 and 85 per cent by 2050, but current scientific opinion emphasises the top of that scale. As the introduction to the Scottish Government's second annual report on climate change says, the Bali summit set out a new road map to reach a new deal on international climate change—a sort of son of the Kyoto protocol, which expires in 2012. Our debate also takes place in the context of the UK Climate Change Bill, which will make the UK the first country to have a legally binding long-term framework to cut greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to climate change. Labour welcomes many of the practical suggestions in the second annual report—particularly on the key emission hot spots of transport and energy. We know from the Stern report, which describes the economic effects of climate change as the great depression meeting world war one, that early quick wins are effective, neat and important to achieving the correct trajectory to meet the target of reducing emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. It will be crucial to keep on target year on year in the Scottish bill's infancy. If that does not happen, there will be a mountain to climb by 2020, never mind 2050. As Stop Climate Chaos Scotland has said, the melting of summer sea ice in the Arctic has significantly accelerated. The 2007 melt was 23 per cent greater than that in 2005 and scientists predict that the Arctic might be free of all summer ice by 2030, which is 100 years ahead of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's projection. Closer to home, as the minister hinted, Scotland's emissions have risen by 8 per cent since 2005-06. That is mostly a result of changes in the fuel mix of Scottish electricity generation. We already need to start short-term course adjustments. The Scottish Government must take action now to meet the climate change targets, so I was disappointed that neither the second annual report nor the minister mentioned establishing a statutory, binding carbon-reduction target of at least 3 per cent per annum. Just in case the minister has misplaced it, I have the Scottish National Party's 2007 manifesto, which says on page 29: "In government we will introduce a Climate Change Bill with mandatory carbon reduction targets of 3% per annum". I note that the minister's colleague Mike Russell is to reintroduce an extinct native species—the beaver—to Scotland, which he is right to do. I respectfully suggest to Mr Stevenson that he might want to reintroduce an extinct native clause from the SNP's manifesto to strengthen the proposed bill. What should the bill aim to do? In simplistic terms, the Government should lead by example and set a framework to make it easier for people to make the right environmental choices. Doing that is not rocket science.

I thought that the minister would raise that issue. We did not make such a commitment in our manifesto, of course, and there are much better yearly and interim targets. Labour's proposed Scottish climate change bill would have delivered a council tax reduction for householders who recycled more and householders who had installed energy-efficient resources and microgeneration facilities. I commend Sarah Boyack's work on that. Will the minister undertake to consider including such a measure in the proposed bill? In our ambition for Scotland we need to set the bar high, and we must see the Scottish climate change bill as the foundation of a truly low-carbon Scotland. Innovation, technology and skills brought about the industrial revolution; the same factors will lead to the environmental revolution in green-collar jobs, supported by legislation and policies to drive down emissions and avoid environmental decline. That is why we need a Scotland-wide rail electrification plan, not just a plan for the central belt. We need to plough investment into public transport, give people real  modal-shift choices, reintroduce the rural transport fund, speed up rail services and aim for true integration, because buses do not always meet trains and ferries. I also stress the importance of getting freight from road to rail through the freight facilities grant. In that context, I commend the work that both the minister and Tesco have done. Tesco recently decided to take 22 lorries a day off the A9 and put products on to rail instead. I appreciate that the minister has no power over the seasons that we experience in Scotland—although he might like to have—but could he attempt to bang together heads in the bus, rail and ferry companies so that people agree on when winter timetables stop and summer timetables start? That would result in true integration. We have fantastic renewables potential in Scotland. With the support of emerging marine and tidal power technologies as well as proven wind power technologies, that potential will create jobs and reduce carbon emissions. Of course, the siting of developments must be environmentally sensitive and acceptable, but we need to speed up approvals across the continuum of renewables, such as for marine energy projects. A good example in that context is the tidal-flow project at Dounreay. We also need the capacity to expand. I ask the minister when the Scottish Government will make a determination on the Beauly to Denny line and whether he shares my view that we need both west and east undersea cables to form a green line as part of the European supergrid. On energy production, does he agree that carbon capture and storage represents a good bridge from the highly polluting natural resource of coal to a low-carbon energy source with security of supply? Security of supply is vital in energy sources. The minister will be aware of the key importance of exporting technology to emerging nations. The very low emission project in China is an excellent example of collaboration between the Chinese Government, the United Kingdom Government and the private sector. The second annual report made interesting references to the development of the carbon assessment tool and the Government's old single CO 2 target. Perhaps the minister could explain and amplify in his winding-up speech where the extra 9,000 tonnes of CO 2 that will be created by abolishing tolls on the Forth road bridge will be balanced by mitigation on the other side of the green carbon sheet. I have a number of brief questions to ask in my remaining time. Will the bill include all greenhouse gases,  as the minister hinted, rather than only CO 2 ? Will it include aviation and shipping?  Statistics already exist for aviation emissions under the memo requirements of the Kyoto protocol. They can be disaggregated for Scotland. Shipping uses very heavy oil. What advice has the minister given to Caledonian MacBrayne and NorthLink in that context? Friends of the Earth has said: "Excluding aviation and shipping is a bit like introducing a drink driving ban that excludes whisky." In conclusion, the clock is ticking—in the Presiding Officer's mind as well as mine. The icecaps are melting in Greenland, wildfires are raging in tropical forests and oceans are acidifying. Planet Earth cannot wait any longer for action on global warming to be taken. We need international direction and political will now.

This is a welcome debate, and I am sure that, notwithstanding any debate about amendments, there will be a strong core of consensus among members about wildlife crime, how it is to be tackled and a timetable for action. Labour welcomes the Tomkins report. We acknowledge the Government's initiative in commissioning it and call for full implementation of the 24 recommendations. I echo the Solicitor General in congratulating the fiscals, police officers and others who have built up tremendous expertise in the subject. In my brief remarks, I will look at some of the bigger pictures and international issues relating to wildlife crime and I will comment on some of the specific recommendations in the Tomkins report. It was the American President Benjamin Franklin who once said: "In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes." Looking back in time, we may argue that there is a third: wildlife crime. I understand that, in the 1600s in Scotland, the beaver was hunted to extinction for its pelts, which were traded all over the world. Even at that early stage, that had major  implications for biodiversity. The bulk of what was even at that time an internationally organised business was carried out by poachers on large estates.

Argyll and Bute was a very important area. I understand that that is one area where piloting the reintroduction of the beaver has been considered. At a naive level, it could be argued that we are a nation of animal lovers, but the harsh reality on the ground is that laws are broken and wildlife is destroyed and exploited for profit. All over the world, animals are sold illegally to satisfy consumer demand. For example, trading in ivory has been banned worldwide since 1989, apart from the trade in so-called antique ivory that predates 1947. However, the International Fund for Animal Welfare estimates that 90 per cent of the internet ivory trade may breach international conventions. We could argue that wildlife crime has three elements: the illegal trade in endangered species; crimes that involve native species that are endangered or of conservation concern, to which the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 applies; and cruelty to and persecution of wildlife species, which includes badger baiting and illegal snaring, poaching and poisoning. What wildlife crimes have occurred in Scotland? Members will be well aware of examples in their areas. For instance, the eggs of protected birds have been stolen on a massive scale. It is estimated that more than 10,000 badgers in the United Kingdom have been killed through badger baiting, and deer poaching is undertaken by commercial gangs. I have found two examples in the national press, at which the Solicitor General hinted. In November 2007, a Dalry man was convicted of badger baiting—that was the first such conviction. He allowed his dog to attack two young badgers in a sett and to maul them to death. Kilmarnock sheriff court ordered him to serve 175 hours of community service, awarded compensation to the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and banned him from keeping dogs for two years. In another case, a London man was sent to prison for six months for taking more than 500 bird eggs, many of which were from endangered species such as the red kite and the barn owl. That was the first imprisonment of an individual under the reinforced legislation.  There are good examples of best practice. Tayside Police has co-ordinated a nationwide operation to tackle egg collectors who are known to the police and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. In March 2002, osprey eggs that had been taken from Scotland were seized by police as part of operation Easter. As members know, the osprey is particularly vulnerable, as only 140 pairs remain in Scotland. The previous Administration introduced the 2004 act, to which I have referred. The act provided a series of protection and enforcement measures to safeguard Scotland's natural heritage. The key driver was the protection and conservation of biodiversity. The act introduced the concept of recklessness and created the offence of possessing a pesticide that contains any prescribed ingredient, to reduce incidents of poisoning. Side by side with that went the new powers for the police to search and arrest in the complementary Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. I must mention the National Wildlife Crime Unit in North Berwick, which is doing good work and is working extremely well towards achieving co-ordinated action. I like the fact that the Tomkins report is well written and well researched and that it is not embarrassed to talk about potentially embarrassing issues. I will ask the Minister for Environment a couple of questions. What is the timescale for implementing the report's recommendations? Will the achievement of recommendations be funded centrally or from the core police budget? How quickly can each police force appoint a wildlife crime co-ordinator? Will an early goal be to train all police officers in the general awareness of wildlife crime? Will the minister follow up my work by contacting the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs on the concerns about restricting the Britain-wide registration of rare birds, which might have a detrimental effect on conservation? Has the minister taken advice to determine whether Scotland breaches the European Union habitats directive by indiscriminate use of snaring of European protected species such as otters? Has progress been made on snaring since the minister made his announcement? Has he ruled out a ban on snaring? The debate is important. Scotland's wildlife protection laws are among the best in Europe, but concern is felt about levels of wildlife crime, and the link between organised crime and crimes such as badger baiting is recognised. The Tomkins report provides a major contribution to the debate and I commend it to Parliament.  I move amendment S3M-1954.1, to insert at end: "supports in full the recommendations of the Tomkins report, and calls on the Scottish Government to produce an action plan on tackling wildlife crime, including a timetable for the implementation of the report."

I welcome the opportunity to debate increased access to insulin pumps specifically, but also the bigger picture of diabetes and its role in health care management. The motion has widespread support across the political spectrum and I thank members who supported it. As for those who have not, I always welcome sinners who repent. First, I acknowledge the work of the cross-party group on diabetes, which Karen Whitefield convenes and of which I am a member. I warmly welcome the visitors in the public gallery, particularly the representatives of Diabetes UK Scotland. Some may ask, why debate diabetes? I declare a personal interest, in that about 11 years ago I made a fascinating visit to Raigmore hospital in my constituency. I went to the diabetic specialist centre there, where I was encouraged by the staff to take a particular interest in the debate. I also had a family member, who is unfortunately no longer with us, who suffered from diabetes for more than 70 years, so I have first-hand experience of day-to-day family life with a diabetic. In my Westminster days, I was secretary of the all-party group on diabetes.  Members will be aware of the major causes of concern about diabetes. It is the main cause of blindness among people of working age; half of all non-traumatic lower limb amputations are due to diabetic complications; and diabetic care costs the national health service in Scotland the phenomenal sum of about £0.5 billion. On type 2 diabetes, members will be aware that I have supported a campaign for high-risk screening for type 2, or mature onset, diabetes for people who are overweight, or who have a family history of diabetes or who are over 45. I hope to use the United Kingdom screening committee to give some support to that campaign. What am I calling for? It is important that we have greater use of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion—CSII—or, as it is also known, insulin pump therapy, which is slightly easier to pronounce, so I will use that term for the rest of the debate. As members will be aware, insulin pump therapy provides significant improvement in glycaemic control and quality of life for some people with type 1 diabetes—so-called early onset and insulin-dependent diabetes. The pump is an external device that continually infuses insulin into the patient's body and thus controls their glycaemic levels, which many patients otherwise struggle to achieve. That alternative way of maintaining insulin levels can contribute to more stable wellbeing by reducing the risk of hypoglycaemia and replacing several daily injections with only two to three a week. With the pump, insulin levels can be increased by simply pressing a button on the pump instead of using a pen needle, which can be embarrassing for patients, particularly when they inject in public. Insulin pumps empower patients to have greater control over their condition as they give them a more flexible and reliable means of managing glycaemic levels. Improved control over one's own health means improvement in the quality of life of many patients: it means fewer hospital visits, a more productive work life and less stress at home. Fewer hospital admissions and a reduction in primary care contacts also mean that there is less strain on the NHS. Diabetes UK Scotland has argued that there is a saving of more than £23,000 over two years, which would comfortably offset the cost of pump therapy. Let us look at the big picture and compare the cost with the costs of poorly controlled diabetes: a one-night stay in hospital following admission to accident and emergency for a diabetes emergency costs £350; one course of laser treatment for retinopathy costs £850; one procedure of dialysis treatment for kidney disease costs £500; and renal dialysis for one year costs £15,000.  Despite the outlined benefits of insulin pump therapy, it is still rare in Scotland. That is particularly problematic considering Scotland's prevalence of type 1 diabetes, which is well above the European average. Less than 1 per cent of sufferers of type 1 diabetes receive insulin pump treatment. That is in stark contrast to other parts of the world, where rates of pump use are much higher. For example, in Germany and the United States 15 per cent to 20 per cent of patients enjoy the benefits of insulin pumps. What would it mean if we had the same rate as the USA and Germany? it would mean that another 4,000 to 5,000 people in Scotland would benefit. In my region—the Highlands—that would mean a jump from six users, which is very low, to 450. In the Western Isles, it would mean a jump from only one user to 33. What is obstructing patients from accessing the treatment, which could potentially change fundamentally the lives of so many of them? Part of the explanation is that the criteria for qualification for insulin pump therapy are currently restrictive and exclude many patients who could otherwise benefit. If a patient does not fall into the set category, they have to fund the treatment themselves, which can run into thousands of pounds. Diabetes UK Scotland has criticised the criteria, which, as members are aware, are currently under review by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. It appears likely that the criteria will change and be relaxed, but that does not mean that our work is over—we must ensure that health boards have the funds to finance treatment for the additional patients. A further concern is that only limited specialist centres in Scotland are able to deliver pump therapy, which means that some patients have to travel extensively. The answer to a recent parliamentary question from Christine Grahame showed that since February 2007 there has been an increase in the number of users of about 127. I give praise where praise is due: Lothian NHS Board and Tayside NHS Board should pat themselves on the back, because their levels of pump usage are well above those in England and the rest of Europe. I do not, however, have such a positive message to put out for Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board and Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board, which are in the corner with dunce's caps for their low level of pump usage. As with most things in life, we never really appreciate the devastating extent of a disease until we suffer it ourselves. That is why I will end my speech by telling members a story about a diabetic who can tell members first hand how life-changing the effects of insulin pump therapy can be. Her name is Dorothy, she is in the gallery today and she has had type 1 diabetes for 37 years. She has struggled to control her blood  sugar level, which has affected her health and deprived her of sleep. She states: "Within 4 weeks of starting the pump, my blood glucose levels came down to 7.5. I suddenly got my life back. My appetite returned and at last I could see the light at the end of the tunnel. Despite feeling 100% better, I still have problems with my control and it's my belief that had I got the 'pump' earlier, I would never have experienced these problems. For this reason and many others, I strongly believe that continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) should be available to everyone who would benefit from it and especially to young people who have their whole life in front of them. It is my dearest wish that they may live their life free of all diabetic complications." I call on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to follow NICE guidelines and to encourage increased use of pump therapy, to provide a new era of hope for type 1 diabetics.

This has been an excellent debate, with knowledgeable and insightful contributions from across the political spectrum. I congratulate John Scott on the motion, which was excellent. I hope that my congratulations do not damage his political career, but I liked the stress on the international aspects of the issue. We have all seen the images of this global problem. Keith Brown was quite right to talk about the incident in Haiti, in which four people were killed in food riots. In Italy, mothers have marched against the increase in the price of pasta and, in Bolivia, there have been violent protests against the doubling of food prices. The World Bank has forecast that 100 million people are facing starvation. What has caused the crisis? Many members have speculated about that, suggesting reasons such as climate change, dietary change in China, global overpopulation, biofuels and even the credit crisis, which has brought about speculation in commodities futures following the collapse of the financial derivatives market.  Do we now need, as the World Bank and the United Nations have said, a new deal for food? A recent Economist editorial said: "Agriculture is now in limbo. The world of cheap food has gone. With luck and good policy, there will be a new equilibrium." What can be done on the international stage? A number of members, such as Rob Gibson and Peter Peacock, have come up with innovative suggestions. However, it is clear that we need to refinance the World Food Programme, which is the world's largest distributor of food aid—the barrier between hungry people, such as those families in the developing world who exist on a dollar a day, and starvation. The purchasing power of the World Food Programme has been slashed because of the rising cost of grain. To distribute the same amount of food this year as was distributed last year would cost an extra $700 million. Oxfam has argued that we need to act earlier. For example, in 2004 and 2005, early warnings alerted the world's donors that Niger needed aid in order to avert famine, but delays and inaction caused the death of thousands of children. As many have said today, we need to reassess the mandatory biofuel targets and highlight more responsible and sustainable policies. We must be careful about taking agricultural land out of production. John Scott gave a good speech. Like others, I liked his analogy about the perfect storm and his encouragement of farmers to grow more food in sustainable ways and consumers to waste less food. I particularly liked his quote about digging for victory, which was relevant—clearly, he has been watching his Winston Churchill tapes again over the weekend. Karen Gillon spoke well about the need for farming across the world to be done sustainably. The stress on climate change is important. I do not have time to touch on a number of speakers' comments, but I thought that Mike Russell gave a well-made speech. His promotion—albeit temporary—is well deserved. I am sure that, like me, he will be supporting Labour's plans to extend paternity leave in the United Kingdom. At the end of 2006, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs published an interesting report on food security. It said that the real issues extend beyond the UK, beyond agriculture and beyond food, and that food security cannot be the object of a single policy, but needs to be supported by a range of cross-cutting strategies, such as strengthening energy security, developing international research and development and looking into the impact of climate  change on global food potential. Food security is an international issue. The developed world can play a key leadership role in refinancing the World Food Programme and advocating fair trade and aid, and can light a candle to snuff out the darkness of hunger, malnutrition and death in the developing world.

I refer members to my entry in the register of members' interests. A century and more before the national health service was a mere twinkle in Nye Bevan's eye, hospital almoners cared for the sick, comforted the bereaved and counselled the dispossessed. That  work was not done out of a sense of paternalism or pity; instead, it was a matter of professionalism and commitment, and the ethos followed by those early almoners remains apt for the dynamic and diverse third sector, which in my area covers a range of organisations from the Highland Hospice to the Highland Community Care Forum. Like many members, I have worked in the voluntary sector. I have been a volunteer with the Samaritans and Citizens Advice Scotland; I have been an unpaid director with Highland Homeless Trust; and I have been employed by the umbrella organisation of the sector, the SCVO. I have campaigned and organised on the front line of the sector and have seen at first hand the quality of work being carried out in various areas, from rural development to the provision of autism services. The sector's very scale should act as a wake-up call to commentators who accuse Scots of being a nation of couch potatoes. Scotland has 1.2 million volunteers, 45,000 organisations with a formal set of rules and 18,000 regulated charities, and the sector has nearly 130,000 paid staff—or about 5 per cent of the Scottish workforce. The sector's income represents 4 per cent of the country's gross domestic product. As we all know, the third sector is part of civic society and encompasses churches, faith groups, trade unions and professional associations. Indeed, it played a key role in the constitutional convention, which framed the ideas and principles behind the Parliament. I give credit to the previous Administration for recognising the sector's contribution and value. As members have already pointed out, it introduced a number of initiatives such as the Scottish voluntary sector compact, the review of direct funding, the strategic funding review and Social Investment Scotland, which was set up in 2001 to build capacity through loan finance. Full cost recovery and three-year funding contracts are also very important for the sector. To be fair—as I always am, Presiding Officer—the current Administration seemed to be very positive about the sector when it took office almost a year ago. However, the reality is different on the ground. For example, as we have already heard, the SNP-controlled Highland Council has cut £86,000 from Age Concern Scotland, which now has to find the money from its own resources. The funding for Aberdeen Cyrenians has been cut by £900,000 and, in Edinburgh, the Ark's funding has been cut by £74,000. In Highland, we will soon see a huge cut in funding for those who look after our elderly people's needs. These organisations are not, as Rob Gibson has suggested, growing like Topsy; they exist to meet the needs of the vulnerable in  our communities. Although the excellent and well-respected Highland Community Care Forum might have had a stay of execution, many are worried about its future. Moreover, every voluntary and youth sports organisation in Highland faces a real-terms cut as a result of the £50,000 saving that the education department is seeking to make in its budget. On top of all that, the Highland Council is about to embark on a major revision of charges for accessing the school buildings that are used extensively by the voluntary sector. Organisations face being squeezed not only by cuts and savings but by increased charges. Is the third sector being squeezed out by the concordat? Moreover, what will be the effect on users of mental health, disability and vulnerable elderly services? We must stand up for the voluntary sector, and I urge members to support my friend Elaine Murray's motion.

Will the minister outline the likely effect of the proposed merger of the Deer Commission and Scottish Natural Heritage on the expertise, advice and trust that has built up in the deer farming industry? Will he identify the evidence base that led to the proposal for the merger?

Zhou Enlai was the premier of the People's Republic of China until 1976. As members may know, he was famous for his skill as a diplomat, as a participant at the Geneva conference and as an historian. He is probably best remembered, though, for his response, when asked for his assessment of the 1789 French revolution, which was, "It is too early to say." Some may argue today that it is too early to say how effective our national parks have been in meeting the four key objectives that were set out  in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. As the minister said, the act was piloted through the Parliament by my parliamentary friend—and indeed boss—Sarah Boyack. Labour members thank the board members and staff of both national parks, some of whom are here today, for their enthusiasm, dedication and leadership, and for the progress that has been made over the years.

I strongly agree with that; in fact, I will reach that issue later in my speech. That progress has included the provision of eco-tourism at Loch Lomond and community action planning in the Cairngorms national park. Taking a step back in time, members will be well aware that the founding father of national parks was a Scot, John Muir, who left Dunbar as a young man for a life in America. His efforts led to the development of the worldwide national parks movement. John Muir was influential in setting up Yellowstone national park in 1872, which was signed into law by President Ulysses S Grant. In the United Kingdom, James Bryce campaigned at Westminster in 1879 for the establishment of national parks. The Ramsay report of 1945 recommended five national parks and three reserve areas. Coming closer to the modern day, in 1990 the Countryside Commission for Scotland recommended four national parks, consistent with the principles established by the Ramsay report. National parks have been a reality throughout the world for many years. The key question that historians might ask is why Scotland took so long to create its first two national parks. We can leave that debate to them, but we must get on and ensure that our national parks are fulfilling their roles and responsibilities. The other day, I read the Official Report of the debates in the Parliament on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill. I was struck by the passion and enthusiasm of members across the political divide, many of whom are here today. Members argued strongly about the principles and provisions of the bill. They discussed the idea of having parks of national importance, but with local communities at their heart—the minister referred to that—and flexibility to allow for the "distinctiveness of different areas" of Scotland; to let local people decide things for themselves; to sustain people and resources; and to develop a "thriving rural economy" while sustaining "natural and cultural heritage." Reading the Official Report , I was struck by the bipartisan approach in the chamber, with emphasis being placed on innovation, partnership and the integration of aims—the overlapping circles—in the social, the economic and the environmental. The National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 was built on the well-developed Sandford principle. Lord Sandford, as members know, was a Tory peer who chaired the national parks review in England and Wales in 1974. He said that national parks' aims were twofold: to conserve the environment and to provide access to the public. If conflict arose between the two, conservation of the environment would take priority. Although that approach applied to England and Wales, it could be argued that the 2000 act represented Sandford plus in adding economic and social considerations into the mix. We do not want communities that are situated within the national parks to stand still. Dedicated national parks make it possible to take into account the needs of the whole area when deciding whether a development should take place. The review that the minister announced comes at the right time for us to take stock and compare aspirations with reality, and I believe that it will be welcomed across the spectrum of environmental non-governmental organisations, from RSPB Scotland to the Ramblers Association—and, of course, the John Muir Trust. I believe strongly that national parks are testament to the value that a nation places on protecting its environment and natural heritage. They are, in effect, the nation's champions. They must work in partnership with local communities and NGOs, for example in protecting biodiversity, tackling climate change, promoting tourism, promoting locally grown food and providing a voice for local people in campaigning for the development of affordable housing. The debate on the National Parks (Scotland) Bill was about how to balance the sometimes conflicting push for economic development with the pull of social inclusion. There will be different solutions in different areas, but my belief is that a bureaucratic decision made in a bunker at Victoria Quay or St Andrew's house is not the way forward. We do not want national park objectives to be determined by a top-down approach to decision making, in a manner akin to the Kremlin in the Soviet Union deciding on ball-bearing production in the Ukraine. The real benefit of having a national park board that is made up of local councillors is that the needs of the whole area can be considered when a decision is made on whether a particular development should take place. The structures that have been in place have, by and large, worked. I live a short drive from the  northern boundary of the Cairngorms national park, and I have seen at first hand the work being done on LEADER + and the community-based rural development plans. I have seen the work on land management, through the Cairngorms deer advisory group. I have seen the work on renewable energy—supporting green energy, but opposing large-scale conventional wind farms. In that context, I read with interest Professor Kay's analysis of environmental governance in Scotland. As we have heard, the report was commissioned by the minister. I was a bit disappointed when I saw it trailed in the national press under the headline "National park authorities have a mountain to climb". That article, which was in The Scotsman on 8 March, said: "A damning report on Scotland's two national parks says they have become a 'clunky, cumbersome, formal and bureaucratic muddle' and calls for 'root-and-branch' review of their quango status." It also refers to the parks being "rolled back into Scottish National Heritage."

I thank the minister for his comments. His earlier announcements perhaps preoccupied some members in the chamber. The minister should by all means look at the positive aspects of the Kay report—I am sure that there are some—but I suggest in a friendly manner that he reject the idea that SNH should take over the management of the two boards, on the basis of the political principle that if it ain't broke, why fix it? There is a great opportunity to review the park boundaries, which the minister has covered. I was going to say that one does not have to be the Brahan seer to predict that that will be part of the Government's plans for later in the session—clearly, I had a bit of foresight. Transport is a key aspect of the national park, particularly in respect of tourism. I ask the minister to raise with Stewart Stevenson the important issue of the link between Dunoon and Gourock, which is important as a link to the national park. I would be grateful if he would clarify the role of CalMac Ferries in that regard. This is an excellent debate. We welcome the opportunity to debate national parks. Establishing the national parks in the Cairngorms, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs was one of the  flagship achievements of the earliest days of the Parliament—it was an embodiment of the success of devolution. In practice, it fulfilled the Labour Party's commitment to create national parks. We join a worldwide family of illustrious names, such as Yellowstone in the United States; the royal national park in Australia; and Kruger park in South Africa. National parks are firmly on the Scottish radar screen as an integral part of our rural landscape. I am convinced that John Muir himself would have approved. I move amendment S3M-1548.2, to insert at end: "and believes that the following issues should be included for specific consideration in the review: the effectiveness of the national parks in achieving the main objectives set out in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, the success of the national parks in building community engagement and involvement in the development of both parks, and whether the boundaries of the parks should be reviewed."

On regulation, is the minister happy with Scottish Water's current leakage rate? It failed to meet its target by 44 million litres a day, which is the equivalent of 17 Olympic swimming pools.

The minister will be aware that the independent working group on snares identified a long list of adverse welfare impacts on snared animals. They ranged from thirst and hunger to amputations. Does the minister believe that the technical amendments that he has proposed today will make any significant difference to animals' suffering as compared with an outright ban?

To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish the conclusion of its review of its international development policy. (S3O-2248)

The minister will be well aware of the growing role of the third sector in Malawi. Will she outline how organisations such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations can support their equivalent partner organisations in Malawi to ensure the continued development and strengthening of that sector?

In the dying days of the first world war in 1918, the country was ravaged by conflict, our young people had been sacrificed on the battlefield and our economy was in free-fall. That is the context in which the Forestry Commission was born, to  replant, rebuild and renew a crucial asset that seemed impossible to replace. Replacing forests seemed to be an oxymoron. How could the native Caledonian pine forests, which were hundreds of years old, be replaced? However, the foresters of old in the 1920s and 1930s did what it said on the tin. They replanted our forests with fast-growing and mainly, but not exclusively, non-native species. Today, the picture is very different. Our living forests play several roles—in climate change mitigation, industry and construction, jobs, biomass, housing and leisure, and biodiversity. For example, the Laggan community forest, which was born out of the national forest land scheme, is an exemplar of new thinking, which brings together various themes: timber processing, combined heat and power, holiday accommodation and recreational access. A few years ago, on a wet November morning, I attended the opening of the Wolftrax mountain bike trails, where brave adolescents risk life and limb—and their parents' blood pressure—to demonstrate that gravity does not apply to anyone under 21. By my back-of-the-envelope calculation, which could be wrong, the Parliament last debated forestry in 2004. I strongly welcome the debate and commend the minister for bringing it to the chamber. As with our debate on biodiversity a few weeks ago, consensus may well break out in the chamber again today. I share the view of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds that the role of Parliament and Government is to enhance the environmental as well as the social and economic value of Scotland's forests and woodlands. I fully support the Scottish forestry strategy, which was developed by the previous Administration, and its three outcomes in the areas of health, competitiveness and the environment. Time will not allow me to develop some of the important themes that relate to the debate such as business and community development, access and health, freight and roads, tourism, and crofting and forestry townships. I hope that future debates will allow more time for those subjects. The Scottish woodland is an important natural resource. It helps in the fight against climate change by retaining carbon and acts as an integral part of our economy not only by ensuring the availability of raw materials for the construction industry but by supporting the jobs that are associated with that industry. It also has an important role in ensuring that people throughout Scotland can access woodland areas to experience the wide range of biodiversity that Scotland continues to have.  The forestry strategy's implementation plan for 2007-08 highlights a number of commitments that the previous Government made, including an allocation of £10.5 million to support biomass schemes, to which the minister referred. Although the biomass sector is at an early stage of development, it has potential for the future. As the minister will be aware, in some parts of Europe, biomass represents 50 per cent of power use. For example, 20 years ago, Styria in Austria started from scratch a combined heat and power scheme that has become a model in Europe. It uses biomass pellets to heat schools, hospitals and housing estates. It uses low-value wood close to source and is effectively carbon neutral. I congratulate the previous Administration on developing support of this sector. When it comes on stream, the Balcas project at Invergordon will add to Scotland's energy efficiency by producing biomass pellets, thereby avoiding the need for imports. We are on the verge of a biomass revolution. The Lockerbie E.ON UK project, which I think the minister is to open, will be the first 100 per cent biomass-powered plant to create electricity for the grid. Does the minister have plans to continue funding through the Scottish biomass support scheme so that the biomass sector can continue to grow? The biomass action plan has been published, but the question remains how the Government intends to take forward the recommendations in the renewable heat group's report on a future renewable heat strategy. Also, will the Government bring forward a sustainable procurement action plan? Although we all want the biomass sector to grow, it is vital that a balance is struck so that demand for wood fuel for energy does not exceed supply and the wood-processing industry continues to have the raw materials that it needs. The timber industry is important to our economy. It operates in a global market. Although prices for timber have held up well, particularly over the past 12 months, the industry is subject to the same economic pressures of any other global market. As we all know, the recent credit crunch, which stems from problems in the sub-prime market in America, has led to issues in the housing market. It has led to concern about the knock-on effect on the demand for timber as the housing market continues to slow. However, at the same time, there is a strong export market for timber from Scotland. Every effort must be made to ensure that the industry can grow further. The minister will be well aware that James Jones & Sons, the maker of the innovative I-beam, announced recently that it is going to expand its plant in Forres. He will be aware that the I-beam  forms a key part of the Forestry Commission Scotland's district headquarters in Inverness, which was constructed as an eco-building. I visited that building last week. It is an excellent exemplar of eco-building. To ensure a sustainable future for Scottish timber in the construction industry, it is vital that people learn new skills. I welcome the minister's assurance that the development of skills in this sector is a priority. I will flag up another Highland initiative: the UHI Millennium Institute's Scottish School of Forestry at Balloch in Inverness, which is taking an excellent lead in this area. Remote areas of Scotland are home to some impressive forests that could be used for processing. However, the difficulties in transporting the wood out can lead to companies ruling those areas out. Surely an increased role can be played by shipping and rail, through the freight facilities grant, to take the pressure off weak roads. Where that is not possible, it is vital that we bring weak roads up to standard. I hope that the minister will give his commitment to supporting the timber transport fund to help towards that. The link between forestry and tourism is already well established. Members will be familiar with the world mountain bike championships at Fort William, which are an excellent example of that link. I welcome this timely debate and acknowledge the contribution that the public sector, private sector and—let us not forget—the third sector make towards developing woodlands and forestry. We have witnessed a sea change in forestry management since the establishment of the Forestry Commission. We have a high-value product and a growing world price for timber. There is strong export potential for Scottish timber. Indeed, one snapshot from the past shows that pulp from Irvine was once exported to Manhattan for the production of Time magazine. We now have affordable forest crofts, some of which are powered by biomass. We are seeing skills development in forest management. We have sustainable development of the commercial forestry sector in which recognition is given to the importance of biodiversity. We are also seeing the replanting and regeneration of native species, urban greening that provides fair access for all Scots, and the mitigation of climate change. By skilful management of the economic, environmental and social dimensions, we can preserve and develop Scotland's rich, natural asset.  I move amendment S3M-1315.2, to insert at end: "and further notes the significant role that Scotland's woodland plays in the mitigation of climate change and the conservation of biodiversity."

The First Minister will be aware that the main measure to mitigate climate change is renewable energy, as he said. Does he share my enthusiasm  for the proposal in the recent Crown Estate study to develop an offshore east coast transmission line to allow renewable energy to be distributed around and across the UK? Will Mr Salmond support the project, in the knowledge that it will provide ministers, in approving wind farm developments in island communities, with assured transmission capacity to meet climate change targets?

The 1992 earth summit in Rio was a defining moment in global history. Apart from the carnival atmosphere and the culture, music and dance that we would expect from a proud country showcasing its society, there was a real sense of achievement. One hundred and fifty-nine countries met, debated and agreed a new tomorrow for a planet that is threatened by monoculture, starvation and climate change. That is the context in which this afternoon's debate is taking place, as Rio set the framework for European, United Kingdom and Scottish policies on biodiversity. There will be no carnivals today, but the debate is no less important. The minister's speech was interesting and stimulating and I judge that his comments will be widely welcomed across the chamber. I will make some big-picture comments on biodiversity and emphasise the role of volunteers, non-governmental organisations, farmers and crofters, as well as public bodies, and ask some specific questions of the minister. At a naive level, it is worth asking the simple question: Why do we need biodiversity? On the other side of the looking glass is monoculture, which has led to stagnation and starvation. Looking back on history, it was arguably monoculture that contributed to the Irish potato famine of 1846 in which two potato varieties were subject to a blight that wiped out the crop and caused disaster to the Irish community, killing a million people and causing another million to emigrate. Coming back to the present day, there has been a strong lead on biodiversity from the European Union, the United Kingdom and here in Scotland. We have had two directives from the EU, one on habitats and the other on birds, as well as its commitment to implement the Convention on Biological Diversity. From the UK has come the  biodiversity action plan, which is being pushed forward, and in Scotland, as has been mentioned, the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, which is the basis for the current biodiversity strategy, was passed in the previous session of Parliament. The 2004 act led to the establishment of the forum, the indicators, the 27 local action plans, the biodiversity action grants and the species action framework.

The member makes a strong point and I am sure that he will tell me that those five are Labour authorities. It is important that those authorities sign up and put their money where their mouths are. In 2004, volunteers were encouraged to become involved through a wide range of organisations, such as ProjectScotland, and non-governmental organisations, such as the RSPB Scotland, were empowered in management and conservation work. Duties were placed on public bodies and Scottish Natural Heritage was given a lead in many areas. Let us not forget the national parks. Cairngorms national park, for example, runs training and awareness courses on biodiversity for local residents and land managers. It is currently establishing a project to work with members of the green tourist business scheme to engage visitors in biodiversity. Biodiversity is important in developing tourism as well. As the minister pointed out, the 2004 act required the Scottish Government to report on progress by 2007, which has led to the publication of the document that we are considering today. The report is well presented and considered and it highlights the twin threats to biodiversity—habitat destruction and invasive non-native species. The report highlighted examples of conservation, such as the important role of the white-tailed eagle, and examples of control, such as the American mink and signal crayfish. Community action by local groups is important. I highlight the important role that is played by volunteers and schoolchildren, which has been a striking success and has helped to raise awareness about biodiversity throughout Scotland. I will offer a local Highland example. Foyers primary school sits above Loch Ness side in the middle of a large coniferous forest. There are  fewer than 20 children at the school, but they have monitored air and water temperature and pond life since 2004. As the school report testifies: "inside the school, the pupils are buzzing with enthusiasm for their project—Loch Bran—its wildlife, plants, ancient history and secrets". When the pupils are asked what they want to do when they are older, there is the usual selection of "Don't knows", and "I'd like to be a forest ranger" in the report, but one young man says quietly and with measure that he would like to be an entomologist. He does not elaborate; he is just certain. What action will be taken to raise awareness about biodiversity in schools and encourage more volunteering? I have several specific questions for the minister to address in his winding-up speech. Under the current spending profile, will the Scottish Government meet the Gothenburg target to halt biodiversity loss by 2010? Will all sites of special scientific interest be brought into a favourable condition under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004? What future does the minister see for key agri-environment schemes under the Scottish rural development programme? How can we encourage new entrants to schemes that deliver biodiversity priorities and public benefits? Finally, does the minister see public bodies' duty to promote biodiversity extending to procurement? Biodiversity plays a key global role in adapting to climate change. A strong Scottish framework is in place in which farmers, crofters, NGOs, volunteers and statutory bodies play key roles, but well-funded agri-environment schemes that will meet the Gothenburg target of halting biodiversity loss by 2010 are crucial. Biodiversity touches all our lives—it touches on everything from carbon recycling to flood control to medicines. The progress report is an important staging post towards a greener Scotland. I move amendment S3M-1204.1, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish Government to confirm the commitment to meeting the 2010 EU Gothenburg biodiversity targets."

There can be few more important debates than that on the future of energy in this nation, particularly as the United Kingdom is now a net importer of oil and gas for the first time in a generation. The debate draws out strong emotions, with technology versus technology and process versus process. Advocates have argued their often conflicting cases with an intensity that would bring a blush to the face of a tattooed gangland leader in Los Angeles. It can also be a complicated debate, with the technospeak of product life cycle, proven technology, carbon capture and storage, security of supply and—my personal favourite—avoiding Russian-end supply chain, which I am sure the minister will be able to explain on a flip chart later. Where, however, is consideration of the energy needs of the ordinary Scottish citizen in Leith, Lerwick or Lossiemouth? The lights might not go out all over Edinburgh, but if we get the energy balance wrong in the next decade, we will be paying over a barrel—or, indeed, over a therm of gas—to countries with the political stability of Burma and the civil liberties record of Zimbabwe. One of the most fluent and well-argued documents on the subject is the Royal Society of Edinburgh's inquiry into energy. It concluded that the challenge is to meet the growing aspirations of the developing world, not least China and India, while mitigating the impact of global climate change. The UK is now more reliant on imported energy, at a time when the international market is much more competitive. The developed world has a particular responsibility to carry the torch and show leadership in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. I mention in passing that I am very pleased that the first act of the incoming Labor Government in Australia was to sign the Kyoto protocol. That should have been done many years ago. I will cover three points: first, the importance of developing further what I call the father of renewable energy—hydropower; secondly, developing the role of biomass energy; and finally, examining the increased role that microrenewables and decentralised energy systems can play in the future. As we have already heard this morning, the context of the debate is the Westminster Government's white paper on energy and the  Energy Bill. As the introduction to the white paper says, articulately in my view, "More than two thirds of the world's carbon dioxide emissions come from the way we produce and use energy". We should focus on three things—some members have already mentioned them. First, we must focus on saving energy, which we sometimes forget about. Secondly, we need to develop cleaner energy. Finally, we should ensure that we can secure reliable energy supplies at competitive prices that are set in the market. Renewables play an important role, particularly hydropower. As members are well aware, Scotland has a proud record in that regard. Members will need no history lesson from me, but I will mention the important role that hydropower has played in our history. Back in 1896, the first hydropower station was built at Foyers by the British Aluminium Company. Around 1900, a large hydropower station basically was responsible for the development of the village of Kinlochleven. As members will also be aware, Tom Johnston, Labour's Secretary of State for Scotland under Winston Churchill, nationalised hydropower in the 1940s and created a network of dams and transmission towers that provided electricity to poor Highlanders for the first time. Cynics might say that that would never have happened under the current planning regime. However, it is perhaps for others to make that point. Hydropower is not some bygone relic of a forgotten age. The Glendoe project, near the banks of Loch Ness, will provide the largest hydropower station for half a century. It will provide clean renewable energy that could provide enough light for every household in Glasgow. Hydro is cheap when oil costs around $100 a barrel, and its operating costs are one tenth of those of gas-fired or coal-fired stations. Is it not time for a hydro revolution? Can the minister tell us what work is being undertaken to develop the potential for new sites and developments? If the minister wants a campaign slogan, I suggest "It's Scotland's water". Scottish Renewables tells me that the potential to increase the capacity of hydropower lies in small-scale projects and run-of-the-river developments. As members will probably know, the Garrad Hassan report for the Scottish Executive in 2001 estimated that there is potential for small-scale developments up to around 30MW. A renewable energy inquiry in 2004 estimated that small-scale projects could provide about 11MW by 2020. I ask the minister to consider three further points when he sums up. First, could he comment on the development of pump storage technology? Secondly, are there any plans to streamline  planning for hydropower, so that local authorities can determine applications under 5MW? Finally, what plans are there to develop more small-scale hydro developments and upgrade them on a strategic basis? Hydropower must, of course, be developed with environmental considerations very much to the fore. Biomass has an important role to play in energy generation. For example, a new factory has been opened in Ross-shire that will allow wood pelletisation to be developed for domestic combined heat and power. That will stop the importing of wood pellets from abroad, which will mark a step change in that technology. On microrenewables, WWF has said that our reliance on centralised energy generation is wasteful, given that two thirds of the energy that is generated is lost in the form of heat and through long-distance transmission. Microrenewables have an increasing role to play. In Wick, for example, hot water from the Old Pulteney distillery is piped to homes, businesses and Caithness general hospital. Microrenewables also play an important role in innovation, particularly in rural areas, where they provide partial energy self-sufficiency. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on her energy efficiency and microgeneration bill proposal. Microrenewables provide local power schemes that are under community control, which can contribute to marginal economies. We need to work smarter, not necessarily harder. Strathclyde University has programmed a computer that can switch off household fridges during the peak period of the "Coronation Street" tea break, which can ensure that we have intelligent and responsive homes. We all know that the task is great, but Scotland has the opportunities and skills to achieve it, not in a self-serving way but as a partner in the UK. With appropriate development and the right technologies at a sustainable scale, and using the proven skills of our Scottish workforce, we can take a lead in Europe and beyond, and we can contribute to meeting our global climate change responsibilities.

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing this important debate and on his speech, which was as articulate and well crafted as usual. I am happy to support and endorse Liam McArthur's campaign. He can be assured of not only my support but that of Margaret Curran, the shadow health team and others. Many years ago, when I worked on the frontline of social services and community care, I was in day-to-day contact with health services. In my  view, there is no issue relating to an agency or a delivery body that is of more immediate importance to the public than health. Academics have, rather grandiosely, described this as Maslow's hierarchy of needs. You will be glad to know, Presiding Officer, that I will not quote Maslow again in the debate. Perhaps an easier way of understanding the point is to think of an example of an elderly woman, living isolated and alone in Kirkwall, who is in pain and in need of urgent medical attention. There are no prizes for guessing what issue would be first, second and, indeed, last on her list of concerns. I was going to talk about the front page of The Orcadian , but Liam McArthur has beaten me to it. I will bow to his local knowledge and experience. I think that everyone in the chamber is united around the solution to the problem that has been raised. Certainly, my view is that there should be a locally based air ambulance. I hope that, when she winds up, the minister will talk about the possibility of a review of the situation. Perhaps the new chief executive of the Scottish Ambulance Service will go back home and think again about the issue. I know that Orkney Islands Council convener has taken a strong initiative on the issue—as has the council itself. As we all know, Loganair previously had the Orkney air ambulance contract, with a fixed-wing aircraft at the hangar in Kirkwall. At that time, there was a crew available, which ensured that medical evacuations could be carried out quickly and efficiently. Now, with the air ambulance service based in Inverness, there are real worries. As I think Rob Gibson mentioned earlier, there are times when a helicopter cannot fly, because of icing, but a fixed-wing aircraft can. I am sure that we need Stewart Stevenson to explain the technicalities of the matter—I bow to the knowledge that he displayed on the matter in the previous debate on this subject. There are also issues concerning refuelling, to which Jim Wallace and Alasdair Morrison referred in the previous debate. If a helicopter is going from Inverness to Orkney and then to Aberdeen, it will need to refuel. That is a big issue in relation to patient care. The public on Orkney feel very vulnerable about the issue, and there are longer-term concerns about whether it might even lead to some depopulation. That concerns me and, I am sure, all members in the chamber. The public need to have confidence in our emergency health care provision. I do not think that I can sum up the issue better than Stewart Stevenson did in the previous debate, when he said:  "The issue is where the aircraft is, not what it is, and the aircraft need to be near the patients."— [ Official Report , 23 February 2006; c 23586.]  I strongly agree with that statement—we need a locally-based air ambulance, and we need it now.

Does the member agree that that would save a lot of travel for those of us who live in Inverness?

I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the debate. I will focus, as Dave Thompson did, on the Highlands and Islands. I will highlight an opportunity for the minister in the creative industries—through film in particular—and a criticism to do with the air route development fund, which many members have mentioned. Members will need no lectures from me on the fact that the Highlands and Islands have a world-class product—they have outstanding natural beauty from the Cuillins to the Cairngorms national park; lochs, hills and castles; ecotourism; the stunning new Eden Court theatre in Inverness; film tourism; the Royal National Mod; and the world mountain bike championships in Fort William.

I strongly echo the member's point—I congratulate the area on its magnificent campaign and look forward to attending that event. The area has iconic wildlife images—visitors can watch the flight of the graceful osprey and the Hooper swans wintering at the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds Insh Marshes reserve. Those natural assets provide a fantastic base for the Highlands and Islands' most important industry. Vital jobs are provided throughout the Highlands and Islands in bed and breakfasts, guest houses, hotels and visitor attractions such as at the Landmark visitor centre in Carrbridge—which I know very well—in what I call "accommodation and song" in the well-known Ceilidh Place in Ullapool, which is owned by the impressive Jean Urquhart, and at the Ice Factory in Kinlochleven. However, as any fresh-faced MBA student would tell us, business has to address the five Ps: product, price, place, promotion and position. They are vital for the tourism industry. I agree with the comments that Peter Lederer, the chief executive of VisitScotland, made this week. He said that to fulfil potential "we must always look at ourselves from the visitor's perspective." I endorse his view that we must develop the five drivers for the industry—extending attraction hours, increasing the length of the season, accelerating marketing, promoting high-value quality goods and persuading businesses to promote others' goods. One fascinating statistic—my last—is that if 10 per cent of visitors spent the same amount as the average visitor to Switzerland, it would be worth half a billion pounds to the Scottish tourism industry. New investment is vital. I would support several Donald Trump golf resorts throughout Scotland. It is an ideal project, although maybe not for crofters living next door. We must have a balance between inward investment and support for indigenous initiative. Most businesses have very hard choices to make—they have to differentiate their product by price or by quality, but not usually both. From the humblest one-bedroom B and B in Corpach to Culloden House hotel—where, allegedly, Bonnie Prince Charlie once stayed, although I suspect that his was not an online booking—quality must be the watchword and there should be no more, "You'll have had your tea." Tourists have to get to the area. Many members have commented on the air route development fund. I will highlight a couple of its successes: Glasgow to Dubai was developed through the  fund, as was the Prestwick to Rome route, the routes from Inverness to Birmingham, Bristol, Newcastle and Dublin, and the Sumburgh to Stansted route. It has been suggested that the fund will still exist, but only for existing routes and it will not help to develop new routes. The fund has dropped by £7 million in the current budget but, as the minister will be aware, the state aid rules do not apply to airports that are run by Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd because none of the airports it operates deals with 1 million passengers or more. The state aid rules argument does not apply at all to HIAL—perhaps the minister can clarify that. I strongly argue against the drop. I would say that, but members need not take my word for it. Liz Cameron, the chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, was quoted in The Scotsman yesterday as saying: "We are extremely disappointed at the plans to axe the ARDF ... This is a magnificent return on an investment of just £14.4m over the past three years and is exactly the kind of project we need to continue." That is what the business community is saying. On a more positive note, I encourage the minister to build on our strengths in the creative industries. Film is crucial—it was developed well and highlighted during the Highlands and Islands year of culture, which was the brainchild of Jack McConnell and Patricia Ferguson. I applaud the work that they have done. Does the minister have any plans to develop film studios, particularly in Lochaber and Inverness? That would allow film crews doing location shots for films such as the Harry Potter films, "Braveheart", "Highlander" and various others not just to film and go, but to extend their stay to use the back-up technology that is available. The "Monarch of the Glen" television series on the BBC was filmed in Badenoch and Strathspey, and at its height had 9 million viewers. I declare an interest, as I was once an extra in the show—I have perhaps the most famous right foot in the chamber. The Badenoch and Strathspey area was very successfully promoted by "Monarch of the Glen", and I strongly support that. Location tourism is vital. The village of Pennan still attracts many tourists, 25 years after the filming of "Local Hero", and 150,000 visitors to Mull cited "Balamory" as the deciding factor of their visit. In conclusion, Presiding Officer—I note the look that you are giving me—tourism is a crucial driver of Scotland's economic success in general and that of the Highlands and Islands in particular. The pathways to success in the industry are quality, skills and training, marketing, infrastructure improvements and the big bang events such as  the year of culture, the year of homecoming and the Commonwealth games. We know the route map to the next stage in the development of tourism. To paraphrase Sir Walter Scott, what we need now is the will to do and the soul to dare.

As a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee—and, perhaps, as a repentant sinner as well—I am grateful for the opportunity to make a few brief comments. The committee did what was written on the tin—we scrutinised the bill. As we have heard, we did not all agree, but we came up with a first-class report. Today, I thank publicly not only the staff and members of the committee, as Patrick Harvie has done, but all the excellent witnesses who appeared before us. I include the minister in that, although I hope that my comments will not damage his future political career. As we have heard, all the witnesses were happy and willing volunteers, apart from one pressed man, representing Transport Scotland, who did not seem keen to appear before the committee, until  he turned up screaming and kicking, handcuffed to John Swinney. Perhaps I overstate my case. We know that this is a simple bill that takes away the tolls from the Forth and Tay road bridges and tidies up the legislation on the Erskine bridge. I thank publicly Helen Eadie for the excellent work that she has done on the issue, especially in her previous proposed member's bill. I support the principle of the bill and will vote for it this evening, but I would like to make a couple of points; the minister may want to respond to them when he winds up. My points relate to consultation, environmental issues—about which we have already heard—modal shift, equity and staffing. I am still confused about why the public were not formally consulted under the new Administration. I am not convinced—although I am happy to be convinced if the minister can come up with some arguments—that because the abolition of bridge tolls was a manifesto commitment there was no reason to consult. What is the legal precedent for such an approach? I understand that the Government will consult on local income tax, which was also a manifesto commitment, so there seems to be a contradiction. However, if the minister can show me the legal precedent for the approach, I will be happy to withdraw my comments. On the environmental issues, the toll impact study was the key piece of information that was available to us. As we have heard, the study suggested that there would be increased congestion and extended peak periods on both bridges. Stuart Hay, from Friends of the Earth Scotland, said in evidence to the committee that toll removal would add 9,000 tonnes of CO 2 to the environment, which he said was 16 times more CO 2 than the Government's whole microrenewables programme currently displaces. The Scottish Government has a debit side on its carbon balance sheet, so where will the credits come from? Where is the evidence of modal shift—the transfer from car to bus, rail or bicycle? Where is the evidence for a transfer to park and ride, or at least to high-occupancy vehicle lanes? I am interested to hear more from the minister on that. In fairness—I believe in being fair in this debate—I have no doubt that the minister is genuinely dedicated to trying to ensure that, in future, trains are more efficient and have greater capacity: he made that clear to the committee. However, in his letter to the committee, which is reproduced on page 165 of the report, he said: "Transport Scotland has no plans to modify or upgrade any section of the trunk road network to minimise the impact of any increase in congestion caused specifically by the removal of tolls",  and went on to say, in response to a suggestion by the City of Edinburgh Council: "Transport Scotland has not considered any proposal to reduce Edinburgh-Fife rail fares". City of Edinburgh Council was also concerned about CO 2 emissions, and it thinks that in future there might be an argument for more air quality management areas in the city. In addition, it suggested bus priority measures on the A90, more park-and-ride facilities in Fife and clean bus-engine technology. I ask the minister to comment on those suggestions when he winds up. Does he share my view that it would have been helpful to complete a strategic environmental assessment, as other members have said? I acknowledge the work that was carried out by the Fife and Tayside members who took part in the original consultation and who articulated well the sense of grievance that communities feel about the tolls on both bridges, particularly given that the Skye and Erskine bridges are now toll free. I do not always sign up to the arguments of environmentalists, but some environmentalists have asked how fair our approach is for non-car users in Kirkcaldy or Wester Hailes. How can there be equity without an increase in public transport projects? It is important that we measure future transport initiatives against a national transport strategy. It is important that there should be more direct intervention by the minister in relation to people who will lose their jobs, particularly on the Forth bridge. The minister has given assurances on that. The evidence on staffing that the committee took from trade unions was compelling. My speech is designed to praise the bill, not to bury it. The Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee supported the principle behind the bill, although there are issues to do with staffing, environmental mitigation and future financing. I support the bill and I commend it to members.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in implementing the Scottish diabetes framework action plan 2006-09. (S3O-1283)

The cabinet secretary will be well aware that diabetes is the main cause of blindness in people of working age and is responsible for half the non-traumatic lower limb amputations. Does she share my view that we need a Scotland-wide high-risk screening programme for people who are more than 45, people who are overweight and people who have a family history of diabetes? In that way, we can tackle a condition that maims, kills and blinds.

What timescale does the minister envisage for dualling the whole of the A9 north of Perth? He will be aware from my written questions that the Scottish Government does not own even a fraction of the land necessary to dual the A9. Is that another Scottish National Party broken promise?

The minister is well aware of the horrific case of five-year-old Danielle Reid from Inverness, who was murdered and whose body was dumped in the Caledonian canal in a suitcase—an image that  shocked the nation. Does he share my view that few local authorities are of a scale that allows them to provide the highly specialised skills that are required to investigate complex child protection cases? Is there a case for a social work equivalent of the Scottish crime squad to provide—centrally—advice, guidance and assistance to all local authorities? That would better protect our vulnerable children and would ensure that cases such as that of Danielle Reid never happen again.

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on his initiative in securing this debate. I also congratulate him on his excellent speech. It is always a pleasure to see a fellow Invernesian do well, and I wish him well for the future. He might expect me to say that, as an ex-member of the IRA. I add quickly that I mean Inverness royal academy. This debate is not about whether we are for or against renewables in a simplistic sense; it is about listening to our local communities, about listening to campaigners—some of whom are in the public gallery today, and about listening to our local authorities and the national park body, which have objected to the 400kV overhead transmission. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I have strong concerns about the proposal—especially as the line runs through the national park. My colleague Jimmy Gray, who is leader of the Labour group on Highland Council, suggested to me earlier today that the solution is to bury the lines under the A9, especially as there will be dualling. Indeed, there would be a double advantage, because we would not need any snow clearance during the winter months. The wider debate concerns the important role that renewables play in our energy mix. We all know the context, but perhaps I will mention a few points. We all know that, for the first time in decades, the United Kingdom is now a net importer of oil and gas; we all know that it does not look like there will be any more nuclear build; and we all know that our existing nuclear plants need so-called life extensions—Hunterston B in 2012 and Torness in 2016. Renewables—wave, tidal, wind, solar and, of course, hydrogen—will all play a vital role in meeting our climate change targets. Being realistic, I accept that some upgrading of transmission lines will be required in the long term. However, we must not forget the important role of microrenewable schemes—which, in effect, consume their own smoke. I am thinking, for example, of wind turbines for individual homes and of biomass combined heat and power for small communities. Let me give members one current example. On Friday, I was at an excellent conference on the future of Dounreay. We discussed the important role of the Pentland firth tidal project, which could supply power for an oil rig decommissioning project at the former Dounreay site without the need for any upgrading of the grid.  There is nothing new in such ideas. In the early 1900s, Kinlochleven had an aluminium smelter that was powered by hydro power. It supplied power to the grid in winter and bought it back in summer. Historians in the chamber will know about the Labour secretary of state Tom Johnston who, under Churchill, nationalised hydropower in the early 1940s. That provided poor Highlanders with electricity for the first time. However, even then—as I know from looking at the history books earlier today—people considered carefully the siting, location, design and build of dams, transmission towers and lines. People were sensitive to the role that such things would play in the economy. I want to make a general point. It is extremely difficult for people who go to inquiries to try to cope with the mass of information that is put before them; but we also have to consider the fact that the companies who make submissions can pay for their contributions to the inquiry by increasing our electricity bills. To use Murdo Fraser's image, it is very much a David and Goliath situation. The Highlands and Islands have built up a vital reputation as a film-friendly environment—an unspoiled landscape with growing potential for the lucrative film market. The granting of national park status was testimony to our unique status. Tourism will be at stake if this project goes ahead. Film locations will be affected. After all, who will film when there are giant turbines, double the size and seven times the volume of the present ones? I object to the proposal and think that no more should be said about it. We should object to the plans. I call for underground and undersea transmission, which would get around the problem. [ Interruption. ]

Does the Lord Advocate share my view that a case can be made for allowing juries sight of analogous previous convictions when defendants have a history of predatory sexual assaults? In the case of Angus Sinclair, what risk management procedures are in place in the event of his release to ensure that he never endangers the public again?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. Like others, I recognise and am grateful for the cross-party way in which the campaign has been run by students, staff and MSPs of all parties and—in some cases—of none. In particular, I  acknowledge the work of Elaine Murray, who spoke earlier. I should perhaps register an interest of sorts in that, many years ago, I used to live and work in Dumfries. At one stage—hard though it may be to think this now—I was a fresh-faced councillor on the former Nithsdale District Council. Although I am not a representative of the area today, I believe that the debate raises common themes about the impact of delivering higher education in rural Scotland. The motion's final clause acknowledges "the importance of the ability of students in rural and island communities to access higher and further education." Of course, that has been a challenge in the Highlands and Islands for many years. In the context of today's debate, it is worth noting the strong collaboration that has existed between the Crichton campus and UHI Millennium Institute through their working together on the dental action plan. That is a good link to consider. It would be churlish not to recognise the work of the new Scottish Government in putting extra funding into the project—I certainly acknowledge it—but we also need to acknowledge the other long-term issues in further and higher education. In the time available, I will discuss some of those issues and will compare and contrast the Crichton project and UHI, with which, as a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am highly familiar. Like UHI, Crichton delivers higher education provision in areas that have been underserved from the point of view of local access. Both institutions need to be allowed to recruit more students and to grow to a viable size—size is a crucial issue in higher education. That can happen only if the Scottish Government allocates funding to the Scottish funding council for additional student places. For example, although UHI caters for just under 3 per cent of the HE students in Scotland, more than 8 per cent of the unfunded, fees-only students in Scotland attend the institution. It is clear that that is a disproportionate burden for a new and developing institution to carry. In addition, further education colleges receive a funding premium that is based on island and rural remoteness, which, as many members have identified, recognises the higher costs in such areas and the relative inability of institutions located there to take advantage of economies of scale. At present, the same funding premium is not available through the higher education stream, so Crichton and UHI face similar challenges in delivering HE to island and rural populations. Another point that has already been made, but which is worth stressing, is that although higher  education for young people in rural areas is vital, we must not forget the lifelong learning agenda, which is about adults of all ages. It is extremely important that they have access to the whole skills agenda, which often requires local access to part-time provision to tie in with their employment and personal commitments. Crichton and, to an even greater extent, UHI offer innovative examples of how that can work in the long term. Given that young people in the south and south-west of Scotland and the Highlands and Islands have left their communities in search of further and higher education, local provision is vital. A key point that is worth stressing is that universities exist not simply because they are nice places, but because they are crucial for the development of our economy, in that they carry out research and development and provide continuing professional development. Another element is the cross-fertilisation that is facilitated through connections with international academic institutions. Cross-fertilisation is extremely important and it would not happen if we did not have universities in the south-west or in the Highlands and Islands. There are another three issues that I want to stress. First, sponsoring universities have a key role to play in further development. UHI has the University of Aberdeen, the University of Edinburgh and the University of Strathclyde. As has been mentioned, Crichton has the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley—in which context Bell College deserves a mention in dispatches—as partners. Sponsoring ensures high standards in teaching and enables the building of strength in research, which is key for the future. Secondly, we should never forget the crucial role that regional development plays. A knowledge-based economy requires strong universities at its core. Just as the south-west needs the Crichton campus, the Highlands and Islands needs UHI to reach the next stage of economic development. Thirdly, we must examine quality. The University of St Andrews has proposed merging its world-class Gatty marine laboratory with UHI's Scottish Association for Marine Science to form the Scottish oceans institute. Such initiatives can be replicated at Crichton in the future. The Crichton university campus and UHI are excellent examples of slightly different models of further and higher education provision for rural and island communities in the south-west and the north of Scotland and its islands. As I have said, I welcome the Government's package for Crichton, but flag up the fact that there remain long-term issues that must be examined. UHI needs to move to the next stage, which is the attainment of full university status. I will meet the cabinet secretary in a few weeks to discuss that further.  Living in rural and island communities should not be a barrier to education and training. We must keep young people in the communities in which they are born and brought up to ensure the future development of those communities. We should never forget the need to provide lifelong learning opportunities for adults of all ages so that they can maximise their potential. Education is the greatest agent of economic development. Long-term, sustainable solutions are necessary if we are to revitalise our rural and island communities.

I welcome the opportunity to debate diabetes, which is appropriate given that it was recently national diabetes week, to which the motion refers. I thank the 37 members who have given their support to the motion. Some may argue that the last members' business debate before the summer recess is the graveyard shift. I welcome the hardy members who have delayed their escape to the sun to contribute to this evening's debate, although there is perhaps a question about how much the sun is shining this evening. I warmly welcome the visitors in the public gallery this evening, particularly the representatives of Diabetes UK Scotland. My proposition tonight is straightforward. At a naive level, it is about prevention being better than cure. The question this evening for me is: how do we detect and treat the 60,000 undiagnosed diabetics in Scotland? I will argue that high-risk screening, particularly for type 2 diabetes, through a threefold focus on those who are overweight, on those who have a family history of diabetes and on those who are over 45 would be the most successful tactic. My interest in the subject is twofold. First, about 10 years ago, when I was first elected to another place, I had a tour round Raigmore hospital in Inverness and met a diabetic nurse in the clinic in the unit there. She convinced me to take an interest in diabetes, which has continued to this day.  The second reason for my interest is that one of my close family relatives, who tragically is no longer with us, had diabetes for more than 70 years. He taught me that it is possible to lead a normal life with well controlled and well maintained pen-needle injections. I was for eight years the secretary of the all-party group on diabetes at Westminster. At a reception that I chaired a few years ago, I met Gary Mabbutt, who football fans in the chamber might know was once the captain of Tottenham Hotspur. I mention his name in the debate because he was diabetic and was an international player for England. He told me before the reception that he had been all ready to go to Mexico with England for the World Cup, when he suddenly had a phone call from the England team doctor, who told him that he was not going to Mexico because he was diabetic. Of course, that was a ludicrous decision because he was probably the fittest person in the team—it was a discriminatory view of diabetics. I do not have time to talk about that in detail, but I flag it up as an issue. I am sure that many diabetics who are in, for example, the police, the fire services or the armed forces can relate to the point about discrimination. So what is diabetes? The British Diabetic Association was the predecessor body of Diabetes UK Scotland—incidentally, its original members included H G Wells and D H Lawrence—and it defined diabetes as "the result of impairments in the body's normal abilities to produce or use insulin. This natural substance is vital for control of blood glucose levels. People with diabetes are vulnerable to various forms of long-term damage to their blood vessels and vital organs." So what are the effects of diabetes? I am sure that members will be well aware that diabetes is the main cause of blindness for people of working age. Half of all non-traumatic lower-limb amputations are due to diabetes and the incidence of heart disease and stroke is two to three times higher than the average among diabetics. There is also higher perinatal mortality among babies born to women who have diabetes. Highland NHS Board tells me that—at its local level—people with diabetes have higher admission rates to hospital, longer stays and more outpatient attendances. I recently asked the Minister for Public Health, Shona Robison, who is present for the debate, for a breakdown of the number of people in Scotland who are diagnosed as having diabetes. Her answer of 14 June told me that there are 193,000 diabetics in Scotland. In addition, of course, around 60,000 people have the condition but are undiagnosed. Those figures break down to suggest that about 5,000 people in the Highlands and 4,745 in  Tayside, which covers the minister's constituency, have diabetes. That means, if my maths is right—which is not guaranteed, I hasten to add—that there are about 800 undiagnosed diabetes sufferers in each Scottish parliamentary constituency. That would mean that scores of staff in Parliament and perhaps one or two MSPs have diabetes without knowing it. We must also consider the issue in an international context. The St Vincent declaration was adopted by 32 countries in an attempt to tackle diabetes internationally—the United Kingdom adopted the declaration in 1992. Members know that there are two types of diabetes: type 1 normally develops early in life and sufferers tend to be dependent on insulin, while type 2 is known as maturity onset diabetes or non-insulin diabetes mellitus, and about 80 per cent of diabetics suffer from it. Screening for type 2 is vital, but it requires planning that tackles local needs within a national framework, so the key is targeting. I do not suggest for a second that we should have random or mass-population targeting. That would not work and Diabetes UK Scotland does not support it. It is not viable because of the costs and workload that would be involved and because of the number of false positive results that would be produced. We should view screening as a form of prevention rather than as a cure. That would allow general practitioners or, indeed, diabetic and practice nurses to offer it earlier to patients who are most at risk—normally, people who are over 45, or people who have a family history of diabetes or people who are overweight. Early detection is vital. Diabetes UK Scotland reports that most diabetics suffer the condition for between three and seven years before diagnosis. Early detection will reduce the number of patients suffering from complications and it will reduce costs. That detection can be done by a simple and inexpensive urine or blood test that takes about 30 seconds. I accept that no perfect screening solution exists, but a GP who detects diabetes through a urine test can follow up the findings with a blood test. Members will be aware that the United Kingdom National Screening Committee, which advises the Westminster and Holyrood Governments on screening protocols, has recommended that screening for sub-groups of the population that are at high risk of type 2 diabetes is feasible, but should be part of an integrated programme to detect and manage cardiovascular risk factors. Although the Scottish diabetic framework of 2002 and the diabetes action plan of 2006 made no clear commitment to screening, I congratulate Andy Kerr on the work that he carried out, as a minister, in developing diabetic retinopathy  screening for all people over 12 with diabetes. However, a recent health technology assessment of screening for type 2 diabetes shows clear evidence that it would be extremely helpful, particularly in conjunction with awareness raising campaigns. In passing, I will highlight some examples of very good practice—

In conclusion, we have a great opportunity to raise the bar in health care and to lead the way in western Europe by introducing a high-risk targeted screening policy for type 2 diabetes. Not only would that be cost effective, it would, on an individual level, tackle a condition that blinds, maims and kills. Together, we can create fresh vigour to slay Scotland's silent killer.

First, I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary to her new post. I wish her well with her challenging and demanding portfolio. Does the cabinet secretary share my view that equality of opportunity is a key principle in the development of higher education? What action does she propose to redress the unequal geographical distribution of universities, with particular reference to the Highlands and Islands?

As a new member, it is an honour and a privilege to make my first speech in Parliament. As a highlander who has also lived in rural Dumfriesshire, it is opportune that I am speaking in a debate about rural development. Before I proceed, I pay tribute to the former member of the Scottish Parliament for the Highlands and Islands Maureen Macmillan, who, as members know, retired before the recent election. She was dedicated and hard working and I am sure that members would like to pay tribute to her work, not just in the Highlands and Islands, but in the Parliament. [ Applause. ] I add a belated welcome to the new Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, who is clearly an individual with dynamism and energy. I wish him well in his new role. I hope that those remarks do not damage his political career.

Indeed—or mine. Give me a chance—I am in only my second minute.  Before I turn to rural development in the Highlands and Islands, on which I will focus, I want to say something about the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development conference last year in Edinburgh, which I attended and at which I met the Mexican minister for rural development, who told me about his work to help the poor in rural areas in Mexico. The Government there built and shipped in hundreds of greenhouses to develop agriculture. However, the community learned that the most productive method of state intervention was not the direct provision of greenhouses, but the development of a market for greenhouses—their construction, distribution, marketing and sales—in Mexico and the whole of South America. If that story has a moral for the cabinet secretary, it is that he must listen to rural communities and should not assume that he knows all the answers. Even if the rural community does not know the difference between voluntary modulation and the planet Zog, it will know about dualling the A9; it will know about rolling out broadband; and it will know about ensuring full university status for the UHI Millennium Institute. I should declare an interest, as my wife works for that fine institution. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will join me in campaigning for all three of those initiatives. Throughout Europe and, indeed, the world, rural policy is evolving. The OECD has described a "new rural paradigm", in which policies and strategies are based on place rather than sector. Policies work with local communities to identify their priorities and integrate them into a regional and national strategy, and public money is invested in ways that deliver the greatest public good in those areas. In recent years, Scotland's environmental organisations have become a formidable campaigning force. I commend RSPB Scotland, Scottish Environment LINK and others for getting their voices clearly heard in the rural debate. However, the social dimension of Scotland's rural communities has perhaps been underrepresented in the debate. I hope that the minister will reach out to those hundreds or even thousands of citizens whose work and lives are so important to sustaining vibrant and successful rural communities. In my previous post at the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, I was privileged to meet hundreds of people in the voluntary sector throughout rural Scotland. The work that they do—some of it paid, some of it unpaid—is the very lifeblood of rural Scotland, delivering services locally and building the social capital that sustains real rural communities. That does not happen by chance. It is not an inevitable by-product of economic success. The work that those people do in their communities needs to be recognised,  valued and, most important, given the funding to make it sustainable. I am sure that many people would ask, "What did the Labour Party ever do for rural development?" I would take them back to the 1940s, when Tom Johnston, the Labour Secretary of State for Scotland, nationalised hydro power, giving electricity to poor highlanders for the first time. I would take them back to 1965, when Willie Ross, the Secretary of State for Scotland, created the Highlands and Islands Development Board and turned around a massive population decline in the Highlands and Islands. I would take them back to 1999, when Tony Blair created the first national minimum wage. It was my privilege to vote for that legislation. The votes continued all night and I left at 9 am, happy that the bill had finally been passed. I have to confess that, unwashed and unshaved, crossing Westminster bridge, I was happy, although not in a self-serving, party-political way; I was glad to protect the waiter in Fort William, the bar staff in Galashiels and the security guard in Inverness. We all know the rural development challenges that we face in rural areas: distance; remoteness; peripherality; low population density; lack of access to services; and low gross domestic product. My great personal concern is the loss of young people from remote and rural areas. However, there are great opportunities. It is better to light one candle than forever to face the darkness. Let us build on the comparative advantage of the culture and the environment. Yes, the hills and the glens are important, but this is more about the character of the people. Rural development needs the intelligence and individuality of the people, but we need to develop the life sciences; create green jobs; build clusters of renewables; stimulate research and development; and link industry with higher education. We need to aim for more headquarters in the Highlands and Islands for enterprises that have Scotland, UK and world reach, such as Tulloch Homes and Orion Engineering Services. The acid test of the new Scottish rural development programme will be how it delivers for our most fragile and remote rural areas and for the young, the disadvantaged and the dispossessed. They deserve the spirit of leadership and vision that lead to the creation of the HIDB and the minimum wage. Our communities look to the Parliament for action. Let us give them progress, not procrastination.