It is quite difficult to follow that historic vote. I thank all colleagues who signed my motion to allow it to be debated. I also thank the supporters of Tibet who are members of the cross-party group on Tibet and the members of the Tibet support group Grampian for their tireless work in my area in fundraising for cultural and educational projects in Tibet and highlighting human rights issues there to the people of Grampian, sometimes on cold and windy days on Banchory High Street. My thanks also go to Dr Martin Mills, the director of the Scottish centre for Himalayan research at the University of Aberdeen, whose knowledge of what is happening in the region is a great asset. I thank him for his briefing. I cannot forget the passionate supporters of Tibet from the University of Edinburgh who add much to our cross-party group meetings. The main reason for bringing the motion to the Parliament is to highlight the extraordinary and distressing actions that some Tibetans are moved to take in protest against Chinese policies in their region. In the past five years, 127 Tibetans have self-immolated—or, in other words, set themselves alight—overwhelmingly resulting in death. Self-immolation began in 2009. In the early days, it was mainly Buddhist monks in the Tibetan areas of Kham and Amdo, which lie outside the Tibetan autonomous region. The practice began at Kirti monastery in Ngaba. During the Chinese Communist Party’s 18th national party congress in Beijing in November 2012, tragically, almost one Tibetan a day was self-immolating, by which time it was mainly farmers, nomads, students and schoolchildren. Since then, self-immolation has decreased, but that has mainly been due to extremely draconian oppression by the Chinese authorities. There has been a heavy military crackdown in communities where self-immolations have occurred—restrictions on movement, the closure of satellite communications, restrictions on mobile phones and bans on the sale of SIM cards. In many cases, friends and relatives have been threatened or bribed by authorities so that self-immolations are denied or even covered up. There have been threats that state support and services such as electricity will be withdrawn from whole communities that are associated with self-immolations and that monasteries that have held the funerals of self-immolators will be closed. It should be said that self-immolation seems to be part of a wider and escalating pattern of protest and public suicide in the People’s Republic of China but, in Tibet, the Chinese authorities view those protests as splittist or about sovereignty. That has led to the collective punishments that I described and the application of the crime of intentional homicide to all those aiding, abetting, encouraging or even photographing self-immolation. There have been widespread communications blackouts, and prison sentences have been imposed for disseminating information on such protests. As only 4 per cent of any self-immolation protests have involved a demand for independence, we must ask what is driving people to do this. It is a response to restrictions that are being put on religious freedoms, language rights, access to employment and the destruction of water resources and grazing lands by large-scale mining projects. The restrictions on Buddhist religious life remain one of the dominant bones of contention in Tibetan areas, with the day-to-day management of Buddhist monasteries being increasingly dominated by party officials, and impositions being placed on large religious gatherings. Language restrictions exist, as Tibetan has been increasingly phased out as the language of instruction in Tibetan state schools, hence the self-immolation by students and—distressingly—schoolchildren. The pollution of water resources and grazing lands has been the result of the substantial growth in the mining of oil, copper and gold resources, which has also resulted in the large-scale relocation of populations. Airport construction has also attracted self-immolation protests, along with other forms of protests. For example, the construction of Gannan airport has been resisted because it has involved building on a mountain that is sacred to local Tibetans. The Chinese Government has been encouraging unrestricted migration into the Tibetan region, and this has been particularly noticeable in urban Lhasa. In reading up for this debate, I was struck by the writing of Tsering Woeser, an ethnic Tibetan human rights activist who was educated in Beijing and who, as a result of her abilities in Mandarin and English, has been able to communicate to the outside world the plight of her people and what she calls the Chinese Government’s attempts at “beautifying” Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, which involves modern infrastructure being built at the expense of the city’s historical architecture. Woeser has called on the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to stop the destruction of the ancient city of Lhasa, which is part of the destruction of the traditional Tibetan landscape, environment and culture. There have been many delegations to China, led by the First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs and other members of the Scottish Government. How can we persuade the Chinese authorities that the repression of culture is not a sustainable way forward in any country? Would the cabinet secretary consider writing to UNESCO to encourage it to do more to protect Tibetan heritage sites, and thereby the culture, and negate the pressure that results in some Tibetans feeling the need to undertake the horrific act of self-immolation?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what role oil and gas revenues will play in any post-referendum negotiations with the United Kingdom Government. (S4O-02864)

I thank the minister for that full answer. I take it that he agrees with the former Scottish Office economists, the Cuthberts, who say that Scotland deserves billions of pounds in compensation for the way that oil revenue has been squandered since the 1970s. What steps can he take to recompense the Scots for that?

This debate has already proved to be lively and diverse because—as is usual with discussions over CAP—nothing is simple or straightforward. Indeed, the cabinet secretary and his staff have an impossible task in reconciling all the competing interests. I am glad that we are having the debate now, as part of the consultation stage, because from some of the frankly hysterical correspondence that I have had from NFUS in the north-east, members might think that everything was done and dusted, and that everything was doom and gloom as far as farmers were concerned. However, the overreaction of NFUS office bearers in the north-east does not seem to have been replicated among the wider farming community, which is evidenced by the optimism of the Bank of Scotland survey and the reporting in The Press and Journal—a newspaper that has its finger on the pulse of the rural community throughout Scotland. Its headline states that “Survey results are at odds with leader’s claims over CAP”. Let me return to the straitjacket in which the cabinet secretary finds himself operating. Europe broke the link between payment and production, so as a result the Scottish Government is trying to support production while being barred from doing so by the EU. We also have the Conservatives and their coalition partners arguing in EU negotiations for single farm payments to be phased out altogether, so I find Alex Fergusson’s words a bit hollow. Things could be so much worse if Scottish farmers were left to the UK Government. That is on top of the UK Government’s refusal to pass on the full convergence uplift: refusal that all parties in this Parliament have agreed is unacceptable. Perhaps some of farmers’ concerns would be overcome if we were arguing about how to divide a much bigger cake, rather than just a slice. It would be helpful if NFUS in Grampian put more of its energies into lobbying the Westminster Government on that. As my colleague Christian Allard has said, if the French Government treated its farmers in that way, seriously obnoxious-smelling material would be dumped in front of the French Parliament and the Élysée palace. I note that the suggested modulation rate of 9.5 per cent is lower than the rates for England, at 12 per cent, or Wales, at 15 per cent. It is also, of course, lower than that which has been proposed by the Labour Party in Scotland, which proposes the full 15 per cent, as in Wales. We have a situation in which Scotland is discussing cuts when other countries throughout Europe are deciding how to invest their increases. It is little wonder then, that support among farmers for independence and a yes vote is moving in the right direction, as they see the unfairness of the Westminster Government withholding funding and showing little support for the agriculture sector. In contrast, we have the Scottish Government’s active promotion of Scotland’s food and drink sector, which now accounts for 18 per cent of Scotland’s overseas exports, compared with a figure of less than 1.5 per cent for the UK as a whole. We know that Scotland can sell all the beef and lamb that it produces, whether it is sold at home or abroad, and we have the capacity to process all the product. Farmers who continue to strive to produce a premium product are rewarded with higher prices and a ready market for their products. The cabinet secretary has a difficult job to do in encouraging our hill farmers to increase their cattle heads and sheep flocks to meet demand, which will only increase rather than decrease. I am heartened by the recent Bank of Scotland survey that showed that 32 per cent of farmers believe that they will increase their beef operation and only 12 per cent will decrease it, and that 29 per cent of sheep farmers anticipate increasing their operations. Of course, the demand for barley increases as the whisky industry surges forward. Although I did not agree with much of what Claire Baker said, I agree with her that the farming sector could make much better use of pillar 2 and SRDP money. We must increase headage and carry out more land improvement to compensate for the fact that far too much prime agricultural land has been sold off at high prices to developers for housing. I commend the cabinet secretary for his work, and I know that he will find the best way forward for the whole of Scotland.

I must admit that when I saw this debate listed in the Business Bulletin last week, I did not immediately want to get involved in it, but on closer inspection I realised that the issues that were raised in the inquiry have probably been raised with the majority of MSPs by their constituents at one time or another. I thank the Justice Committee for finding time in its busy schedule—it has lots of bills going to it—to get involved in this post-legislative scrutiny. I know how difficult it is to find time to do such work. My interest is twofold. I am interested as a constituency member who has constituents with on-going problems with factors involved in land maintenance, as already mentioned by Christine Grahame and others. I am also interested as convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which next week will begin consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which covers many areas relating to housing, including the right to buy, licensing requirements for mobile home sites with permanent residents, allocation of social housing and the use of the Scottish secure tenancy. It also includes the amendment of local authority powers to enforce repairs and maintenance in private homes, a registration system for letting agents, and part 3, which, among other things, “allows local authorities to apply to the private rented housing panel for enforcement of the repairing standard, setting out the procedure for such applications and the right of appeal.” I hope that Government officials who are dealing with the Housing (Scotland) Bill will have read the Justice Committee’s report and its recommendations, which I certainly will quiz them on. I will also ensure that my committee’s clerks have a conversation with the Justice Committee’s clerks, to see whether anything can be included in the bill to strengthen it and deal with some of the issues raised by the Justice Committee’s inquiry. John Lamont articulated very well much of what I wanted to say about land management issues. I am a constituency member for Aberdeen, an area in which there is a housing boom. It is a large part of my constituency casework. Like John Lamont, I am concerned that home owners are not always well informed of their legal obligations on the purchase of a home. I remember that when my husband and I purchased our house more than 20 years ago, the solicitor told us among other things that we could not keep chickens. However, Mike Marriott from the Greenbelt Action Group said in evidence that buyers do not have the obligations spelled out to them, which I think is more common. Like John Lamont, I believe that ideally green spaces in new estates should be looked after by local councils, as they look after green spaces in older estates. As a regional member, I was at the meeting with Greenbelt in 2011 that Christian Allard mentioned, which was very heated, as he said. It really is sad that these situations arise simply because companies such as Greenbelt cannot agree with house owners what level of land maintenance their fees should cover. As Alison McInnes said, there is not a simple solution because Greenbelt owns the land, so changing factors will not necessarily make much difference. I sympathise with Patricia Ferguson and Sandra White on the factoring of the beautiful Glasgow tenements, which lots of people have bought to let, meaning that there is not the pride in those lovely tenements.

I welcome the report, which I am sure will inform my committee’s deliberations on the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

Will Willie Rennie give way?

Following on as it does from the important and exciting announcements on childcare and free school meals, the cabinet secretary’s further announcement on this issue today is welcome. The importance of these announcements should not be underestimated as part of the Government’s aspiration to fundamentally transform the world of work in Scotland and enhance the part that women can play in that better future for the country. In Scotland as part of the UK, women’s participation in the labour market lags behind other EU countries. For example, Sweden has the highest rate of female participation in the workforce in the EU and Finland and Denmark, too, are above the EU average. In Denmark, 79 per cent of mothers with children under six work, while in the UK the figure is 59 per cent. I also note that a 1 per cent increase in Scotland’s economic activity rate is the equivalent of an extra 30,000 people in the labour market. Such policies have a clear impact on gender equality. For example, the top four countries in the World Economic Forum gender gap index are Iceland, Finland, Norway and Sweden, and Denmark, too, is in the top 10. Moreover, our Nordic neighbours are leading the way in standards of care for the elderly, and those countries also have the highest satisfaction rates. As we can see, our ambitions for an independent Scotland require transformational policies that no Westminster Government has ever contemplated. Indeed, a Scottish Government analysis shows that many women in Scotland are already and will be worse off as a result of Westminster changes to the benefits system. According to an Institute for Fiscal Studies analysis, single female households will lose out most from welfare reforms from 2010 to 2015. Our opponents say that focusing on childcare is a cynical ploy to woo the female vote for independence, and even today many of them, particularly those on the Labour benches, do not understand the pivotal nature of childcare provision in growing the economy and reducing gender inequality. However, although we have seen that expanding childcare will in itself increase job opportunities and despite the fact that Professor Ailsa McKay has written that “Every woman in Scotland should welcome the commitment to a ‘transformative expansion’ in childcare”, women who are in employment or who want to return to work face other barriers. The women’s employment summit, which was held in September in partnership with the Scottish Government and the Scottish Trades Union Congress, discussed such barriers and, as a result, a number of strands of work are progressing. For example, the Government is funding the women into work project, which tracks the progress of and outcomes for women on employment programmes; the careerWISE Scotland project, which builds on the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s “Tapping all our Talents” report, is working to step up action to encourage young women and girls to consider careers in science and engineering; and the cross-directorate occupational segregation working group, which aims to tackle occupational segregation, has also been re-established. While those proposals are progressing, the industry sectors are picking up on this issue. As I think Nanette Milne mentioned at question time earlier this afternoon, Aberdeen Journals through The Press and Journal energy supplement and the energy voice website and women in the oil and gas industry are beginning to challenge male chauvinism and domination in that industry. In the renewables sector, the women in renewable energy Scotland forum, or WiRES, has recently been launched with the aim of increasing women’s participation and progression in that industry through networking, mentoring and information sharing. Finally, I welcome the University of Aberdeen’s intention to celebrate this year’s international women’s day by hosting a women’s world event and inviting high-profile women, led by Anne Glover, to inspire other women. As usual, Iain Gray moans but conveniently fails to mention that employment law, equal pay, the minimum wage and so on still reside with Westminster. We know the dynamic direction of travel with independence; we know the no action that comes from Westminster; and I support the motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the devolution of air passenger duty would have on the economy and the integration of modes of transport. (S4O-02733)

The minister said that the cost of air passenger duty to the Scottish economy was £210 million. Can he give an estimate of what it means to the north-east?

Will the member give way?

If I had a Christmas wish, it would be that we did not have to debate this subject. The campaign about a child’s Christmas wish that its parents did not shout and fight is one of the saddest that I have known. We have no way of knowing whether the increase in recorded domestic abuse incidents represents an increase in domestic violence itself or a greater willingness to report cases in the knowledge that such abuse will be taken seriously by the police and other services. I welcome the 62 per cent increase in funding since 2007 to £34.5 million between 2012 and 2015, and the comments from Scottish Women’s Aid that, as the awareness of the issue increases and professionals receive more training, more women are encouraged to report the abuse that they experience rather than suffer in silence. I hope that it is the former. I continue to be appalled by the discrimination against women that I come across and the lack of awareness among men of what is and is not acceptable behaviour. For example, I have received some appalling comments from pretty prominent people in the community about a recent high-profile sexual assault court case in Aberdeen. The idea that several women individually should not report behaviour that they find unacceptable and threatening shows a total lack of respect for women. I agree with Jackie Baillie that attitudes are the key to eliminating domestic violence. Until we live in a country that has a thread of equality running through every single aspect of society, we will have men who believe that it is acceptable to treat women as their inferiors and to commit acts of violence, whether physical or psychological, against them. That thread means parents giving the same opportunities to their children, whether boys or girls, and not steering them into gender-stereotyped roles from an early age. It means schools ensuring that all pupils have access to and assistance with science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects so that all career opportunities are open to women and men. It means equal pay for work of equal value, and that means giving caring and nurturing roles the gravitas and value that they deserve. I welcome the advent of a strategy that is aimed at tackling all forms of violence against women, and hope that a very large part of it will be about education about violence against women being totally unacceptable and as illegal as drink-driving or not wearing a seat belt. However, it should also be about penalties. That is why I welcome the proposed changes on the requirement for corroboration. Far too often, constituents of mine who have been subject to domestic violence have been unable to get redress in the courts. Those constituents have received excellent support from the police domestic violence unit in Aberdeen, but they, like the victims, are frustrated that allegations do not proceed to court, let alone conviction. I know that, in the north-east, the procurator fiscal is as frustrated as the victims and the police. The sooner corroborative evidence does not have to be from another person, but can be other obvious factors, the better. Rhoda Grant should think hard about the consequences of what she proposed—forcing prostitution underground and hugely increasing the harm to women. That is why the proposal is not supported by groups that work in the area. The song goes: “no one knows what goes on behind closed doors.” Those lyrics, like the sentiment, must be part of the past, not the future of a modern, safe, stronger and equal Scotland.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the state of cleanliness at Aberdeen maternity hospital. (S4O-02689)

I am glad that the cabinet secretary believes that NHS Grampian is in a position to improve and maintain the high standards that people in the north-east expect of Aberdeen maternity hospital. My colleagues in the north-east and I recently met Richard Carey, who is concerned about some equipment that is used in the hospital, especially the beds. Will the cabinet secretary work with the health board to ensure that the beds in the birthing unit are suitable for what they are required to do?

It was entirely predictable that the Labour Party would use its business slot today to debate housing, given Mr Kelly’s question in the white paper debate last Wednesday. However, the logic of its doing so escapes me, as the assertions in the motion can be demolished paragraph by paragraph—so let me do that.

Presiding Officer, I thought that the convention was that members are allowed at least a minute before interventions. Let us stick to that, shall we? The motion states that “Scotland is facing a housing crisis” and that “the number of new homes built in 2012 was the lowest since the post-war era”. I wonder why that is. It would not be anything to do with the complete collapse of the economy that was presided over by the previous Labour Government at Westminster, would it? The selective amnesia of the Labour Party—and, we now hear, of the Tories—is breathtaking. The decline in house building is entirely due to the downturn in private sector housing construction. With banks refusing to lend to them, many house builders are going to the wall and there is a lack of confidence among house sellers and buyers as they see the value of properties decline. While the Labour Party sits and moans, “Woe, woe and three times woe,” the SNP is taking action and intervening wherever it can with its currently limited powers. We know from its record of inaction that that would be the Labour Party’s reaction. Even in the good times, before the crisis, Labour’s record on house building was woeful. It is worth repeating that Labour built only six council houses in its last four years in government compared with the 3,724 council homes that were completed by the SNP Government in the six years to June 2013. Also in the six years to June 2013, 27,023 housing association homes were completed—a rise of 16 per cent over the six years from 2002 to 2007, when Labour was in power. That can be said to be typical of Labour, as in Wales Labour has built only eight council houses in the past few years. In addition, when the SNP in Aberdeen called for the council to borrow to build more council homes, both Labour and the Tories rejected that call. Despite the 26 per cent reduction in the capital budget from Westminster, planned investment in housing over the four years to 2015-16 will exceed £1.35 billion. Of course we would like to do more, but we are constrained by the financial settlement. James Kelly rose— I am not aware that anybody on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee or the Finance Committee suggested changes to the budget to increase spending on housing or said where such increased spending would come from. Is James Kelly going to tell us?

It is funny that we are still managing to build more houses—we know how to use the money better. The motion mentions that house builders are concerned about separation. I am not aware of that, but I am aware of a Homes for Scotland press release from 27 September, which said: “Home builders herald launch of ‘game changing’ Help to Buy scheme in Scotland.” We know that house builders would not have adequate house-building standards if those were left to the industry itself—the industry admits that—but how many fewer houses in both the public and private sectors would be falling below tolerable standard, especially with regard to insulation, if housing standards since the war had been set to cope with Scottish weather conditions, rather than those several degrees warmer in the south-east of England? It is because housing standards have been set in the south-east of England that this Government is having to spend so much on insulation schemes in Scotland. I thought that we could agree that the homelessness legislation had cross-party support and was being well implemented across local authorities, notwithstanding some local difficulty in East Lothian. However, at the weekend we found out that Glasgow City Council is neglecting and ignoring its duty on homelessness. Organisations such as Turning Point Scotland and Glasgow Housing Association itself will be horrified, as both those bodies were proud of the legislation and their work on meeting their obligations. Indeed, Turning Point has said that international bodies that it met were envious of the legislation. I said at the outset that this debate was predictable. James Kelly, like so many of his better together colleagues, opened his mouth last week before his eyes were opened to the white paper. The white paper has more paragraphs than there were council houses built when Labour was in office. Finally, Presiding Officer—

I want to address the personal attack in the motion on the Minister for Housing and Welfare. Mary Fee should be reminded that in the previous parliamentary session, her Labour colleagues frequently indulged in that practice—little good it did them. As a woman, Mary Fee should reject the tactics of the male chauvinist dinosaurs in her party. Margaret Burgess is an inspired choice of minister. Her career in a citizens advice bureau gave her—

She works tirelessly. This morning she was in Perthshire; after the debate she will be in Glasgow—

The Housing (Scotland) Bill is coming forward—she has been working on that. I support Margaret—

9. To ask the Scottish Government what representations it has received regarding a weighting allowance for public sector workers in the Aberdeen travel-to-work area. (S4O-02630)

Given the immense pressure on the recruitment and retention of public sector employees, such as teacher and nurses, in the Aberdeen travel-to-work area, does the cabinet secretary think that there should be an allowance similar to the London weighting allowance for such workers?

Last week in the chamber, we had some excellent personal and emotional speeches about individual freedoms and equalities during the stage 1 debate on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. Today, a similar emotion flows on the SNP benches in relation to the freedom and equality that we seek for our country, Scotland, and its citizens. In a few months, it will be 40 years since I joined the Scottish National Party. Getting to the point at which we have a white paper on Scotland’s future has been a long, hard slog for not only many on these benches but, more important, as Mark McDonald said, the thousands of members and supporters of the SNP for many decades. Some of us have been more closely involved than others in that individual struggle and sacrifice. It is entirely due to the opportunity that I had to observe Westminster and how it works at close quarters that I came to realise that the legislators and their advisers knew nothing and cared less about Scotland and its needs and that full self-government is the best way for Scotland’s citizens to be served by their legislators and for the country as a whole to reach its full potential. That belief was further reinforced during my 14 years working in the oil and gas industry, when I saw those resources squandered by the Westminster Government. For successive UK Governments to swallow up the revenue from those finite resources was a scandal. We are the only country bar Iran not to have an oil fund—I will come back to that. Fortunately, voting yes can stop that and begin to leave a legacy for future generations. In an independent Scotland, we would have full responsibility for oil and gas reserves and would maximise the safe production of those reserves. I welcome Sir Ian Wood’s interim report on the review of maximising recovery from the UK continental shelf, in which he comments that fiscal instability is a significant factor in underperformance in the UK basin. Over the past decade, there have been 16 subsequent changes to the fiscal regime. Those frequent changes—which have often been made without prior consultation with the industry—have earned the UK a reputation for fiscal instability, inhibiting new investment and, more important, decreasing the lifespan of some fields and damaging the Scottish economy. There is no doubt that operators place a big premium on working under a stable and predictable tax regime, so that tax returns from investments can be appropriately evaluated. That stability is also important to underpin Aberdeen’s position as the oil and gas capital of Europe, a position that has built up over many decades. It is recognised as a centre of excellence in the field. In 2012, oil and gas production is estimated to have contributed around £22 billion to the Scottish gross domestic product. In 2013, oil and gas was the largest single sector in the FTSE 100 index of leading companies. It is a sector in which Scottish firms are leading and global players. Scotland has the vast bulk of the UK’s oil and gas reserves, which has an estimated wholesale value of £1.5 trillion. As well as in the North Sea, there are substantial reserves west of Scotland including, as Chic Brodie has discovered, in the Clyde. It is estimated that we have the largest conventional oil reserve in the EU and around 60 per cent of the EU’s total reserves. We also have the second largest volume of proven gas reserves after the Netherlands. Despite that, Ruth Davidson says that we would not be in the EU.

I am so fed up with hearing that Scotland is too poor and stupid to look after its reserves. On 18 September next year, Scotland will have the opportunity to gain the stewardship of the oil and gas assets for the benefit of the nation. We can introduce a stable and predictable fiscal regime, with an expert commission established to consider appropriate fiscal and regulatory regimes. We can use our position as a major hydrocarbon producer to drive the most ambitious low-carbon economy transformation in our country. Scotland has many natural competitive advantages for the development of carbon capture and storage, for example, yet Westminster drags its feet on that. Of course we can establish an oil fund; of course we can look after ourselves. I support the motion with the whole of my being.

On that point, does the cabinet secretary agree that adaptations to housing provided by registered social landlords and community transport are just as important to the integration of health and social care?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding transport issues. (S4O-02612)

I understand that Aberdeen City Council is asking the Scottish Government for funding for preparatory work or a feasibility study in order to introduce trams to Aberdeen. Given the fiasco that happened here in the city of Edinburgh over trams, the on-going work on the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the introduction of hydrogen buses in Aberdeen, would it not be wiser to wait and see the impact of those three projects before committing scarce taxpayers’ money to that request?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that it was not the Government but BAE Systems that made the decision, and that it will have taken the future of Scotland, whatever it will be, into account?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Community Transport Association and what assistance it can provide to this sector, in light of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report on community transport. (S4O-02567)

I thank the minister for his comprehensive reply. Will he advise me how the money for buses will be allocated, by whom, and what groups will be eligible to apply? Also, is that substantial sum for just one year or can the same sum be found over a number of years? Buses get old over a number of years.

Will the member give way?

Does Lewis Macdonald concede that the KPMG study was probably a desktop exercise that did not take into account the oil and gas sector in Aberdeen and the north-east?

I am pleased to be speaking towards the end of this debate because, as convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, it has been interesting for me to hear views from members across the chamber on a matter that occupies much of our time in committee. What strikes me most about the current Government’s infrastructure investment compared with that of previous Governments is that it is for the whole of Scotland. The Government is the first that has as a priority to connect all our cities with dual carriageways, and the effect of that should not be underestimated. It will be a key factor in convincing people that they can still live in rural towns and villages, many of which are not on rail routes, and be able to get access to employment further afield. I am pleased that the projects are progressing well and that, for example, consultation with communities along the A96 is taking place at present. I have to take issue with those who complain about and oppose the dualling of these roads. I think that they come to the issue from a central-belt perspective. The central belt is already well served by a network of motorways and dual carriageways. Those who are against improvements to the road network to and in the north and north-east are clearly not subject to the daily frustration that my and other colleagues’ constituents face as they try to go about their daily lives. Those who are concerned about air pollution fail to take into account the increase in cars that have very low emissions and, although they are still in their infancy, the number of electric vehicles, which is increasing. I am pleased that the minister mentioned the AWPR. In a survey by Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce this spring, 87 per cent of respondents identified the AWPR as the key infrastructure investment that will drive economic growth in the region. We have already seen the unlocking of many large-scale developments in the region because of the progress that is, at last, being made on this vital project. Some of the briefings that we have received for this debate complain that more investment is going into roads than into rail, but transport economists and those who are involved in the rail industry tell us that investment in rail has not been higher in Scotland for years, and that the other parts of the UK are envious of the Scottish Government’s commitment to rail. Spending of £4 billion since 2007 has supported new rail lines, new and better services, new stations and new trains. There were 83 million passenger journeys in Scotland last year, which represents a 33 per cent increase since 2004. Rail freight continues to grow and it is pleasing to see the recent move to rail of that most valuable of freight: whisky from Moray. I am sure that not many members of the Scottish Parliament, with the exception of Alex Johnstone and the Tories, do not regret the deregulation of bus services, especially when we see how effectively, efficiently and cheaply Lothian buses work in Edinburgh. Would that we could have such a system in Aberdeen. However, Iain Gray and Mark Griffin have yet to say where the money for that would be diverted from. Members mentioned ports and airports. I share Lewis Macdonald’s hope that expansion of the Aberdeen port will be included in future Government plans. Other members and I recently met representatives of the port; the project is exciting. I appreciated Fiona McLeod’s speech. Cycling has a strong lobby in Scotland, but far more people walk, especially women and children. In the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s deliberations, I ensure that time and consideration are given to safe streets for walking. Alex Johnstone mentioned high-speed rail, which he believes will be delivered to Scotland only by a Westminster Government. To me, HSR demonstrates most visibly the London and south-east-centric nature of the Westminster Government, which is not concerned about—or listening to what people are saying about—the economic future of the north-east or north-west regions of England, let alone that of Scotland. Only in an independent Scotland, which has full responsibility for all modes of transport, ports, airports and air passenger duty, will the people of Scotland get the integrated transport infrastructure that they deserve and can fund.

The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee welcomes the opportunity to debate its report on community transport and its recommendations to the Scottish Government. First and foremost, I take the opportunity to thank all the stakeholders who submitted written evidence, helped facilitate our fact-finding trips and gave oral evidence to the committee over the course of its inquiry. I also thank the committee staff and the communications staff, because social media played an interesting part in the inquiry. The inquiry and report would not have been possible without the significant input of time and effort by community transport groups, representative organisations and service users. The committee hopes that the report will go some way towards highlighting the good work undertaken by these community transport operators in providing a vital service to communities across Scotland. I also thank our colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for their interest and participation in the inquiry. In particular, the Health and Sport Committee’s evidence session on transport for health was very helpful in informing the committee’s considerations. The purpose of community transport is the provision of safe, accessible, cost-effective, flexible transport for those who are unable to access or use public or private transport. It is provided by several types of organisation, including dedicated community transport providers, community groups and private individuals using their own vehicles. We learned that no two organisations are the same and that a mixture of voluntary and paid staff meet the specific needs of a local area. However, early in the inquiry the committee identified key barriers and issues that many community transport providers have in common that significantly impact on providers’ ability to run services. Those are: funding arrangements; driver training and licensing; joint working with partnership organisations; leadership; and the lack of definitive information and data on the provision of community transport throughout Scotland. The committee made a number of recommendations to the Scottish Government and is pleased that the Minister for Transport and Veterans indicated, in evidence to us, that he would carefully consider our recommendations. Indeed, in its response to our report, the Scottish Government said that it would look into ways to scope out the practicalities of and take forward some of the committee’s recommendations. It is vital that the issues are addressed now. Given Scotland’s ageing population, inevitably there will be increased demand for and reliance on community transport services. Getting it right now could bring enormous benefits for Scotland’s population in future. It will come as no surprise that, during our inquiry, funding arrangements emerged as the single biggest problem that community transport operators face. The committee heard that following the transfer of funding responsibility to local authorities, under the concordat, the level of funding that local authorities provide to community transport groups has varied significantly across Scotland. The committee was concerned that that could lead to additional financial pressures, particularly in capital funding, on community transport operators in areas in which local authority funding is lower than it was under previous schemes or is not provided at all. Although we acknowledge that decisions on their spending priorities are matters wholly for local authorities, we are of the view that the variation in the availability of funding for community transport throughout Scotland presents significant financial challenges to many operators, which, in turn, can impact on the provision of services to users. The committee called on the Scottish Government to explore the potential for the provision of funding to further assist the community transport sector, particularly with the capital costs of new and replacement vehicles. We were pleased that the Scottish Government noted in its response that it is considering the possibility of a grant scheme to fund new vehicles and that it welcomes any steps that can be taken towards alleviating that significant burden on providers. I would welcome an update from the minister on how the Government’s consideration of that important matter is progressing. During evidence, the committee heard a range of views on whether a more co-ordinated approach to community transport in Scotland is required. Some responders argued that such an approach would be beneficial in overcoming some of the barriers that providers experience. However, other witnesses were keen to emphasise the importance of community need-responsive services. The committee agreed that community providers are better equipped to understand local needs but was of the view that they could benefit from a higher level of support and advice at a national level. In its response, the Scottish Government supported the committee’s view. The committee recommended that the Community Transport Association in Scotland would be well placed to take on an expanded role in Scotland, providing leadership and promoting shared standards across the sector, and we called on the Scottish Government to work with the CTA in Scotland to that end. The Scottish Government responded that it will continue to work with and support the CTA to strengthen the services that it can provide to support and encourage community transport initiatives. The Scottish Government also noted in its response that the CTA has been invited to submit costed proposals for an expanded role. The committee was pleased to hear that that recommendation is being explored and that options are being evaluated. The Scottish Government also agreed to explore how existing approaches such as the CTA’s quality mark and the west of Scotland community transport network can be developed further to support groups throughout Scotland and to drive up standards. We welcome that news and believe that the development and adoption of common standards across Scotland will benefit operators, users and funders. During our inquiry, we were struck by how little information is available about the community transport sector in Scotland. The consequence of that lack of information is that it is hard to establish where gaps in provision exist, what and where the unmet need is and how to plan for future need. It is also hard to establish, beyond an anecdotal level, what the additional benefits of community transport are, elements of which the report sought to highlight. The Scottish Government stated that it proposes to commission a new piece of qualitative research that will collect information from a selection of community transport providers in Scotland on their services, including benefits and costs, and to deepen its understanding of what services are currently available. We welcome that commitment. Another significant long-term challenge for community transport sector providers is the impact of minibus licensing changes, which is already starting to be felt. In short, the challenges come from the costs associated with training volunteers for their D1 licence, which can be significant and burdensome, especially for small providers. Over the course of the inquiry, the committee suggested that there might be scope for cost saving through more effective co-ordination of training, with larger and smaller services working together. To that end, the committee recommended that training co-ordination be looked at in the context of developing a wider means of supporting community transport throughout Scotland. Another significant theme of the evidence in the inquiry was the call for greater joint working between agencies providing transport, particularly for health. As many members will know, that call was made in Audit Scotland’s report “Transport for health and social care”, it was a recommendation from the Scottish Government’s short-life working on patient transport and it was echoed in the Health and Sport Committee’s report to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. The Scottish Government responded to that call by saying that it would continue to work with regional transport partnerships. I look forward to Duncan McNeil expanding on that issue in his speech. I will briefly mention concessionary travel, an issue that featured in our deliberations. The committee concluded that, due to the significant logistical issues of extending the national concessionary travel scheme infrastructure to all concessionary travel schemes, including car schemes, and the potentially extremely high financial costs, that was not option. However, we recommended that the Scottish Government explore how to address the iniquities in community transport provision. The importance of community transport in the lives of those dependent on it should not be underestimated; nor should the invaluable contribution of those who volunteer and work in the community sector. It is vital that those lifeline services can develop and grow and, importantly, be sustained as we work towards making Scotland a fairer and healthy society for all. I hope that the Parliament finds our report both informative and interesting, and I look forward to members’ speeches. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s 7th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Report on Community transport (SP Paper 377).

Does Duncan McNeil believe that if community transport organisations were involved in community planning partnerships, especially with regard to the health and social care agenda, much could be done to have a more joined-up framework for providing patient transport?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there was also trouble at the Grangemouth plant in 2008. Five years on, we are here again. What steps can the Scottish Government take to ensure that commitments are followed through this time, that the Forties pipeline will take oil and gas from the North Sea for decades to come, and that the rest of the Grangemouth plant will have a strong future for decades, not just for another few years? Does he believe that having worker representation on the board might help that?

I have not been called to speak in the debate, but I have done some background work on the issue. Can the member tell us which countries that have strict liability have better safety records for cyclists? It seems to me that there is no correlation between having a strict liability law and safer highways for cyclists.

As control rooms are only one aspect of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, and as the activity pattern of demand for call centres has changed, is it the case that reconfiguration could lead to improved public-facing services and more jobs in the Aberdeen area?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what economic opportunities will arise from the decommissioning of oil and gas installations. (S4O-02477)

Does the minister agree that the expertise that Scotland will gain in decommissioning will be similar to the country’s expertise in operating subsea? That will give Scottish companies a competitive advantage in gaining future international contracts in that area, and help to grow further our supply chain companies and our exports.

When the airport is returned to profit, is it absolutely necessary that it is sold back into private ownership? Is it not possible that a profitable venture could stay in public ownership, with the profits returning to the public purse? If not, will the cabinet secretary ensure that all public investment in the interim is recouped with interest?

I am happy to follow Alison McInnes’s thoughtful speech. I welcome the opportunity to input into this debate on how the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 might be reformed. It is absolutely right to revisit 40-year-old legislation, not least because the profile of offenders has changed dramatically. I cannot speak to the change over 40 years but, as many members know, I was a member of the HMP Craiginches visiting committee for 12 years, from 1994 until I entered this place in 2006. I am very aware that that prison’s demographic changed over that time—the population changed from persistent burglars in their 40s and 50s to a majority of young male offenders, whose crimes often relate to drug and alcohol abuse. It is absolutely necessary to look at the offending population’s profile and to tailor any legislative change accordingly. I am not sure that, even 40 years ago, low levels of literacy and of numeracy and childhood neglect and/or abuse were not factors, but much more attention is now focused on background circumstances—and much more needs to be done to correct such wrongs. I am pleased that all sides of the chamber seem to be on board with reviewing this legislation. It is certainly important that the Conservatives focus on this area, given George Osborne’s comments this week and the need to turn words into action. After all, the UK statistics are striking: 68 per cent of those entering custody were unemployed in the month before; 13 per cent of prisoners have never worked; 48 per cent are below the reading level for 11-year-olds; 65 per cent are below the numeracy level for 11-year-olds; 47 per cent have no qualifications; 41 per cent of male offenders, 30 per cent of female offenders and 52 per cent of young offenders have been excluded from school; and only one in five prisoners is capable of completing a job application. However, offenders who undertake prison education are three times less likely to reoffend than those who do not and 68 per cent believe that a job is essential in preventing reoffending. Our punishment of offenders has also changed in ways that the 1974 act could not have foreseen. When it is possible and when no risk to the public is predicted, community service is viewed as a viable alternative to prison; it helps to lower reconviction rates, is seen as making a positive contribution to society, keeps families together and maintains employment. That is borne out by the release earlier this month of statistics that, as the cabinet secretary has already highlighted, show that reconviction rates in Scotland are at their lowest level for 14 years, with a marked fall in convictions among all groups but, in particular, in people under 21. For me, the most interesting aspect of the statistics is that the one-year reconviction rate for those sentenced to prison for three months or less is 58.9 per cent compared with 31.6 per cent for those given a community sentence. As a result, whenever it is possible—and, indeed, safe—keeping offenders out of prison is a win-win situation for offenders and the public, but where incarceration is the only option every effort at rehabilitation must be made. That is why I was keen to see what progress had been made in the construction of HMP Grampian. I was very impressed by the amount of teaching and workshop space in the new facility. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary knows what level of interest there has been in occupying those workshops. I think that that will be key. That said, all of that effort goes for nothing as long as a third of employers keep saying that they will never hire ex-offenders, even those charged with petty crimes. Interestingly, in a recent article in the Serco journal Ethos, Yvette Carter, the company’s representative on the employers forum for reducing reoffending, calls that approach “a disaster for business and equality” and goes on to discuss her determination to break down the barriers in employing ex-offenders. Ms Carter makes it clear that “Serco has been employing ex-offenders for years”, saying: “It is an opportunity to widen the pool of talent, and plenty of anecdotal evidence shows that these employees offer a ... greater degree of loyalty, commitment and engagement.” She goes on to say: “Recruiters often don’t realise that, unless there is a ‘need to know’ situation because of the nature of the role, the potential risks are the same as with any employee. In fact, if you hire someone who responds to an ordinary job advert, you just have to believe their CV and references. A candidate could easily hide the fact that they are an alcoholic, drug addict or have other behavioural issues that could affect their work. If you recruit an ex-offender from prison, you can choose to find out everything about his or her past, and therefore be prepared for any possible challenges.” She also says: “At Serco, we don’t keep a strict record of the numbers of ex-offenders on our staff as we don’t think it’s necessary. But given that one in five men of working age has committed an offence more serious than a driving conviction, and given that Serco is a major employer, there are inevitably many ex-offenders working for us, many of them employed in our catering, street cleaning, transport and recycling contracts. Recruiting ex-offenders is something that Serco wants to actively pursue.” I am sure that there are other enlightened employers around. Ms Carter continues: “The only way to find out how to make this work is by trying it, one case at a time. My feeling is that if someone goes to prison, they’ve paid the price, and they shouldn’t be penalised for ever after. And for every pound of tax I pay, I don’t want it spent on somebody being incarcerated. Helping ex-offenders to start afresh is simply the right thing for us to do.” I whole-heartedly concur and believe that the review is the right thing to do to help such employers.

Further to Anne McTaggart’s reference to the usefulness of physical activities in prison, although it is often thought that going to the gym is a good idea, does the member agree with me that offenders can be helped on the route to rehabilitation through yoga, which lowers their anger levels and the pumped-up feelings with which they might have gone into prison?

I, too, thank Richard Baker for the opportunity to record our horror at the recent Super Puma crash and the tragic loss of life, which highlights the risks that offshore workers take every day in securing our oil and gas supplies. It also gives us the opportunity to express again our condolences to the families and our thanks to all the rescue services that were involved. I am always amazed that people manage to escape from helicopter crashes. I have done the helicopter evacuation training several times and, even in a swimming pool, it is pretty scary. If you do not get it right, you end up in a human washing machine. Although in the recent crash the helicopter landed without turning over, I welcome the industry’s consideration of the reconfiguration of seating, because it is miraculous when people escape in a sea situation rather than in a swimming pool. I am amazed by how calmness and the training kick in. I am old enough to remember when Chinooks provided helicopter journeys to the North Sea installations. I must admit that I was very glad when they were withdrawn, because I found them particularly scary. However, it should be remembered that helicopters are a vital method of transportation to the offshore rigs and platforms, because there are also great risks involved in ship transfer to the installations. I hope that all members here and other members will come to the next meeting of the cross-party group on oil and gas—on 8 October in room P1.02—which will discuss the helicopter accidents. I welcome the inquiries that are taking place and I note that one of them involves all the helicopter operators coming together to review their operations and share best practice. However, I am saddened that BALPA has said that the investigations are “too little, too late”. I hope that BALPA will fully engage in the investigations. I am glad that the CAA announced yesterday that its investigation will be done, as others have mentioned, in conjunction with the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority and the European Aviation Safety Agency. The investigation will take in all the Super Puma accidents in the past four years and operators’ decision making; internal management; protection of passengers; crew and pilot training and performance; and helicopter airworthiness. I look forward to hearing the results of that. We should mention, too, the boots on for safety campaign, in which all the oil operators are engaging with all employees—offshore and onshore—and reassuring them about safety and that people who have real concerns about travelling offshore and who do not want to will be handled with sympathy and consideration. I hope that the trade unions will keep an eye on that, because I would hate for anyone to lose their job just because of the particularly high anxiety that exists at the moment. It is important to wait for the outcome of the inquiries rather than rush to find any particular answer regarding the crashes, and I hope that that will happen.

10. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met NHS Grampian and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02391)

Further to the questions from Drew Smith and Linda Fabiani, the cabinet secretary will be aware of the current problems in NHS Grampian in recruiting for certain specialisms, and the impact of that on waiting times. Is there a way in which those who are training for medical and nursing posts can be made more aware of the specialisms in which there are vacancies, and directed to those areas? Can that be discussed with the British Medical Association and nursing unions to see whether we can get people into specialisms in which there are vacancies?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met fishing representatives from north-east Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02359)

The cabinet secretary may be aware that Aberdeen City Council is undertaking redevelopment plans that would result in fish processors moving out of the Union Square area with no clear indication of where they should move to. That may impact on the critical mass of fish processing companies in the city and disproportionately on the community of Torry, where there are many other processors and where the vast majority of workers live. Does the cabinet secretary agree that fish processing plays, and should continue to play, an important role in Aberdeen’s economy?

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the Scottish Government will continue its commitment to 1,000 extra police officers on the street, helping to deliver record low levels of crime?

What the member has just suggested was very much a feature under the Labour/Liberal Scottish Executive, when Scottish Enterprise had no clear direction. Since the Scottish National Party Government came to power, there has been very clear direction on where Scottish Enterprise should go. Is that not why Scottish Enterprise has been successful?

I am pleased to have been called to speak in this debate as it gives me an opportunity to highlight the huge contribution that companies in the north-east—not just in the oil and gas sector, but in the food and drink sector—make to the Scottish economy and, for now, to the UK economy, and to discuss the ways in which Scottish Enterprise has helped many of them. The statistics that were announced over the past few weeks are impressive. Although there is still a long way to go, employment in Scotland is at its highest level in almost five years, economic inactivity dropped by 20,000 over the past quarter and we have the highest youth employment rate of any nation in the UK, at 57.2 per cent compared with the UK average of 49.8 per cent. Scottish Enterprise has played an important role in driving economic growth in the Scottish economy, and its ambition is to grow the number of companies under its account-managed arm. Some 300 of its account-managed companies are in the oil and gas sector and about 250 are in the food and drink industry, with 46 of those in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. An example of the help that Scottish Enterprise has given is its work with Hydrasun in my constituency, where the First Minister launched the oil and gas strategy. Hydrasun is a leading supplier of fluid connectors, hoses, fitting instrumentation and process control products, coupled with added-value services including integrity management, primarily to the oil and gas sector but also to a wide range of secondary sectors including the petrochemical, marine and defence industries. Scottish Enterprise has supported Hydrasun to export to 58 different countries. Interestingly, it employs a number of linguists to help with that. Scottish Enterprise has helped with an acquisition in Brazil and has helped to drive Hydrasun not only to export but to establish operational bases and manufacturing facilities in Angola and the United Arab Emirates. The company also services the Gulf of Mexico oil industry and has partnership and distribution agreements in Egypt and Thailand. Its truly impressive growth has been helped by Scottish Enterprise. While Scottish Enterprise has helped by account managing that company and others, it has not helped them on its own. It has worked with Scottish Development International on exports and with local universities on research and development. Many of the quarterly meetings that politicians in the north-east have with Scottish Enterprise Grampian have been at the premises of account-managed companies, and the feedback has been overwhelmingly positive. The advice that has been given has not just been sectoral. Middle managers were initially sceptical about having management skills training with colleagues from other industries, but it proved to be very worth while. I am sure that it would not have happened without the help and co-operation of Scottish Enterprise. Work with other organisations has been particularly evident in the food and drink sector. The food and health innovation service, which is based at the Rowett institute of nutrition and health in Aberdeen, directly supports food and drink companies that seek to exploit the burgeoning market for healthy food and drink products, which is estimated to be worth £20 billion in the UK and more than £300 billion globally. In that regard, Scottish Enterprise works with Scotland Food and Drink and, for example, the James Hutton Institute, in my constituency, and its crop research arm in Dundee, which has helped to develop soft fruit production by introducing new products. Scottish Enterprise also works with other people in the food and drink sector, of course. I am particularly interested in how small and medium-sized companies grow their businesses, access the skills of our university graduates and take on apprentices. The Scotgrad scheme has much merit but needs far more publicity. There also needs to be more co-ordination between the business gateway and Scottish Enterprise, with a view to driving companies into greater growth, as many members said. Scottish Enterprise is on the right track. I have met no one in the agency who is in any way complacent or thinks that it cannot continue to improve its service to the Scottish economy and Scottish companies. Is the study that has been mentioned not an independent review, on which I am sure that Scottish Enterprise can build?

This week, the UK Committee on Climate Change warned the United Kingdom that it is not on track to meet its targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions. That is despite the fact that the UK greenhouse gas emissions targets are lower than Scotland’s and do not include aviation and shipping. What can the Scottish Government do to encourage the UK Government to meet its targets?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating what is now the latest 2 Sisters Food Group meat processing plant in Portlethen in my constituency because Tesco, which already takes most of its meat products, has agreed to market premium, high-value beef products in its leading stores, thus acknowledging the increasing demand for Scotland’s top-quality beef, which is good news for retailers, processors and producers alike?

18. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with universities and colleges regarding demand from international students for courses that develop skills for the oil and gas sector. (S4O-02152)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that full answer. I, too, have received that letter and have written to the immigration minister. Given the excellent global reputation of those universities and colleges in relation to the oil and gas sector, which the minister highlighted, what can be done with the UK Border Agency to change those wrong-headed rules?

I am pleased to contribute to the debate. Apart from Kevin Stewart, who has lived in Middlefield for most of if not all his life, I am probably more aware of the problems at the Haudagain roundabout than any other member, having worked out of an office at the roundabout for five years from 2006 to 2011 and having visited regularly both before and after that. I cannot understand the thought process that went through the heads of the Labour Party members who thought that this would be a good subject for debate for them. It begs the question that if making improvements to the Haudagain roundabout before completion of the AWPR was such a good idea, why was it not taken forward by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration in Scotland any time between 1999 and 2007? Why does the Labour Party think that it knows better than Nestrans, Transport Scotland and the local authorities’ infrastructure departments? Labour members must understand that the AWPR needs to be in place before work on the Haudagain roundabout can begin, otherwise the congestion and disruption to commuters will be much worse than at present. Perhaps Lewis Macdonald, or whoever sums up for Labour, can tell us on what basis he claimed this morning on the radio that the building work at the Haudagain can happen without any traffic disruption. He said in his speech that there would be traffic disruption because of lane closures. I do not know how often he goes to the Haudagain roundabout, but if even one car breaks down anywhere near the Haudagain roundabout, there is massive traffic disruption. Where else in Scotland can he demonstrate that roadworks have not disrupted existing traffic flows?

On the radio this morning, Mr Macdonald said that that can happen without any traffic disruption—I quote him word for word. Perhaps he will retract that later today. If Mr Baker had any idea of what drivers face, he would know the number of cars that come down through Manor and Logie to join the A96. For him to say that work would not disrupt that part of Middlefield shows how little he knows about the geography and traffic flows to the north of the city—a city that he is supposed to represent. Following no action on transport issues in the north-east after the Labour-Lib Dem coalition got themselves into an almighty legal wrangle because of legal action, the SNP Government has wasted no time in procuring a design organisation to carry out preparatory work on improvements to the Haudagain roundabout. Transport Scotland announced a £3 million design contract that was awarded to Jacobs UK Ltd as soon as the legal wrangle was concluded. Essential ground work on the AWPR began immediately, with Soil Engineering Geoservices Ltd winning a £1 million contract for six months’ work. Agreement about funding has been reached, although the Labour Party in the city continues to wrangle. I admit that I was not previously in favour of the third Don crossing. However, I have listened to transport experts, and it is needed. Perhaps the city council will fulfil its part of the bargain and begin immediately to put in place that part of the transport infrastructure for the north-east of Scotland.

Given the delays that the AWPR project has already faced, does the cabinet secretary agree that it is irresponsible of Councillor Young of Aberdeen City Council cynically to object to the agreed funding split and that he and his colleagues should honour the funding agreement that was made in 2003 and allow this vital infrastructure project to be progressed in a spirit of co-operation, as Aberdeenshire Council has done?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Although I am a substitute member of the Public Petitions Committee, I was not involved in hearing the evidence on the topic. However, I have been substituting in recent weeks, because although David Stewart is incapacitated, so too is my colleague, Adam Ingram. We wish them both a speedy recovery. I welcome the fact that the petitioner, Professor Crichton, has brought his considerable knowledge on the subject to the committee in highlighting the problems that are faced. I suspect that members do not have to be on the committee to know about the problems, because many people go to MSPs’ surgeries with flood-related problems. I welcome the Scottish Government’s positive work with DEFRA, the other devolved Administrations and the Association of British Insurers to make flood risk information more widely available, so that those who are at risk can have affordable insurance. Insurance is a necessity, but it is a pain not only to organise insurance but to read the small print and then hope that everything is covered. That is why it is important that agencies such as SEPA work with the insurance industry to make things better for our constituents. I understand that data sharing has been an issue, and that the ABI does not have access to the Scottish flood defence asset database when setting premiums. That makes it much more difficult for insurers to take into account flood risk when setting premiums for people in Scotland. SEPA has been working with the local authorities. I was pleased to hear the minister say that all 32 local authorities have now responded to the requests. The Scottish Government has been proactive on the issue of reducing flood risk. “The National Flood Risk Assessment”, which was published in December 2011, provides for the first time a national picture of flood risk across Scotland. That is a major milestone towards Scotland targeting efforts to plan and invest in reducing the impacts in those areas that are most vulnerable to flooding. The sum of £8 million has been invested in developing a state-of-the-art national flood warning dissemination service. In addition, a joint Scottish flood forecasting service between SEPA and the Met Office has been established. I want to make the case for prevention to be at the top of the agenda. By that, I do not simply mean putting in place flood defence systems; such systems are often extremely expensive and, as Elaine Murray and Stop Climate Chaos Scotland highlighted, their infrastructures are extremely carbon intensive. Other forward planning by councils and SEPA is also needed. I am pleased, for example, that SEPA has relaxed restrictions on deepening straight watercourses. However, landowners must be encouraged to clear and deepen ditches and burns much more and to allow land to be set aside for upstream flooding. I know from helping a constituent in Portlethen, who has been flooded twice in recent years, how difficult it is to ascertain who the landowner upstream is and to contact them and encourage them to act. I am not sure whether the powers of enforcement exist with local authorities or SEPA to force landowners to act. Furthermore, when a householder is encouraged—as my constituent was—to build their own flood defences around their property, there seems to be a lack of agreement among the agencies about what is required for, or will be acceptable to, insurance companies. Surely, councils have an obligation not to allow residential or commercial development on flood plains. I for one am not convinced that it is sufficient for the builder to put in earth defences between a development and the watercourse. Such developments simply should not be allowed. New developments can disturb the water table and normal watercourses. That is a problem for my constituents at Checkbar, and near where I live in Durris a new development has disturbed the watercourse, so that existing properties are more liable to flooding. It is disturbing that no one seems to want to take responsibility for alleviating such problems. I have had to hold meetings to get builders, SEPA and the council round the table and knock heads together to see how problems can be resolved. Meanwhile, people are living with flood risk. I am not sure that developers and local authorities adequately take account of the disturbance of existing watercourses and the water table when they consider proposed new developments. Does the minister know of anything further that can be done in that regard? I understand that people in the merchant quarter of Kevin Stewart’s Aberdeen Central constituency have had difficulties with insurers because of constant flooding in the locale. Kevin Stewart told me that many affected businesses have had to wait ages for payouts and face the prospect of not getting insurance at all unless Scottish Water and the council resolve the problem to the satisfaction of insurance companies. As members said, for many small and medium-sized businesses one flood is a tragedy that might tip them over the edge; more than one flood is often far too much for a business to bear, particularly when insurance companies leave people in the lurch. Although some householders who experience flooding do not have a good experience with their insurers, some insurers try to help as much as possible. We need consistency across the industry, and we need something in place that can replace the statement of principles. I hope that the flood risk assessment maps and plans that are produced under the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 will provide information that enables the insurance industry to offer premiums that more accurately reflect the lower risk in Scotland. I hope that the information that is held on databases can be shared with the industry, so that individuals’ premiums more accurately reflect the risk.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeenshire Council regarding education issues. (S4O-01985)

Does the minister believe that parents’ concerns in connection with the number of national 5 qualifications that pupils will be able to sit in Aberdeenshire have been resolved to the satisfaction of both teachers and parents?

The debate has been extremely useful and I thank members very much for their contributions. I am sure that the committee will take on board members’ comments when the bill comes to it for scrutiny. We will ensure that we have copies of the Official Report, because we might not be able to keep all the points raised in our heads until June or whenever the bill is introduced. As folk have said, there has been a great deal of interest in the bill. The number of briefings that has been received is one of the highest I have ever known. An extremely broad range of organisations submitted briefings, from charities such as SCIAF and Oxfam to care organisations and construction and other business organisations. Even the British Medical Association sent a briefing, on the ethical procurement of surgical instruments. As Linda Fabiani and Tavish Scott said, there are high expectations of the bill. I am not sure that they will be met but I can reassure members that the committee will try as far as possible to listen to and accommodate all the contributions. Like Elaine Murray, I attended the David Hume Institute seminar on procurement in January. I was impressed by the amount of interest in and enthusiasm for meaningful change that was shown by the speakers at that event and in the informal discussions afterwards. We heard about the importance of sharing good practice in public procurement and the willingness of a variety of organisations to do that. We heard about concerns about the cost of quality bids from prospective contractors, which can sometimes be in the region of £1 million for a £40 million project. Those costs are ultimately paid for by the public purse as part of the overall contract costs. In some cases, the bid costs are also paid out to unsuccessful bidders, which is not unreasonable. Again, though, that adds significantly to overall costs. Perhaps it would be worth while to identify any steps that could be taken to reduce or streamline the work that is required to formulate and deliver bids and therefore reduce the overall project costs. As has been mentioned, it is expected that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee will conduct formal scrutiny of the bill at stage 1. We will certainly call on all areas of the public, private and third sectors to engage fully and directly with us in the formal scrutiny of the bill. We will seek to work with the various representative bodies on how we might best encourage that engagement. In addition, I fully expect that the committee will seek to identify opportunities to hold informal discussions with representatives of all sectors to hear suggestions for improvements that would make a meaningful difference to the ability of all sectors to engage with the procurement process in future.

We recognise the clear and legitimate interest that other parliamentary committees have in the bill’s provisions, and the committee will be more than happy to discuss with committees ways in which they might contribute to the scrutiny of the bill. It was interesting to hear from members who thought that the committees that will scrutinise other bills that will go through Parliament, such as the health and social care bill and the community empowerment bill, could in doing so take on board some of the points that have been raised today. A few themes can be identified in this afternoon’s debate. Chic Brodie, Kevin Stewart, Linda Fabiani and others spoke about breaking down the barriers and stopping the inclusion of risk-averse conditions that are there simply to cover people’s backs. We need to ask questions and challenge existing practices to see whether they are delivering the best for the taxpayer, the user and local businesses. I was interested to hear about Mike MacKenzie’s experience and I liked what he said about being not risk averse but risk aware. The financial viability of the businesses and organisations that are tendering for work is vital. I often feel that third sector organisations are subjected to much more scrutiny than private sector organisations are, and I do not think that that is fair. Members raised the idea that people sometimes hide behind EU procurement rules. It is important that, before contracts are awarded, the bidders are made fully aware of what is required in the contracts. I was interested to hear the Minister for Housing and Welfare say that, when a public meeting was held to discuss the contract for the Aberdeen western peripheral route, a huge number of people turned up to find out what the contract was all about. I take on board Elaine Murray’s comment about the need for feedback, so that organisations feel that, even if they have not won one contract, they can tender for others. I say to Tavish Scott that I raised at the David Hume Institute seminar, which was mentioned earlier, my concern about hubs and consortia. There is a role for Scottish firms coming together in consortia in order to bid for large contracts, but I have a feeling that a too-cosy situation might develop between companies that have the major contracts and bodies that require work to be done, and that people might just go with the contractors that they know. I will keep that in mind when we scrutinise the bill. Many members mentioned the living wage, blacklisting and tax avoidance. A lot of hot air was expended on the subjects, as well as some light being shed. The public sector has made significant progress on the living wage and the Scottish Government has led on making it be seen much more as something that should be the norm rather than not, as is the case in some companies. As a former human resources professional, I think that blacklisting is sloppy HR practice. Companies should not have dealings with companies that have a blacklist. Instead, they should do their own recruitment to a much higher level, if that is what is required. On tax avoidance, the public have led by example by boycotting the companies that have been trying to avoid paying tax. I was pleased to hear what the cabinet secretary said in her closing remarks about the sustainability issue. This has been an interesting and worthwhile debate. I know that the cabinet secretary has listened closely to the points that have been made across the chamber, as have the members of the committee. I thank all who participated in the debate.

The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee welcomed the introduction of the Forth Road Bridge Bill and agreed to recommend to the Parliament that the bill’s general principles be agreed to. The committee received evidence from only a small number of organisations. We thank them for their contribution to the scrutiny process and for assisting us in our deliberations. The bill is short and technical, and it is an important element of the Scottish Government’s strategy to upgrade the Forth crossing transport network. As the minister said, its main focus is to pave the way for a single operator to carry out the management and maintenance of the Forth road bridge and the new Forth crossing. The bill provides for the dissolution of FETA, which currently manages and maintains the Forth road bridge, and allows for the trunking of the Forth road bridge, which brings it under ministers’ direct responsibility. It also allows for the transfer of all FETA’s assets and liabilities to Scottish ministers and for FETA staff to be transferred into the employment of a new single bridge operator to be appointed by Scottish ministers. Each of those issues is addressed in the committee’s short stage 1 report. Although the committee welcomes the bill, we note the concerns that were expressed about the consultation process during the bill’s development. Instead of carrying out public consultation on the bill’s proposals, Transport Scotland officials adopted a targeted approach to consultation, involving only organisations and community groups that it had identified as having a direct and local interest in the Forth road bridge’s management and maintenance, and stated in evidence that, given the bill’s relatively narrow scope and technical nature, that kind of approach was considered more appropriate than a wider public consultation. Although the committee acknowledges the obvious value of close and continuous dialogue with stakeholders directly affected by a legislative proposal, it is concerned that restricting consultation to only those groups can potentially disenfranchise others who might have a legitimate and relevant interest. An example of the risks of such an approach was highlighted in evidence from the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians, which advised the committee that it had not been made aware of Transport Scotland’s limited consultation process and was therefore unable to participate. In fact, the union had a very clear interest in the bill’s proposals, given their impact on FETA staff. The committee is aware that its session 3 predecessor committee, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, raised similar concerns in relation to the Scottish Government’s failure to carry out a public consultation on the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill, which was clearly also related to the Forth road bridge. Regardless of whether legislative proposals are considered to be of limited or narrow interest, it is expected that an appropriate and proportionate public consultation will be carried out to ensure that everyone with an interest can input their views. As a result, the committee in its report “calls on the Scottish Government to reflect on its approach to consultation in relation to future legislative proposals.” The Scottish Government’s proposal to contract a single bridge operating company to manage and maintain the new Forth crossing, the Forth road bridge and connecting roads in the vicinity of the two crossings received strong support in evidence to the committee. The committee shares the view that contracting a single bridge operating company is the most appropriate and cost-effective approach to the management and maintenance of both structures and is also reassured that, under the new arrangements, the valuable expertise and experience of FETA staff will be available to the new operator, which will ensure a strong element of continuity. Although content with the proposal for a single operator for both crossings, the committee considered it unfortunate that, with its valuable and extensive experience of and expertise in managing and maintaining the Forth road bridge, FETA was not able to be considered for the role of carrying out those operations for both crossings. However, as the minister has said, the committee was advised by the Government that if FETA had participated in a tendering exercise backed by Scottish Government funding, there was a very real risk of such a move being found in contravention of European Union state aid rules.

The committee itself did not take legal advice but in all the evidence that we received we understood why the Government did what it did. The committee understands and acknowledges the significant risk in this regard and therefore accepts the Scottish Government’s judgment. The committee considered it unfortunate that, as a consequence of the Scottish Government’s decision, there is no mechanism for assessing how the option of FETA taking on this role compares in cost-effectiveness terms with other options. However, we understood why in practice that was not possible. The committee heard differing views on the most appropriate duration for the new management and maintenance contract. The Scottish Government’s proposal is for the contract to have a five-year duration plus add-ons that could take the term up to 10 years in total. However, FETA indicated in written evidence that it had a 15-year planning cycle for major maintenance and works programmes. FETA suggested that, in recognition of that, a minimum contract length of 10 years would be required. Although the committee has no strong view on the optimum contract length, it recognises the importance of the contract duration being appropriate for the maintenance regimes that will be required. Therefore, the committee has called on the Scottish Government to provide further information on how its proposal to let the contract for five years, plus extensions, would fit with longer-term planned maintenance programmes of the type that are currently operated by FETA, which, as I said, cover 15 years. On the issue of how the contract for the management of the Forth bridge and the new Forth crossing should be framed, the committee received written evidence from UCATT and Unite that made clear those unions’ expectation that the contract will make it clear that any companies that have been involved in the practice of employee blacklisting or tax avoidance will not be eligible to tender.

The committee was also keen to establish how the procurement process might provide a community value element and allow for the creation of professional and vocational apprenticeships and job opportunities for long-term unemployed people.

Does the member not realise that the expertise that FETA has gained in managing bridges will be transferred as all the staff will be transferred, so the knowledge and expertise that they have gained will be used in the new structure?

I think that the joint parliamentary scrutiny of the draft RPP2 was the first of its kind, involving as it did four committees. I will outline the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s view of the report. First, I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee and I thank the other three committees, whose work on the report means that there has been proper scrutiny of an important and extensive document. Unfortunately, some of our academic witnesses could not attend our evidence session, so we may not have received as balanced a view as we could have done. We focused on two main themes: energy efficiency measures in homes and communities, and transport. We made some practical suggestions about the clarity of the document to the Government and I am pleased that the Minister for Housing and Welfare said in evidence that she will reflect on suggestions for improvement in the presentation of material in RPP2 made by our and other committees. We are clear about the enormity of the challenge facing the housing and transport sectors in contributing to meeting Scotland’s ambitious and world-leading climate change targets. We will need significant behavioural changes across Scottish society if we are to meet that challenge. It was made clear to the committee that improving energy efficiency in our homes is key if we are to meet the emissions reduction targets. However, that it is not an easy task—not least because of the large number of existing hard-to-treat properties in Scotland. We feel that regulation for minimum standards in private housing and energy-efficient building standards for new homes will help Scotland face the challenge. It is essential that we reduce the cost of heating our homes through energy-efficiency measures and that we seek to mitigate the associated cost and other barriers that make it difficult for home owners to do that. We are concerned that it is not clear how the UK-based policies aimed at addressing this—for instance, the energy company obligation and the green deal—will work alongside Scottish policies. We recommend that the Scottish Government works closely with the UK Government to ensure that the Scottish-specific issues are fully recognised in the delivery of those schemes. Our committee will be writing to the UK Government about that. We welcome the new national retrofit programme and the warm homes fund, which will help those in the most fuel-poor areas. It is important that the Scottish Government works with stakeholders and especially with local authorities, who have a key strategic role in identifying fuel-poor areas and housing stock that badly needs upgrading. The current economic climate and the impact of the welfare reform agenda make it even more important that programmes like that are rolled out to those who need them most. We look forward to seeing the detail of how the retrofit programme will be delivered when the Scottish Government publishes its sustainable housing strategy. I will move on to the transport sector and what the committee believes is vital if RPP2 is to set Scotland on the right path to meeting the targets up to 2027. The Government must be able to embrace emerging technologies and innovations to meet the challenges in this sector. That is why we support a flexible approach to proposals and policies for the period up to 2027. I am pleased that the Government is funding a wide range of initiatives and programmes, such as those on decarbonising vehicles, promoting sustainable communities and encouraging people to change their travel practices and behaviour. We do not know what the economic climate will be like in 2027, nor what budget levels future Governments will have. Since the 2009 act setting our emissions targets was passed, the economic climate has changed significantly and it will be a hugely significant factor in our ability to deliver the changes and improvements required to meet those targets. The committee also acknowledges the positive impact that a shift to more sustainable procurement methods and procedures might have on carbon emissions reduction. I have little doubt that this will be an important part of Parliament’s scrutiny of the Government’s forthcoming procurement reform bill. We hope that the Government will address the various concerns in our report and that these will be reflected in the final RPP2, setting out how Scotland will go about meeting its climate change targets up to 2027. We recognise that the Government has set ambitious, ground-breaking and world-leading targets and that to meet them Scotland must stay at the forefront of climate change policy.

Does the member not think that if we can move to hydrogen fuel cell or electric vehicles or to using other forms of fuel, that does not mean that we cannot build motorways to get people to their destinations?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that you would rather be down here, contributing to the debate, than up there. I add my congratulations to Angus MacDonald on lodging the motion to congratulate the SAYFC on reaching its 75th anniversary. It is very important to recognise this historic year and the contribution of young farmers clubs to public life in general. I really enjoyed reading the brochure, “Developing the Youth of Rural Scotland”. Although I come from farming stock, I was never a member of a young farmers club. I attended a good few young farmers events, including memorable events such as dinner dances—and yes, I can remember them. I recall my friends travelling many miles to young farmers dances at Echt, which ran some of the best dances in the north-east. I notice from the brochure that Echt young farmers are having a great time to this day. We note from the brochure that there are 77 clubs throughout Scotland, 18 of which are in Aberdeenshire and Moray, where agriculture is hugely important. It is no accident that there are so many clubs in those two counties. One of those set up in the early days was Keith young farmers club, in whose formation my father and his brother were involved. I know how pivotal those clubs were in giving my father and his brother the confidence to enter public life in other spheres. As many members know, my father went on to become a member of the Westminster Parliament and his brother is a past president of the NFUS. Many people use the skills, confidence, networks and international contacts gained in young farmers clubs to go on to make a significant contribution to their communities and further afield. Many young farmers go on to become councillors, Burns club stalwarts and effective members of many organisations, including the NFUS. They become effective lobbyists on behalf of the agricultural industry and the rural life of Scotland. I am not sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment always appreciates their doing that, but I am sure that on balance he agrees that those people have a pivotal role in ensuring that agriculture contributes to the economic wellbeing of Scotland. As other members have said, they also play a pivotal role in agricultural shows throughout rural Scotland—and we know how important those are to the local economy and the tourism industry—not just by producing excellent tug-of-war teams, as my local club Durris tends to do, but in the whole organisation of the event. One cannot underestimate the importance of the international arm of young farmers clubs. I know how many young farmers have spent time in dairy farms in New Zealand, in the vast agriculture and cereal plains of the United States or in developing countries in Africa and elsewhere, and have come back with much more drive and determination than they left with. As agriculture becomes more mechanised and less labour-intensive, the social networking side of young farmers clubs becomes ever more important, not just, as Angus MacDonald mentioned, for those directly involved in the industry but for rural communities in general. Isolation and loneliness in rural areas are a real threat and clubs can combat that. It is heartening to see more clubs coming into being. I am sure that the clubs will have another very successful 75 years.

I congratulate the First Minister on leading Scotland to a place where, for the first time ever in its history, all Scots over the age of 16 will be able to determine their own future. Does the First Minister agree that it is insulting to the intelligence of the people of Scotland to say that an independent Scotland could not deal with control over increased oil and gas revenues and their price volatilities? Does he agree that only with control of all our revenues can Scotland begin to deliver the fairer and more equal society that our citizens deserve?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the 2 Sisters Food Group regarding the acquisition of Vion Food Group’s United Kingdom red meat and poultry businesses. (S4O-01917)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that the safeguarding of 280 jobs at the McIntosh Donald facility in Portlethen was essential for the employees, the local community and the economy, as well as supporting a trusted red meat and poultry brand that is renowned for its quality and responsible sourcing, and which has remained steadfast throughout the mislabelled meat scandal?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the work that has already been done by the University of Aberdeen and Robert Gordon University, along with Aberdeen College and the Banff and Buchan College, which will become the new regional college. As an Aberdeen member, I hope that the energy skills academy will be based in Aberdeen, but is it not essential that other further and higher education institutions come on board with the project? There are not enough skills within the north-east, and we must encourage students from other areas—such as Fife and Renfrew, where there are already oil-related jobs—to come on board in the oil and gas industry, which has an exciting future.

I, too, congratulate Bob Doris on securing this timely debate and look forward to a busy two weeks ahead as we celebrate the bicentenary of Livingstone’s birth. I wish Sarah Boyack and Alex Fergusson a safe and productive visit to Malawi next week as they take forward the work that we in this Parliament do through the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association to try to enrich and enhance the democratic capabilities of the members of the Malawi Parliament, and I hope that they will take our good wishes to them. I was privileged to visit Malawi for the same work in January 2011. I am now the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Malawi, so I obviously keep a close eye on what is happening there. David Livingstone was indeed a remarkable man, as James Kelly said, who worked as a child and into his early teens but continued to learn in order to better himself. He was deeply religious, too, but he was not the standard imperialist explorer. He worked to protect the interests of the tribes that he came across. Although he did evangelise as a missionary, he apparently did not manage to get that many conversions. He did not force his beliefs on those whom he came across and he was far more motivated by the prospect of exploration, scientific discovery and—most important—ending slavery. David Livingstone believed that he needed to find an easy route into the centre of the continent in order to bring legitimate trade as an alternative to the slave trade. He campaigned tirelessly against slavery and worked to spread knowledge of its horrors back home in the UK. In particular, he reported on the Nyangwe massacre, when slave traders fired into a crowded market and 400 people were killed. It was British pressure that was in part due to Livingstone’s efforts that led the Sultan of Zanzibar to make the slave trade illegal on the east coast of Africa. Unlike many other missionaries, Livingstone remained respected as a great humanitarian in the areas in which he travelled. As a doctor, he was able to provide medical aid to the people whom he met, which helped to win their trust. He was one of the first to administer quinine in doses that are now considered to be effective and he suggested early on that mosquitoes were associated with malaria. For those reasons, he is still deeply respected in Malawi and so well known that everyone you meet there can tell you something about him. I think that that is the basis for the deep relationship between our two countries. Through the CPG, we have learned so much about the projects that Scotland’s civil society undertakes in Malawi. I point out, however, that behind every good man is a good woman. An often ignored element of Dr Livingstone’s story is his wife, Mary, who was often known by her maiden name of Moffat. She was born in Africa and her father was a missionary, too, who was famous for protecting the interests of natives. Moffat crossed the Kalahari—imagine this—while pregnant. She was, in fact, the first white woman to cross the Kalahari. She accompanied Livingstone on many of his other strenuous expeditions, often with her family in tow. She died from malaria after rejoining Livingstone in Africa following a period of living in Great Britain. We should recognise her sacrifices, too, which played a crucial role in enabling Livingstone to make his mark in history.

I add my condolences to those of the cabinet secretary on the deaths of the researchers from the James Hutton Institute, the Macaulay part of which is in my constituency. I am delighted that today’s debate seeks to highlight how important the production of food and drink is to the Scottish economy. The food and drink sector has grown since the SNP Government made it one of the key sectors that Scottish Enterprise should focus on in order to grow the Scottish economy. We should recognise both the success that has been had to date and the progress that can still be made. The north-east makes a big contribution to that effort. According to Grampian food and drink forum, the region contributes 14 per cent of Scotland’s agriculture output, 26 per cent of its cereal value and 11 per cent of total Scottish food and drink employment. In particular, we should praise the contribution of the primary producers, such as the farmers who in all weathers—it has, let us face it, been pretty grim recently—produce high-quality beef cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry, fruit and milk. Without them, none of this success story would occur. There is still some work to do to convince hill farmers and crofters that it is worth their while—and their bank balances—to increase stocking levels. I know that in the beef sector, for example, McIntosh Donald in my constituency can process all the cattle that it can get, mainly for sale to Tesco. On that subject, I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth for all their help in securing a new buyer for that and other parts of the Vion business. However, I will focus my remarks on the contribution that fish and fish products make to this success story. Aberdeen city and shire remains the most important fishing region in Scotland and the UK, with more than £100 million-worth of fish per annum landed at the port of Peterhead. Others may focus on the farmed fish market, but I will concentrate on the fish brought to our shores—again, in all weathers—by our fishermen. In recent years, the fishing sector has experienced a lot of pain, with quotas, cuts to days at sea and the decommissioning of vessels. Traditionally, the fishermen have landed fish and expected the merchants to buy their produce and find markets for it. Now at last, I think, we are beginning to see more collaboration and co-operation between the harvesters and sellers. However, as Tavish Scott mentioned, the prices at the quayside can still be very volatile. Only last week, those of us who attend the North East Scotland Fisheries Development Partnership were informed by John Wallace of Peterhead harbour of the rock-bottom prices for white fish at the port. That is partly because of the large amount of cod and haddock in the traditional fishing grounds, which seems to herald a return to the stocking levels that we have known in the past. That is good news if we can deliver security of supply, given that the Norwegian fishing industry, backed by its Government, is making a concerted effort to grab much of the supermarket market in the UK and our markets abroad. Our merchants are fighting hard and successfully to retain those markets. Today, much store is set by adding value, and I would like to highlight the success story of Joseph Robertson (Aberdeen) Ltd in my constituency. Joseph Robertson used mainly to bread fish, but now it does that and much more. It supplies Christmas party food, among other foods, to Morrisons and other supermarkets. This year, it has been selected as one of 35 businesses to take part in the Asda supplier development academy 2013, which is backed by Scotland Food & Drink. Ten of the companies that participated in the programme in 2011 have seen their sales go up by up to 330 per cent, so the selection of Joseph Robertson to take part in the scheme is a great accolade, and I wish it every success. Aberdeen’s contribution to the growing food and drink market includes the contribution of the Rowett institute of nutrition and health, which has been working with Marks and Spencer, among others, in creating nutritious, healthy ready meals. As Elaine Murray said, following the horsemeat scandal, last week the focus turned to the dangers of eating too much processed meat. As I listened to “Any Questions?” at the weekend, I was horrified that the only alternatives to the full English breakfast that the panellists could come up with were muesli and porridge. There was no mention of kippers, Arbroath smokies, kedgeree made with smoked haddock or even scrambled egg with small pieces of smoked salmon. It is clear that we have a huge education task to undertake on the variety of breakfasts that we produce, never mind the other meals in the day. The good thing about fish is that there is very little waste. As someone from Banffshire, I cannot fail to mention the contribution that whisky makes to the success of Scotland’s food and drink. Whisky exports reached a record high of £4.23 billion in 2011, which represented an increase of 23 per cent from 2010 and 50 per cent from 2007. New distilleries are being opened and existing ones are working at full pelt. As a youngster, I was always made aware of the value of the whisky in the bonds around Keith, which, when taxed, was higher than the value of the gold in the Bank of England—that was before Gordon Brown sold off most of it. We may moan about our weather, but the temperate climate and the abundance of rain for water for whisky and grass for our milk cows—milk being the raw ingredient for ice cream, in the production of which we in the north-east are so successful—mean that we are in an excellent position. Our excellent reputation for a clean environment and for producing high-quality foodstuffs can only be built on further. I support the Government motion.

2. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it plans to upgrade the voting consoles in the chamber and, if so, when this will be carried out. (S4O-01861)

Ms Fabiani will recall that, by pressing a few buttons together on the previous consoles, members could work out how many speakers remained to speak in a debate and therefore when to be back in the chamber for closing speeches. That was preferable to the Presiding Officer having to herd people back into the chamber for closing speeches. Is it possible to do that on the current consoles?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding a currency union between an independent Scotland and the rest of the UK. (S4O-01872)

Investment in the oil and gas sector is at its highest for 30 years and the sector contributes upwards of £40 billion to the strength of the pound, with more than £1 trillion-worth of oil and gas still to be extracted. Does the cabinet secretary therefore agree that the UK Government should acknowledge that a currency union with Scotland is beneficial to the UK as well as to Scotland and that it is time that Scotland saw more of that benefit? Bizarrely, the no campaign argues that having access to billions of pounds of oil tax revenue is somehow a bad thing for Scotland but a good thing for Westminster.

This is a useful debate on a useful report. In my role as convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I thank the Finance Committee for the report, which will certainly help to inform our deliberations, especially on housing. In defining old age, we need to completely change our thinking that everybody over 60, 65 or pensionable age is immediately a burden on the state. That is simply not the case. If I think back to how my grandparents were at 60 and then compare that with my parents and now their children, I see vast differences in people’s health and abilities. The saying that 60 is the new 40 is perhaps not far off the mark. Like Mike MacKenzie, I look forward to the day when we can devise our own pensions policy that could reduce wealth inequalities. Why should someone who leaves school at 16 have to work until they are 65 and beyond while someone who continues in education into their early 20s and thereby lands a less physically demanding job retires at the same age? As I have said before in the chamber, surely it is not beyond the wit of man or woman to devise a more equitable pensions system. Many over-60s will lead active, healthy and fulfilling lives for many years to come and Government policies must be designed to enhance those lives for longer. The Government’s vision is that “everyone is able to live longer healthier lives at home, or in a homely setting”. Central to helping that to happen is undoubtedly free personal care—a policy that is under threat from Labour’s cuts commission. According to Age UK, it costs £5,000 to provide personal care for someone and at least £25,000 for a person to be looked after in a care home. That is an excellent example of preventative spending but, as we have heard from James Kelly, the Labour Party would rather spend money on totally unproductive bureaucrats working out means testing than on helping older people and treating them all equally. One of the things that leapt out at me from the report was the fact that many rural authorities will have a larger proportion of older people than urban areas will, and I wonder whether that will be taken into account in decision making on local government settlements in the future, as, in a rural setting, social isolation might be a much greater threat. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee is about to embark on an inquiry into community transport, both urban and rural. Hopefully, that report will be able to contribute to the issue of what is required in the future in that area. There is no doubt that the concessionary travel scheme is helping older people to stay healthier longer, as people are able to get out to go to clubs and societies, the shops and entertainment and, crucially, to visit family. Social interaction is key to longer life, and the lack of it has been proven to curtail longevity and have an impact on health, as conditions such as dementia are more likely if a person lives alone and in isolation. Fiona McLeod highlighted the fact that about 75 per cent of older people are homeowners. I agree with her about the need for suitable private accommodation. I have been to several exhibitions of such assisted-living sites in my constituency and now see them in construction in Cults and Mannofield. It is important that those developments are near amenities or are on bus routes to amenities. Hanzala Malik raised the issue of the bedroom tax. I agree that it is relevant, as it will add to pressure on the one-bedroom or smaller-unit houses. As the Finance Committee convener pointed out, household sizes are diminishing and there is more of a need for one-bed or two-bed accommodation. We know that house builders seem to prefer to build larger houses and planning policy might need to change to make it easier for those companies that concentrate on building assisted-living houses to build the kind of houses that are needed. Malcolm Chisholm briefly mentioned some of the barriers to making adaptations, but I cannot stress enough the importance of spending money on adaptations. The issue is something about which I get my ear bent every time I visit or telephone my father. He insists that he would be in a care home now, rather than at home, if he had not converted a large cupboard into a shower and toilet. I have to agree with him, so I am now bending the cabinet secretary’s ear on the matter. I think that any money—if there is any spare—that was sent in the direction of local authorities and housing associations for adaptations would be money well spent. Every time that older residents move into accommodation, there should be discussions about the adaptations that are required. The briefing from the Bield, Hanover Scotland and Trust housing associations points out that for every £1 that is spent on adaptation, the Scottish Government recoups up to £4. That is also a good example of preventative spend. Of course, any additional money that the cabinet secretary could put into housing would be welcome.

All of those things must be done in partnership and in consultation with the older people—they do not need to have things done to them; we need to know what they need. Grandparents used to fear their old age and I hope that growing old is now something that people can look forward to, due to their ability to take opportunities that they do not have while working.

Our older people are a treasure and a huge resource. They are carers and childminders but, most of all, they are knowledgeable partners and grandparents.

Will the member take an intervention?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with local authorities regarding the distribution of food from food banks. (S4O-01853)

Does the minister agree that, along with food, it is essential that those in need are offered broader advice concerning health and budgeting, in order to provide longer-term solutions to poverty? Will she join me in congratulating Cfine—Community Food initiatives North East—for developing a food distribution strategy in conjunction with Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council and other stakeholders?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am not sure how much of it I will take, but here goes. It is with a little tinge of sadness for me that we are drawing to the close of consideration by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and the Parliament of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill. I admit that I found the whole process fascinating. If I were leaving university today, I would consider the water industries in Scotland as offering very exciting career opportunities. I add my thanks to all those who have been involved in the passage of the bill, including the committee clerks, the bill team and the stakeholders who helped us in our deliberations. Early on, the committee visited Scottish Water’s sampling offices at the Heriot-Watt science park, where we learned a great deal about Scottish Water’s activities. The water supply and waste water sub-sector in Scotland is estimated to have a market value of £709 million and to employ around 6,000 people. I am referring not to Scottish Water itself, but to the more than 300 companies in the sector in Scotland. Scottish Water’s record since its formation has been impressive. Since 2002, Scottish Water has stripped out 40 per cent of its costs, and it now provides water to Scottish customers at a lower cost than any of the private companies in the rest of the UK. Drinking water quality is at its highest level, leakage has been reduced by 70 million litres per day, and it has recorded the highest-ever customer satisfaction level. Even this week, Scottish Water announced that it is to invest around £250 million in improving water projects in the Clyde area. To me and to SNP colleagues, it is inconceivable that the Tories and their Lib Dem colleagues can still be hell bent on privatising this valuable Scottish resource. Let us face it: mutualisation is the first step on that road. When I challenged Alex Johnstone on that on the way back from Heriot-Watt, he admitted—as he did today—that indeed Scottish Water was impressive, but he trotted out the old broken record of the Tories: public bad, private good. There we have it: dogma rules okay. Private fat cats, not the whole Scottish population, should benefit. We saw Thatcher sell off Scotland’s oil resources in the 70s, and given half the chance, the Tories would sell off—

Yes.

If Mr Findlay had let me finish, I would have said that frankly, and fortunately, there is not even half a chance—not even one iota of a chance—that the Tories in Scotland will see water privatised, certainly not in the near future. Scottish Water and any of the other 300 companies in the sector can now also compete for global water supply and waste water treatment works, which amount to around £8 billion in the UK and £242 billion worldwide. Water scarcity and access to clean water and sanitation are global concerns, and Scotland, as a known hydro nation, can play an international role on them. The Government has commissioned a virtual centre of expertise on water, which can pull together advice and information on water management. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, the James Hutton Institute, which is based in my constituency, is leading on that, as is the University of Dundee’s United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization centre for water law, policy and science, and Scottish Water itself. All those organisations provide a strong basis for Scotland to be known as a hydro nation. The Government wants Scotland to be “the helpdesk to the world on water governance” and those three institutions also provide a strong basis for that. The fact that Scottish Water already works in countries such as Qatar, India and Canada demonstrates the potential to meet that aim. Scottish Water International works with Governments at national and state level on methods of governance, openness, transparency and accountability and we have already seen the benefit of that, when John Swinney was able to find £50 million to use elsewhere in the Scottish budget rather than on Scottish Water. WaterAid is supported financially and with expertise by many who work in the industry and it is a good example of how Scotland works worldwide. Although Scottish Water is a high-performing public company, it is not resting on its laurels. I was interested to hear from Peter Peacock, and the body he now chairs, Customer Forum, on how willing Scottish Water is to engage with it and others to have other perspectives on the industry. Scottish Water would tend to admit that it comes to the area from a rather geeky engineering background, so it is interesting to hear from customers and others on how the industry is perceived. Business Stream still has a lot to do to assure business customers that it deserves their business, as competitors from other parts of the UK enter the market. I wish Scottish Water’s new chief executive, Douglas Millican, all the best in his new role and I hope that the message of the passing of the bill is that Scotland appreciates this fantastic resource and is about how we manage it and use our experience to help other countries benefit from Scottish expertise. Part of my constituency is rural—as is part of Elaine Murray’s—and I recognise totally the importance of septic tanks to a lot of our constituents. I sincerely hope that the parts of the bill to improve maintenance where previously there may have been problems will be beneficial. I am mindful of the costs of water purification. I hope that, through partnership with landowners and farmers, we will be able to drive down those costs, by ensuring that the water that comes off our hills needs less treatment before it reaches customers. I say to the cabinet secretary that I hope that an information campaign will be run in several languages on the disposal of fats and oils before there are any charges or convictions. Some business premises are perhaps still not aware of their duties and responsibilities on such disposal. The bill offers huge opportunities for all who are involved in the water sector in Scotland. I support the bill.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had, or will have, with the new local police commanders for Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire and Moray. (S4O-01755)

The team of 14 local police commanders who will serve under the single Scottish police service will develop and implement local policing plans specific to each council ward that are intended to ensure that policing across Scotland reflects the needs of our diverse communities. Can the cabinet secretary advise what input individuals and groups from the local community have had, or will have in future, in developing those plans? How will local priorities be informed and agreed?

I am pleased that we are having this debate at this time, when people are beginning to receive their January bills, but I am a bit disappointed that Labour has halved the time to debate the matter. When I read the motion, my first reaction was that I was a bit surprised by the call for action to tackle payday loans and high-interest credit, because the biggest impact on them can be made at Westminster, of course. Perhaps Kezia Dugdale is gradually realising that it would be much better if powers relating to those matters were devolved to the Scottish Parliament. We could take powers over those and other things as necessary and help those who are most in need in society.

Not at the moment, thank you. As other members have said, Labour had 13 years to take action on high-interest credit and payday loans when it was in power at Westminster, but it did nothing. Here in Scotland, why did Labour MSPs in the previous session not sign Kenny Gibson’s motion entitled “Time to Curb Excessive Interest Rates”? More recently, only five Labour members signed Mark McDonald’s motion on bringing forward the January pay date. The SNP did that when it was in power in Aberdeen City Council. It would be nice to see some consistency and continuity from the Labour benches. I wonder whether Labour’s cuts commission would take away from families the much-needed support that is so helpful in this area. I am grateful to CAS for its briefing, which shows the reasons for the rise in the number of people who are struggling to make it to pay day. Those reasons are the stagnant economy, public sector cuts, mainstream credit being more difficult to access, and the number of people who hold and use an overdraft facility or credit card having fallen by around 1 million in the UK. The other factor, which Kezia Dugdale mentioned, is the speed at which customers can access credit without adequate scrutiny of their current commitments and their ability to pay back the loan. That has, of course, resulted in many people regretting taking out payday loans. They find that they are unable to pay them back and find themselves in a downward spiral of debt. Evidence suggests that lenders are unsympathetic to customers who find themselves in financial difficulties, and it is not clear that even lenders who have signed up to the new customer charter are adhering to the good practice that is advised therein. I wish that citizens advice bureaux and credit unions had the ability to advertise their services as much as those who offer payday loans. People need to know that their first port of call should be their local credit union office, their citizens advice bureau, or even their MSP, who can direct them to the proper agency for their needs. Many organisations offer financial health checks and people may find out that they are entitled to benefits that they have not accessed or that an organisation can help them to reconfigure their debt. I have noticed that some churches now offer that service, too. I am a member of a credit union, a supporter of credit unions, and I support their work in schools, but I get the feeling that that is not the position of successive Westminster Governments. Some credit unions in Scotland are increasingly frustrated by the lack of progress and support from south of the border and are asking themselves why they bother belonging to cross-border organisations in the field. The credit union sector is stronger in Scotland. One in 20 people is a member here, but only one in 70 in Britain. Scotland is making more progress in this area, so the natural progression is for Scotland to take full control in this regard. I am happy that, with her motion, Kezia Dugdale, too, is beginning to see that.

I am sure that the minister will want to join me in congratulating the people of Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire on being among the most energy conscious in Scotland. Almost a third of adults there have installed or are thinking of installing renewable energy systems. Does the minister believe that a huge reduction in carbon emissions can be achieved through a modal shift from air to rail travel? Does he believe that the Westminster Government’s HS2 proposals lack ambition and urgency?

On the broadband moneys, because I am a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I can inform the member that she will find that the Government is accessing that money. However, on the other funding streams that she identified, can she tell us how much of that funding would need to be match funded by money from here and where that money would come from?

I welcome the opportunity presented by today’s debate to recognise the contribution of the oil and gas industry to the Scottish and UK economies. I sometimes think that, because the bulk of the oil and gas activity is centred in the north-east of Scotland, which is remote to some, too many people do not appreciate the huge contribution that the industry makes to the economy. Indeed, successive UK Governments have been keen to fill their coffers with tax revenues from oil and gas—£300 billion in the past 40 years—but they have had very little understanding of the industry and its requirements. David Cameron admitted as much in a visit to Aberdeen last year. That is why I congratulate the minister on the huge amount of time and effort that he has put into understanding the industry. I know that that has been much appreciated. The oil and gas strategy that he mentioned has been well received, and I thank all those in the industry who took the time to input to that strategy. When I entered Parliament in 2006, too many here and in the other place were content to peddle the myth that the industry was in terminal decline and to discourage youngsters from entering it. Today, the industry is in one of the best boom periods that I have known, and I have seen and worked in the industry in bad times as well as in good times. I am glad that the current Scottish Government and the industry have done much to turn round that perception and recognise that 24 billion barrels of oil are still to be recovered from the North Sea. They have a value of more than £1 trillion. I do not quite understand what point Mary Scanlon was making, other than to suggest that an independent Scotland could not handle the volatility of the oil price, which is plainly rubbish.

Not at the moment. I thank ACSEF—Aberdeen city and shire economic future—and other organisations that have given members their briefings. According to ACSEF, the oil and gas industry contributes £7 billion in exports, £13 billion or one quarter of all corporation tax collected in the UK, and £6 billion in corporate and payroll taxes. Oil and gas activity from Aberdeen city and shire accounts for 15 to 16 per cent of gross domestic product, and it is vital that the right conditions are in place for Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland to continue to be the hub for oil and gas in future, and that, with independence, the whole of Scotland begins to reap the benefit of this resource. The oil and gas industry supports approximately 450,000 jobs in the UK, half of which are in Scotland. It is therefore important that the expertise that has been developed in the north-east is retained in the north-east and in Scotland. It should be used in the North Sea and overseas, and in other fields such as renewables. Many oil and gas firms are already involved in those other fields. As Rhoda Grant said, a recent PWC report suggested that the oil and gas industry might have to find another 120,000 workers during the next 10 years. Many oil and gas companies are currently recruiting large numbers of people. I am heartened that our learning institutions in Aberdeen and beyond have embraced the concept of the oil and gas academy and I hope that the whole industry will get involved with that. It is quite unsustainable for companies within the industry to carry on poaching employees from one another, thereby driving up salary costs, rather than taking on apprentices and giving opportunities to highly trained graduates from our universities. I pay tribute to all the men and women who work in the industry—although there are not nearly enough of the latter—onshore and especially offshore. We should make no mistake about it: those people work in a very risky industry. I know from experience what it is like to travel offshore in a helicopter, and I have seen at first hand the work that is done on the drill floor and derrick. It can be scary. That is why safety is always at the forefront. Although the current helicopter situation is costing the industry millions, it is vital that all the safety issues surrounding helicopters are resolved so that workers can confidently use that method of transport offshore. The perception that high salaries and wages are paid in the industry is correct—it is a risky industry. Nonetheless, I highlight one of the unique challenges faced by the industry. Everyone agrees with the introduction of automatic enrolment into pension schemes. It was only in the late 1980s that the company that I worked for introduced a pension scheme. However, the law firm Pinsent Masons recently warned that the nature of the oil and gas industry, which extensively employs contractors, and rotators, which is when employees are sent overseas, while people are brought into the UK on short-term assignments—the UK Border Agency does not comprehend the damage that it is doing in that area—presents particular challenges with pensions. I have written to the Minister for Pensions at Westminster on the issue and I hope that Fergus Ewing might raise it with his UK counterparts when he next meets them. I support the motion.

When I entered the industry quite a long time ago, the price of a barrel of oil was $20 and the recovery cost was $8 dollars. It is the difference that decides whether the industry explores or not.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is that not precisely why we need independence, so that we can set up an oil fund like Norway’s? The income from that fund is now more than the income from oil and gas in that country.

The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee welcomes the introduction of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill and has agreed to recommend to the Parliament that the general principles be agreed to. Our stage 1 report sets out how we arrived at that conclusion. The committee received evidence from a wide range of water interests, including domestic and commercial water users, environmental and energy bodies, industry specialist engineers and academics plus, of course, Scottish Water. I thank all those who gave written and oral evidence, those who hosted our visits to their premises and the clerking team, for their sterling support. The evidence supported the basic premise of the bill that, although we are fortunate to have such an abundant water resource in Scotland, we must recognise more fully the value of that resource and learn to make more efficient use of it. As the committee heard in evidence, the bill, together with the Scottish Government’s hydro nation agenda, will put Scotland at the forefront of water policy making in the developed world. The benefits for Scotland could be substantial. In the global context, growing stress is being placed on the world’s water supply, due to an ever-increasing global population. As a result, many countries are becoming more and more interested in finding ways to make better use of what water they have. The committee has heard about the work that Scottish Water is already doing through its international operations. It has won consultancy and training contracts in Canada, Ireland and, more recently, Qatar. To respond to Neil Findlay’s point, I say that he will find that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization centre for water law, policy and science at the University of Dundee is, for example, working with countries along the River Euphrates to get some agreement on water abstraction. Scotland’s expertise in water matters is clearly in demand, and the bill recognises that. There is an opportunity for Scotland to develop what it is already good at doing in the water sector, to continue to grow its expertise in sustainable water management and to increase its competitiveness on the world stage.

Scottish Water is helping overseas countries with precisely that, although it is not so much about infrastructure and more about how countries determine the governance of their water supply. That is part of what Scottish Water is doing. Given the abundance of our resources, it is probably fair to say that Scotland is the envy of the world. After all, we tend to be good at managing our liquid resources. Other countries just seem to bottle it, but we bottle it and export it, and we do lots of other things with our water. The committee agrees that the bill will go some way towards establishing a framework that will allow us to make the most of our water resources. The message that we received from witnesses is that there is strong support for that direction. In addition to the positive comments that we heard, I will talk about some of the concerns that were raised with the committee. Although the committee’s view is that the negative comments do not call into question the general principles of the bill, our report makes recommendations that are aimed at improving it. As the cabinet secretary said, the almost unanimous view of witnesses was that the bill places too much emphasis on developing the economic value of water and does not say enough about environmental and social considerations. From the evidence that the committee received, it seems to be widely accepted that the three pillars of sustainability—economic, environmental and social—need to be given equal weight when we are seeking to develop the value of our water resources. The committee agreed that, if the bill is to specify economic value, there is no reason why it should not also include environmental and social considerations. I welcome the commitment that the cabinet secretary has given today to lodge an amendment on that point. Part 2 deals with water abstraction. Alex Johnstone took a lead in questioning on that part of the bill, so I will not steal his thunder and will leave him to cover that in detail. That said, I draw the Parliament’s attention to the evidence that the committee received that reflected a general lack of understanding on the part of witnesses about the intended purpose of the new abstraction regime. It appeared to the committee that that was due, in large part, to a lack of consultation on that element of the bill because it was added just prior to the introduction of the bill. It is also fair to say, however, that some witnesses were confused about whether the new regime would add anything, given that the current CAR system already includes some abstraction control. As our report says, we felt that it was necessary for the cabinet secretary to engage directly with organisations to discuss the intended purpose and effect of the proposed abstraction regime. We called for a programme of engagement to be carried out prior to stage 2, and I welcome the cabinet secretary saying that such a programme is already being undertaken. Other concerns were raised with the committee about the proposal that would actively encourage Scottish Water to develop its commercial activities in, for example, the renewable energy market. Serious concerns were raised with the committee by businesses that operate in the renewable energy and waste management sectors. They feared that the bill would give Scottish Water an unfair commercial advantage, based on its status as a Government-funded public body. The committee examined the issue in detail and questioned the Water Industry Commission for Scotland, the water industry regulator, as well as the cabinet secretary, about the proposals in the bill. We are content with the assurances that we received. It seems clear to us that the intention is that Scottish Water’s non-core activities will be entirely separate from the core services for which it receives public funding. Thus, there is no question of public funding being used to support Scottish Water’s commercial activities. Of course, it is the WICS’s responsibility to regulate Scottish Water’s activities, and the Parliament will have a continuing scrutiny role in ensuring that the regulator continues to do its job properly. Finally, I will touch on the bill’s wider context and the hydro nation agenda. In considering the bill, particularly the expansion of Scottish Water into commercial and international markets, we must have regard for the interests of water customers in Scotland. We must ensure that water customers are protected. There is also scope to go further by, for example, enabling benefits that are derived from the development of Scotland’s water resources to be passed on to customers in the form of lower bills. The cabinet secretary has indicated that the bill and the hydro nation agenda should bring positive benefits for customers directly and indirectly. The committee will wish to focus on the interests of customers, and we have an ideal opportunity to do so as we move towards the next water regulatory period, which will run from 2015. The objectives that are set out in the early part of the bill and in the hydro nation agenda are ambitious and require substantial co-ordinated action by the Government and other public bodies in order to achieve them. If the bill is passed, my committee will take a close interest in these activities. The committee’s wish is that the new prominence given to water environment issues must have substantial gains for the Scottish people. Today’s debate coincides with moves at European Union level to encourage greater efficiency in water use. The European Commission’s water blueprint has just been announced amid disappointing results for the implementation of river basin management plans, which have been implemented by only 53 per cent of member states. Europe needs to do more to use its water resources sustainably and efficiently, and if Scotland plays its cards right, it can show the way for the rest of Europe. When the bill was published under the previous cabinet secretary, there was great media interest in the idea of exporting water by pumping it south or tanking it abroad. That issue did not greatly exercise us but, as the Presiding Officer knows, our food and drink exports such as beef and lamb require rich grassland, and salmon, whisky, beer and other such products require a lot of water. As a result, we actually export a great deal of virtual water—it is amazing what one can learn in this place. On behalf of the committee, I recommend that the bill’s general principles be agreed to.

The minister said that he has already had discussions. Will he remain available, even though it is coming up to the festive period, to discuss issues with Serco and the RMT in order to have the dispute resolved as quickly as possible?

I add my congratulations to Mark McDonald on bringing his motion to the chamber for debate this evening. It might not be immediately obvious that someone has autism or an autism spectrum disorder. In fact, autism is a very underdiagnosed condition precisely because it is a spectrum disorder. We know, for example, that Asperger’s is a form of autism. People with Asperger’s are often of average or above average intelligence. They have fewer problems with speech, but they might have difficulties with understanding and processing language, and they have difficulties with social interaction, as Mark McDonald mentioned. They may appear insensitive because they have not recognised how someone else is feeling, and they may appear to behave strangely or inappropriately precisely because they do not have the mechanisms that others have in terms of social interaction. As has been mentioned, they cannot process facial expressions, tone of voice, jokes or sarcasm—things that the rest of us take for granted. Even though not everyone who should perhaps be armed with the autism alert card has it, it is important to raise awareness of the card and of autism in general. Mark McDonald mentioned the criminal justice system. As a former prison visiting committee member, I know that too many people who are caught up in the criminal justice system may have autism. However, even outwith prisons, when there are boyhood pranks, the person with autism is often disarmingly honest and has not got into the habit of running away as his mates might have done, so such people get caught up in the system. It is vital that security guards in shopping centres are made aware of the card and are trained to recognise autism. I have a friend who is obsessed with watching out for shoplifters, and security guards are often a bit apprehensive about what he is doing. People who work for transport providers should also be trained to recognise the card. It is good that the card is working well in other areas. I make the analogy with the thistle assistance card, which I had the pleasure and privilege of launching for the south east of Scotland transport partnership in my role as convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. That card, which has been well received, alerts transport providers to people who have sight, hearing, speech and mobility problems. It has special stickers that people can put on that say “Please wait for me to sit down”, “Please talk slowly and clearly” and so on. It can also be used when, for example, people with Parkinson’s need more time at the checkout in shops and so on. The cards have tremendous benefits, but it is important that training is provided for everyone who might be presented with a card and that card holders can feel confident in presenting their card at all times so that we can break down more barriers and misconceptions or ignorance about autism.

I thank Alison McInnes for bringing this debate to the Parliament to highlight the importance and value of the Camphill movement. I also thank the many constituents who emailed me in advance of the debate. Of the 12 Camphill communities in Scotland, no fewer than five are in my constituency of Aberdeen South and North Kincardine. They cover the range of Camphill’s activities. For children and young people, there is Camphill school. For young adults, there is Beannachar on South Deeside Road. For adults, there is Newton Dee and Tigh a’Chomainn—I apologise for the pronunciation—and for elderly people there is the Simeon Care facility. I first got to know about the Camphill communities many years ago when a cousin of my mum’s with Down’s syndrome stayed at Newton Dee for a short time and we visited her. I think that her elderly parents thought that she might want to stay there, but she was too much of a Cockney to stay for long out of London. Since then, I have visited most of the facilities in my constituency. I visited Beannachar on a doors-open day and saw growing there the biggest raspberries that I have ever seen. I do not know whether the plants are talked to, but the community there has a wonderful way with growing crops. The facility is close to my heart, as many Germans come across to do voluntary work there. The rules of compulsory service in Germany mean that conscientious objectors do voluntary work, and a lot of them come to Beannachar. They can often be seen walking to Aberdeen along South Deeside Road. Newton Dee, as Alison McInnes pointed out, is a wonderful facility. It is nice to go there and have a cup of coffee, buy some bread and just chill out a bit. It is little wonder that it has the highest eco-flag status, because it not only has a wind turbine but the people there are all very much into eco-friendly activities—the woodcrafts are something to behold. The Simeon Care for the Elderly facility, which Alison McInnes also mentioned, is engaging very much with the community to raise the funds to rebuild that community. Many years ago, the Camphill philosophy was thought of as being a kind of non-mainstream, hippy philosophy. It is based on self-determination and equality and is focused on providing for each individual’s needs through a supportive community and the creation of a safe and supportive environment for individuals, who are encouraged to develop their own independence through an engagement in community life. Of course, that philosophy has become very much mainstream. As Alison McInnes said, there are opportunities for councils to make more use of the facilities that are on their doorstep and are provided by the Camphill movement. It is silly that local authorities will set about creating new facilities when Camphill, in and around Aberdeen, already has the facilities to provide for the vulnerable in society. I pay tribute to the Camphill movement, its organisers and its users, whose professionalism, care and hard work have made a world of difference to the lives of individuals and families across Scotland.

6. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that the Scottish economy is overreliant on the oil industry. (S4F-01026)

Sir Ian Wood said recently in an interview that the oil and gas industry still had many years ahead of it but that, for the north-east to remain as an energy hub of Europe, it is important that we encourage new oil-related industries to locate and stay in the north-east. Does the First Minister agree that this Parliament must have economic levers at its disposal to ensure that we encourage investment in our vital industry so that Scotland remains a world leader in this field for many decades to come?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in commending the proactive approach taken by north-east university and college principals Professor Ian Diamond, Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski, Rob Wallen and Paul Sherrington in convening a meeting on 17 December in Aberdeen, to which MSPs have been invited, to discuss the challenges and opportunities in the development of an oil and gas academy?

Does the member realise that, as today’s figures show, tuition fees south of the border have increased the rate of inflation and that that affects everyone?

Clearly, Scotland would not be the only country in that position. Sarah Boyack should look at Norway, which has used its oil fund as a cushion against all the economic downturns.

In Scotland, we have a proud tradition of universal provision of welfare and public services that neither discriminates within nor divides among our society. Johann Lamont asked why we are debating universal benefits today. It is because—astonishingly—that universality is under threat from Labour. Universal benefits such as concessionary travel for the elderly, housing benefit, jobseekers allowance and, of course, health care exist to ensure the maximum opportunities and the maximum quality of life for all, regardless of a person’s background or circumstance. It is our responsibility to ensure that people in Scotland continue to have access to the highest-quality public services possible without stigma being attached to those who rely on them. Access to high-quality public services is part of our identity and a large part of what binds us as a society. It is therefore no surprise that the people of Scotland overwhelmingly oppose the UK’s ruthless cuts to public services, which threaten to tear our social fabric and impact on the poorest in our society. The unstinting protection of public services is at the heart of Scottish Government and SNP policy. That protection goes well beyond front-line services, and the importance of various aspects of universal benefits to ensuring our health, wellbeing and quality of life should not be underestimated. Concessionary travel is a perfect example of that. The benefit to the 1.2 million elderly or disabled people or the veterans who are entitled to concessionary travel does not stop at their saving money on their bus fares. People who use concessionary travel—especially those on low incomes—also benefit from improved access to other services in their communities and beyond. That in turn facilitates social networking and promotes inclusion for those who might otherwise be isolated, as well as supporting those who are in work or in voluntary positions. Evidence suggests that concessionary travel also improves the health, wellbeing and safety of elderly and disabled people by encouraging a more active lifestyle and by keeping people engaged in their communities. Ultimately, by contributing towards the broader quality of life of older and disabled people, concessionary travel helps to reduce demand for social and health care down the line and therefore supports savings in other parts of the public sector. For example, raising the age of eligibility for concessionary travel to 66 would affect around 40,000 people and save £8 million in the short term. However, that would most likely result in NHS bodies having to meet increased costs for transport to and from medical services, which might otherwise have been provided under concessionary travel. The same is true of stringent means testing. The current approach is relatively cheap and simple to administer because it depends on either proof of age or disability. The fact is that the administration costs associated with any further eligibility checks would be prohibitive and would largely cancel out any potential savings. To me, that underlines the short-sightedness of UK Government cuts, which are aimed at cutting back on services that are not only vital but represent good value for the taxpayer. Johann Lamont asks that we consider the issue in open and transparent debate, but that is exactly what we are doing. What Labour and its Westminster cronies cannot get their heads around is preventative spend. The choice that this Government is making is the choice to intervene early—

Let me just finish the point. When we came into office, money was being spent on firefighting problems as they arose; this Government is trying to prevent the problems arising in the first place. Gavin Brown mentioned free eye tests. Would people go for eye tests, dental checks, breast screening or bowel cancer screening if they had to pay for it? I think not.

This is absolutely not theoretical, Ms Lamont. The member should take up the issue with the council that is providing the service. That is the choice that the council has made about how it spends the money that it gets. Westminster’s cuts to the welfare system threaten to have similar knock-on effects on our society as a whole. Dismantling the welfare system—I say this to Duncan McNeil—is precisely what we are talking about. We are trying to protect the welfare system in Scotland. Willie Rennie gets it all wrong when he says that such cuts might not last post the referendum. We know that the Westminster Government has said that there are more cuts to come down the line, so we have seen only a little of the cuts that we will get from Westminster. To take one example, the regressive bedroom tax threatens to cut claimants’ housing benefit by 14 per cent or 25 per cent where one or two bedrooms are deemed unoccupied. In this context, that even includes where the Government thinks that children could share. It seems to forget that children grow up and need single rooms later on in their lives or that, for example, a person with a respiratory condition may need an extra room for the respiratory equipment. As with most UK Government cuts, the bedroom tax is likely to hit the poorest in our society the hardest. Housing associations warn that it could force more people into homelessness if people cannot afford to support a house that George Osborne deems to be too big for them or their family. That is not to mention the unwelcome invasion into family life of rules on which family members should be sharing bedrooms.

The worst part is that the UK Government perceives a need for the policies based on the belief that housing policy can be applied uniformly across the UK. Of course it cannot. I support the motion.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to change the guidelines on breast screening for 50 to 70-year-olds. (S4O-01448)

With the number of people in Scotland diagnosed with breast cancer as high as 4,000 a year, 20 of whom are men, does the cabinet secretary think that the breast screening programme should be maintained and expanded rather than cut, and does he agree that scaremongering about unnecessary procedures should not deter women from getting screened, given that screening can detect many cancers at a very early stage?

4. To ask the First Minister what impact fungal diseases will have on trees in Scotland. (S4F-00960)

I would like to be the first person in the chamber to sincerely congratulate the First Minister on becoming Scotland’s longest-serving First Minister. Given that the United Kingdom Government may not have released advice on the vulnerability of ash trees as speedily as it could have done and that there is now speculation that a threat could exist to our iconic Scots pine, what information and advice can the First Minister give to those who are concerned about the potential susceptibility of Scots pine to the disease?

I very much welcome this debate and I welcome the minister to his new post. I am sure that Malawi will be safe in his hands. I look forward to hearing the cabinet secretary’s summing up and his impressions from his first visit to Malawi last week. I hope that the country captivated him as much as it did me. The debate is timely, given that we are in the run-up to the bicentenary of David Livingstone’s birth next year and that preparations for that are under way. I will leave my colleagues to say more about that, as they are much more involved geographically. Suffice it to say that Malawian children are much more aware of David Livingstone than children here are. Perhaps we can improve on that in Scotland next year, not only because it is part of our rich heritage, but because it is the reason why there are such strong bonds between our two countries. Indeed, an analysis by the University of Edinburgh in 2010 highlighted the value of inputs by members of the Scotland Malawi Partnership, stating that Scotland’s civic society links with Malawi were worth at least £30 million over the previous 12-month period. The study also indicated that at least 1.3 million Malawians and 280,000 Scots have benefited from participating in those activities over the same period. However, Malawi remains a desperately poor country. As Patricia Ferguson said, it ranks 171st out of 180 countries in the most recent UN human development index report. Some 10 per cent of school-age children do not attend primary school, and according to UNICEF only 26 per cent of school-age children complete their primary school cycle, of whom—perhaps not surprising—only 16 per cent are female. AIDS remains the leading cause of death among adults, and water-borne diseases cause many more deaths among children. It is little wonder that much of the aid from other countries is spent on health and education. Like Jamie McGrigor, I am grateful for Oxfam’s briefing, which highlights, among other things that the charity does, awareness raising on the treatment and support that people can expect—and how they can get it—if they are diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. There have been many improvements. As Patricia Ferguson said, the rate of HIV deaths has reduced. When I went to Malawi in 2010, I was struck by Ted Brocklebank’s observation that there were far fewer coffin makers on the roadside than there had been when he visited the country in 2006. We saw hardly any coffin makers in 2010. A privilege of chairing the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Malawi is that I hear about many projects in the country that have benefited from Scottish Government funding as well as other funding, including many donations. Projects are not just in health and education. I am increasingly struck by the huge variety of work that is done in Malawi through partnership working by Scottish institutions. For example, Scottish higher education institutions, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the Malawi Government and Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources are working together to establish a veterinary school in Malawi, in an effort to combat epidemic transboundary zoonotic diseases and to improve food quality, food security and animal welfare. We heard that apps are being given to farmers, to alert them to when they should feed and milk their animals and dose them for mastitis. Advice on breeding matters, for example, is also offered. It might seem strange to hear about the use of apps in rural Malawi, but that is happening. It is vital that we use the most up-to-date technology to drive forward sustainable development in the country. Organisations are helping Malawi to use its abundant solar energy to power homes, hospitals and schools. The minister talked about the University of Strathclyde’s energy programme. The minister is a lawyer and has been a member of the Justice Committee, so I implore him to look sympathetically on funding bids for advocacy in Malawi. I will never forget my visit to Chichiri prison in Blantyre, and in particular the women’s unit there. I saw women with children and women who had been on remand for as long as seven years without coming to trial. I commend the work that Sister Anna Tommasi does, but she needs a great deal of funding. On the change of Government, Malawi must be congratulated on the smooth transition of power following President Mutharika’s death. It is much to Malawi’s credit that the transition to Vice-president Joyce Banda was smooth, but she has inherited a much-maligned regime. She does not have her problems to seek, as members have said. It is to her credit that she has sold the controversial presidential jet that the previous president purchased, which had annual running costs of £220,000. She has also sold the Government’s fleet of 60 Mercedes-Benz limousines. She is doing great work but she has a high disapproval rating. I hope that when she comes here she sits down with our First Minister, to improve that.

The debate is a useful reminder of the measures that all citizens need to take in the run-up to winter—measures that we need to take as householders, as office tenants and as neighbours. It is to the Government’s credit that winter resilience has risen up the agenda, and it is creditable that so many agencies are taking winter resilience seriously, as witnessed by the number of briefings that we have received from many of them in anticipation of the debate. We all hope that our preparations will not be needed—especially this year, as we have had such a rotten summer with prolonged periods of rain, which have had a detrimental effect on our farmers among others. I contacted Alex Hill of the Met Office yesterday to see whether the long-range weather forecast would give us some cheer. In summary, he said that for October, November and December a whole range of forecasts favour lower than average rainfall for the period but slightly colder temperatures. There is no real cheer there and we must be prepared, although weather forecasters have become a lot more canny in recent years about what they say. As someone who lives in a rural area where the roads are not maintained by the council, I know the importance of having shovels and salt-and-sand mix ready at the door and in the car. I am also aware that rural roads are not a priority if they are not bus routes. I understand that, as it is important that our councils make the best use of their equipment on arterial routes. Therefore, I welcome the fact that farmers are being involved in clearing rural roads. I am not sure that Jim Hume can claim the credit for that, as—I am sure that Alex Johnstone will back me up on this—Aberdeenshire Council has been involving farmers in clearing the roads for a number of winters. It is vital that we keep our roads not only clear of snow, but gritted. As Graeme Dey said, companies such as LPG providers and heating oil suppliers must be able to access their customers in remote and rural locations. I therefore welcome the information that we have received from Calor Gas that it is working with local authorities and Transport Scotland to ensure that off-grid consumers can be accessed during severe weather. Mention has been made of the railways, and I welcome the £2.2 million that ScotRail invested last year to ensure that it is better prepared for severe weather. Those preparations include providing pioneering de-icing equipment for our trains and real-time travel updates for customers. Updates are important because, for travellers, there is nothing worse than getting absolutely no information at all—people can take the bad information, but waiting around without any information is most distressing to customers. During the debate, we have tended to focus on the preparedness for snow but, with climate change, we are as likely to experience high winds and extremely heavy rainfall. That is why it is vital that landowners clear—and keep clear—water courses and that councils keep drains clear. I am not sure that all councils have the best strategies and plans for clearing drains and water courses, especially in areas that are prone to flooding. People who dump garden rubbish in burns and streams are totally irresponsible. I think that Keep Scotland Beautiful may be doing work in that area, but perhaps the minister will confirm that. Similarly, preventative action may be useful, with landowners, councils and ScotRail removing weakened trees before they fall and cause disruption. I put on record my thanks to all those public sector workers, including snow clearers, police, fire and ambulance personnel, social and care workers, and health and school staff, who go that extra mile to help our most vulnerable. I also want to thank the many volunteers who step up to the plate to help in adverse times—that even includes four-by-four drivers. I support the motion.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to expedite the building of the Aberdeen western peripheral route following the Supreme Court’s final rejection of the legal protests that have delayed the project. (S4T-00078)

The minister has already agreed that there should be community benefit clauses in the contracts that guarantee opportunities for apprentices and the long-term unemployed. I hope that there will be work with the universities to give trainee civil engineers and surveyors practical experience. Will the minister also work with the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment to urge farmers to use recycled stones lying at the sides of their fields in the construction process so that we can regain some agricultural land, which is being lost at a phenomenal rate to house building?

Can the minister give us any idea of what savings will be made by combining the AWPR project with the Balmedie to Tipperty project?

I was pleased that the cabinet secretary said in her statement that she was going to meet the Electoral Commission this week, and I am sure that they will discuss ways in which we can ensure that the campaigns are equitable and transparent. Therefore, will she join me in condemning the attempts of the anti-independence parties to undermine the fairness of the financing of the independence referendum?

Has the minister been in touch with FirstGroup, given that it is a major transport company headquartered in Aberdeen that employs thousands of people in Scotland and the rest of the UK and has taken a severe blow on the stock exchange as a result of UK Government incompetence?

I am pleased to be taking part in the debate and I have listened eagerly to all the speeches. I believe that regardless of which party we are from, we are all intent on ensuring that all women can achieve their full potential, at their own pace and taking into account their circumstances. We recognise that, despite what Mr Macintosh says, women do most of the caring. I am sure that Mrs Macintosh would be willing to change the vacuum cleaner belt and the light bulbs if Mr Macintosh did all the ironing and dishwashing. Childcare has been mentioned a lot. Affordability is key, but flexibility and accessibility are also issues. The majority of doctors and vets and similar professionals are now women, and they require flexible childcare rather than the normal office hours that are available in childcare establishments. As a result, the on-call hours and flexible surgery hours that the Government now requires are an issue for some practices. We used to talk a lot about job share, which used to be actively promoted. Now, we hardly ever see jobs being advertised for which job share is a possibility. We should get that back on the agenda—and higher up the agenda. Jean Urquhart mentioned the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report “Tapping all our Talents”, which is an excellent piece of work. The report recommends many things, one of which is the commitment of those in leadership. It means commitment from all our educators, from nursery to higher education, to eliminate gender stereotyping. Our universities and their research establishments still have a lot to do to address the gender balance in senior management. Mary Scanlon mentioned the oil and gas sector and why so few women were taking up the opportunities, of which I agree that there are many. This morning, I spoke at an oil and gas breakfast in Aberdeen with Alix Thom of Oil & Gas UK, who is doing a lot of work to address the skills shortage and skills gap. I am sure that Alison McInnes has had discussions with Alix, too. If we ask fathers in the oil and gas industry whether they would like their daughters to work offshore, the resounding answer is no. We have an attitude problem here. Most members who have spoken today have been pussyfooting around this. We still have a lot to do to address male attitudes towards women working in traditional male roles. Many women are resigned to the fact that many such opportunities are not open to them. I am glad that the Government is addressing those issues. We have got to get cohorts of female apprentices in engineering into the oil and gas industry. On Margo MacDonald’s point, 3 per cent of people in the UK oil and gas sector are women; in Norway, the figure is 9 per cent. We have a long way to go.

I think that lots of people know about the Telephone Preference Service, but I understand that the TPS relates only to calls that are generated in this country and that people need to phone the Call Prevention Registry on 0800 6527780 to get overseas calls stopped.

I welcome the resources that have been allocated to the energy skills academy, which will benefit all learning institutions in the north-east and beyond. Will the cabinet secretary give details of the overall funding package to colleges in the light of his commitments today?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle domestic abuse. (S4O-01291)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Grampian Police’s domestic abuse unit on giving protected adult status to people who are victims of domestic abuse and who continue to be at risk, thus giving them direct access to police help? Does he believe that the legal profession should be aware of that status in relation to related criminal and civil cases?

I congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing the debate and bringing the attention of the Parliament to the disgraceful situation that the citizens of Aberdeen find themselves in. Their democratic will—in a referendum that secured more votes than the council elections and, indeed, the Scottish Parliament elections—has been overturned. Members may think that this is purely an Aberdeen issue—I will remind them why it should not be. As others have mentioned, Aberdeen city and shire is driving economic growth in Scotland and the United Kingdom through our energy sector. It is the only truly global economy in the UK outside London. The area is a supply chain hub for the oil and gas industry and for jobs throughout the UK and beyond. It used to be said that if someone wanted to see the world, they joined the merchant navy—now, they join the oil and gas industry. The energy sector in Aberdeen is booming. In fact, the whole of Aberdeen is booming on the back of the energy sector. Aberdeen has long been recognised as the oil capital of Europe and it is one of the most robust and resilient economies on the continent. The region has the second highest gross value added per head of population in the UK and the cities outlook 2012 survey mentioned Aberdeen as one of only a handful of cities with the strongest signs of economic growth. Indeed, at the ACSEF meeting on Friday that Nanette Milne mentioned, we heard of one company—General Electric—that has an immediate 200 vacancies and over the next three years it will have 3,000 vacancies. Does the centre of Aberdeen reflect that status? No, it does not. I stood for election in Aberdeen North in 1979 saying that Aberdeen should not be the oil capital of Europe but end up with nothing to show for it. Now we have a local boy who has made exceptionally good who wants to reinvest some of his wealth back into the city, together with seven others who are prepared to put their hands in their pockets to kick-start the regeneration of the city of Aberdeen. There has been a lot of focus on the gardens—I believe that the project would have been transformational, but it also included a revamp of the art gallery and many other parts of the city centre that desperately need work done on them. It is therefore incredible that an arrogant, petty, stagnant Labour-led administration rejected the wishes of Aberdonians to transform their city without even having an alternative plan.

I reckon that the people of Aberdeen would have clapped their hands in glee and said that at last the Labour administration had seen sense. There is currently a collective gloom in the city of Aberdeen and incredulity—there and beyond—that anybody could be so stupid as to reject such a generous offer from the private sector in Aberdeen. Other areas are asking whether they can have the money if Aberdeen does not want it. It is not only that—the petty city councillors, as alluded to by Alison McInnes, threatened to cut off the funding from ACSEF, which is the economic driver in the region. I am glad that Sir Ian Wood has left his offer on the table and I hope that some councillors, with all the lobbying that they have had from their constituents, will change their minds. The transformational change that is required in the city centre is within the power of the Labour-led administration.

I am delighted to speak in the debate and to have listened to all the speeches, but I cannot understand the negativity of Opposition speakers—bar a few. Labour speakers tried to convince themselves that the SNP Government has done nothing and will do nothing but concentrate on the referendum and securing independence. I politely suggest that it is the Opposition parties who are obsessed with independence, given that they raise the issue in the Parliament more often than SNP members do. Let me remind members of a few of the SNP Government’s achievements. In relation to justice, most adults rate their neighbourhood as a very good place in which to live. That continues a rising trend, and the success is due in no small part to the fact that we have maintained the presence of 1,000 extra police officers, which has led to the lowest crime levels since 1975. In health, the majority of people—there has been a rise of 16 per cent since 2005—are either very satisfied or quite satisfied with the way that the NHS runs, and a record 4 million people are registered with NHS dentists, including 99 per cent of six to 12-year-olds. That is a real achievement that is very welcome, especially in the north-east given the shambles that we inherited in the area from the previous Labour-Lib Dem coalition Government. In housing, the Government has exceeded its target to deliver 6,000 affordable houses. In 2011-12, the figure was 6,882. In education, a record number of school leavers qualified to at least standard grade level, and a record number of school leavers are in positive destinations. A record 22,292 young Scots will go to university in Scotland this year, and Scotland is one of only three European countries to increase investment in higher education. On the environment, there has been continued investment to make Scotland greener and in our agricultural sector to provide food and drink. Those exports are at an all-time high. The concentration on early intervention and preventative spend is making a real difference to many families, and the programme that the First Minister announced yesterday will continue to make Scotland safer, healthier, smarter and greener. Perhaps the Labour Party does not like to hear about that progress, but the public do. Let me remind the Labour Party of its most recent poll ratings. The SNP is on 47 per cent, which is up 2 per cent, while Labour is on 32 per cent—that figure has not changed. Some 71 per cent trust the Scottish Government to act in Scotland’s best interests. Even in the current economic climate, business confidence in Scotland is the highest in the UK. It used to be the case that, if England caught a cold in recessionary times, Scotland would get the flu. John Swinney’s shift of money to capital spend has made a real difference. That is why it is so important that money is released from the UK Government for shovel-ready projects. That business confidence and other confidence among Scots do not automatically happen. The Scottish Government is creating the conditions for business in Scotland. The confidence comes from the Government but also from other organisations, such as the Aberdeen city and shire economic future, which drives the economy of the north-east. We are all judged by our actions rather than our words. Labour politicians in Aberdeen threaten to pull the funding from that body precisely because it is driving economic growth. Perhaps Richard Baker—who is not in the chamber at the moment—might have a word with Ms Eagle and stop her decrying an Aberdeen-based business for winning a contract in the rail industry. Just what is it that the Labour Party has against Aberdeen? Aberdeen is the economic driver for Scotland and the UK. There are jobs aplenty in the oil and gas industry. I am not saying that there is not much more to do—of course there is—but we are making progress with one hand tied behind our backs. As Kevin Stewart has said, it would be great if we had both hands on the levers of power. What does the Opposition want to do? It wants simply to continue chugging along with mediocrity, while the SNP Government wants drive and ambition for our country. The status quo is not an option. Yesterday, we were told on the radio that “three quarters of the pain still lies ahead with widespread cuts to spending and benefits likely to have a bigger impact on voters’ wallets than the tax rises and reduced investment to date.” Britain’s recovery from the financial crisis is slower than that of other countries. Apart from the Italian economy, the British economy is the only one of the world’s 20 biggest economies back in recession and, to our shame, the UK is the fourth most unequal country in the world. Instead of supporting hope and ambition for Scots, Labour members are in bed with the Tories to maintain the status quo and support worsening conditions for our citizens. Shame on them.

I, too, congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing this debate on the importance of the armed services advice project. The debate is a great opportunity to publicise the Citizens Advice Scotland report “Civvy Street: The New Frontline” and the service that citizens advice bureaux provide. I believe that all MSPs and their staff should know about it. It is important that dependants of current and previous forces personnel know about the project and the wide and varied number of organisations that are available to provide help. Knowledge of this one-stop shop would have been helpful to one of my constituents, whose husband, who had formerly been in the Army, tragically committed suicide as a result of post-traumatic stress disorder. Unfortunately, because of unemployment, the family had cancelled insurance plans and, as a result, lost the house that they owned and found themselves in temporary accommodation and then council accommodation, a situation that the widow and her family found traumatic. Sadly, my constituent contacted me only 18 months or so after that had happened. I make the minister aware of the case because I have concerns that dependants and former personnel who are perhaps not near the voluntary organisations’ centres face greater challenges in accessing help. For example, my constituent’s husband was asked to travel from the north-east to the central belt for counselling, despite the fact that agoraphobia was part of his mental health problems. Similarly, my constituent was not made aware of the availability of housing in the central belt for widows in her situation. Indeed, she might have been eligible for help with her mortgage and been able to stay in her home. The Citizens Advice Scotland document “Advice and information for the Armed Forces Community” lists the wide range of organisations that can help. I stress that ex-service personnel and their dependants might need help at any time after service—there is no limit. My constituent’s husband had been out of the Army for many decades. Many organisations are available to help, but the one-stop-shop service from citizens advice bureaux must be made available throughout Scotland. I look forward to the minister’s reply.

I am glad that Nanette Milne managed to bring the topic to the chamber as a Conservative business debate this morning; it was originally going to be a members’ business debate. It is an opportunity for us to discuss and consider how we can best support the organisations in our communities that are on the front line of supporting people who have addictions, and their families. In her motion, Nanette Milne cites the Grampian Family Support Forum and in her speech she mentioned Sheila McKay. I first met Sheila McKay when I was a regional member. For Sheila, one meeting was not, as a woman from Banffshire, enough, of course. As the minister knows, we Banffshire women can be thrawn and persistent. We had several meetings in Aberdeen and—as Nanette Milne mentioned—in Parliament, not just with the Grampian forum but with other groups in the north-east that are involved in such work. Sheila McKay is still working—as Dr Simpson mentioned—on extending the pool of people who are allowed to administer naloxone. Although levels of illegal drug use are at their lowest for several years and are still in decline, we cannot underestimate the devastating effects that drugs still have on individuals, families and communities. Virtually every family in the country is now affected in some way or another by drug misuse; my family has certainly not escaped it. The Grampian Family Support Forum has benefited from administrative and communications assistance from the alcohol and drugs partnership that covers Moray, Aberdeen city and Aberdeenshire. The Scottish Government’s recovery-focused approach to tackling drug use has helped thousands, and that progress is supported by the funding that is provided by many organisations that facilitate recovery, such as the Scottish Drugs Forum, the Scottish Recovery Consortium and the Grampian Family Support Forum. All those organisations deserve praise for their efforts, not only in helping and advising those who have addiction problems and their families, but in assisting in community action, education programmes and—as other members have mentioned—combating the stigma that attaches to addiction issues. Those organisations have been feeding back to Government and parliamentarians their information and experiences, and their opinions on the effectiveness of the current strategy and how progress can be continued. That highlights the invaluable work that they do, which is carried out as much in private as it is in public. Worryingly, several of those organisations have heavily criticised the United Kingdom Government’s welfare cuts which, they tell us, threaten the support systems that exist and the delicate balance in many families and communities that are in sensitive situations regarding addiction and drugs. The Scottish Drugs Forum and Scottish Families Affected by Drugs have spoken out against the UK Government’s proposed changes to how claimants with drug or alcohol problems can receive benefits, which threaten to undermine the progress that has been made. Both organisations have highlighted how Westminster’s proposals to hold claimants hostage over their benefits, pending their drug and alcohol addiction treatment, threaten to have serious knock-on effects on families and children. The recovery happens event was a great example of how the expertise that such groups provide is fed back into the development of national and Government strategy. Neil Bibby mentioned kinship carers. I am assisting a number of grannies who are, as a result of the drug abuse of their child or their child’s partner, caring for their small grandchildren. One of the main messages that came from the recovery happens event was on the importance of a family-focused approach to recovery and addiction support. Families from across Scotland are keen to support one another and to share their experiences and knowledge. I welcome the debate as a way of thanking them.

It is to be commended that the debate has been designed to cultivate the broadest possible discussion, given that the issue is so multifarious in its scope. It is an affront that in Scotland, a northern European social democratic country, the gender gap still persists across our society in so many respects. I hope that the difference between ourselves and our Scandinavian neighbours does not elude most members. We know that girls tend to outperform boys at school, yet women are generally less well represented when it comes to senior management positions and to climbing the career ladder, especially in certain fields. As others have mentioned, we know that the recession and the UK Government’s welfare cuts will have a disproportionate impact on women and will have a knock-on effect on their children and families. Although the Scottish Government is trying to do all that it can to mitigate those impacts, it is equally important that we know why the imbalance exists. Annabel Goldie gave a list of reasons that she thought contribute to the imbalance. I would say to her that it is about all of the above. We know that low pay among women contributes to the high level of child poverty in Scotland. That is why, for example, the SNP included in its local government election manifesto a progressive pledge to introduce a living wage of £7.20 an hour in all councils to help to tackle the issue. That measure is necessary because almost two thirds of the thousands of people who will benefit from the introduction of the living wage are women. Although that modern, progressive policy is to be commended, as a society we should ask ourselves why the majority of our lowest-paid jobs are done by women and why men continue to dominate the boardrooms. We remember that, in a number of our council areas, the process of implementing single status has been a long and tortuous process. Those who we would think would most benefit from it and welcome it have often been the most obstructive. Just as concerning is women’s traditional exclusion from other fields. Although progress is being made in attracting women into STEM subjects and areas of work, gender stereotypes continue to prevail. Last night, at the British Veterinary Association dinner, we heard that 80 per cent of veterinary medicine students are women. However, when it comes to being in line for a partnership, how many of those women will be overlooked? There is probably the same issue in the legal profession. White, able-bodied males still make up the largest group in Scotland’s workforce, but they no longer represent the majority, so continuing dependence on that demographic in science and technology is unsustainable and represents a lost opportunity for female scientists and engineers as well as for the sector as a whole. A modern, scientific, energy-rich nation such as Scotland must address the issue. In the north-east, there are loads of employment opportunities in STEM subjects, but colleges do not have enough flexibility to decide where MAs go. We could replace hairdressing apprenticeships with engineering apprenticeships, for example. We must challenge attitudes.

There has been much debate about exactly how many women in Scotland, the UK and across Europe might be affected. Those numbers remain unclear, but we can be sure that, for those who are affected, it is a very serious matter indeed; they are going through a time of great anxiety. Although we can be somewhat relieved that no link has been established between the implants and an increased risk of cancer, it is a cause for concern that PIP implants appear to be more prone to rupturing and can be toxic. As my colleague Fiona McLeod pointed out, the rupture rates are estimated to be between 1 per cent and 5 per cent, but the women concerned do not know whether they will fall into that category. It is welcome news that the NHS and the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy have reassured the people of Scotland that there is only one known case of PIP implants being used by the NHS. However, I am a little puzzled by that. Does that mean that single purchases of implants are made, or does the patient bring the implants with them? Perhaps the minister could enlighten us. The NHS is to be commended for offering to remove PIP implants from anyone who has been affected following either NHS or private surgery. We can only hope that the private clinics will choose to offer the same treatment. I echo the call from the Scottish Government and from various members during this morning’s debate that private practices provide the care that their patients expect, and offer surgery to rectify the problem. Like Margaret Burgess, I agree that we should look again at resurrecting the register of implants. Clinics and hospitals must know the source of their implants and there must be batch numbers, so we should be able to do that. Some women might not even know whether they have PIP implants, and although NHS and private clinics are making efforts to contact those who do, the advice for anyone who is still concerned is to contact their GP or clinic in the first instance. Reassuringly, it appears that the rigorous MHRA processes were not at fault. The manufacturers fraudulently, and with callous disregard for their customers, altered the make-up of their products. I reiterate my hope that the continuing UK-wide inquiries into the issue will provide both answers and peace of mind for those who have been affected. It should be borne in mind, however, that no breast implant surgery or cosmetic procedure is entirely without risk. I know that there are often good medical reasons for having breast implants, but I am not alone in being concerned by the ever-increasing numbers of women who feel that they have to put their bodies through this ordeal for cosmetic reasons. The PIP case highlights the real dangers that are involved in cosmetic surgery. The unrealistic image of women that pervades much of our society, most worryingly among our young people, continues to drive women to measures such as cosmetic surgery at great expense and danger to themselves, all in the name of someone else’s idea of beauty. Carol Craig of the Centre for Confidence and Well-Being is extremely concerned about the amount of money that is spent—by people who can ill afford it—on such treatments. The health impact of the practices is well documented and it is becoming increasingly apparent that the situation threatens to undermine the equality and emancipation of women in our society. We can all agree that the manufacturers and practitioners in question have a duty of care to their customers, but we should not forget the duty of care that we all owe each other in society, and to ourselves as women.

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Scottish Enterprise’s energy team on its work on Scotland’s oil and gas strategy and the successful launch of that strategy at Hydrasun’s premises in my constituency last month? Does he agree that the oil and gas sector has a key role to play in the reindustrialisation of Scotland?

Does the minister recognise that RHET has an important role to play with regard to promoting a safer Scotland and the fewer knives, better lives agenda, as people such as gamekeepers can show young people that knives are used only for work and gralloching deer rather than taking to Kirkcaldy or Glenrothes, as one pointed out on a children’s visit that I attended?

18. To ask the Scottish Government how it will encourage the use of tablet computers and other new technologies in classrooms. (S4O-01086)

As recent job market figures have shown again that the strongest demand for permanent staff in Scotland comes from the information technology and computing sector, does the cabinet secretary agree that ensuring that our children’s IT education is of the highest possible standard is essential to the Scottish economy? Does he believe that the speed of technological development means that we must always be open to introducing new methods and technologies in our schools?

Will the member give way?

The impact of the euro zone crisis on Scotland should not be underestimated. Currently, 45 per cent of Scotland’s international exports are to euro zone countries and they are worth almost £10 billion to the Scottish economy. We should be extremely concerned about anything that jeopardises that trade. As others have said, Greece is Scotland’s 28th largest market by export value, with exports of £175 million in 2012, which is 0.8 per cent of all exports. That figure is down from a peak of 12.5 per cent in 2009. We should also be worried about contagion, especially in Spain, which is our seventh-largest market. A number of Scottish seafood companies, including companies in my constituency, are reliant on the Spanish market. In addition, fears over the future of the European currency act as a deterrent to companies investing around the world, which has direct consequences on the number of jobs that are being created in this country. That reluctance to invest can also make it significantly more challenging to raise private capital for infrastructure projects. There is, in that, a certain irony, given that infrastructure investment is one of the most effective ways of stimulating economic growth and is certainly the most powerful measure available to Scotland under the current limits of devolution. In both the euro zone and the UK, a short-sighted fixation on austerity is causing significant and lasting damage that threatens us all. Greek debt as a percentage of GDP has rocketed from an already eye-watering 113 per cent in 2008, at the start of the crisis, to 165 per cent in 2011. Severe austerity measures, with no credible effort to stimulate growth, mean that no matter how much public spending is cut by in Greece, the deficit continues to rise and, with that, the debt-to-GDP ratio goes up. Could there be a clearer example of why austerity without growth is no way to revive an ailing economy? Listening to David Stewart, we would think that all Greece’s problems are someone else’s, but there is no doubt that in many respects Greece was living beyond its means. Whether it is within the UK or among the economies of the euro zone, stimulating growth has to be a priority if we are to avoid the current horrendous situation getting worse. In recent weeks, the Chancellor of the Exchequer has faced the humiliation of having both the IMF and the Confederation of British Industry point out the critical flaws in his approach and the urgent need to stimulate growth in the economy. Following the recent announcement of the chancellor’s U-turn on his ill-advised pasty tax, the UK Government’s perverse obsession with austerity is perhaps the only policy that it has yet to reverse its course on, but it is the policy that it should have given its greatest priority to abandoning. To continue down the coalition’s current path out of a stubborn refusal to face reality is the worst kind of foolishness. George Osborne should be big enough to admit that he has misjudged his priorities and to accept that growth needs to be stimulated as a matter of urgency. The potential consequences, should he fail to do so, can only be described as catastrophic, and mean that we will stay in recession for longer than necessary. Germany’s insistence on Greek austerity is wrong. I found it rather worrying that when a cross-party group of parliamentarians from the Bundestag visited the Scottish Parliament recently, all parties were behind Chancellor Merkel’s strategy. Perhaps there will be some softening of that stance, especially since elections beckon in that country. Many people are now asking for investment in infrastructure—a stance that has been taken by this Government but ridiculed by the other parties in this chamber. Every £100 million of capital spending is estimated to support 1,400 jobs throughout the Scottish economy and would make a big dent in unemployment figures. Gavin Brown wants to know what the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry have been doing. If he had had his eyes and ears open yesterday, he would have heard about the oil and gas strategy that was launched by the First Minister at Hydrasun in my constituency—a company that is growing across the world with the help of Scottish Enterprise and the SCDI. It is taking on apprentices and new graduates, who are driving forward growth in the company. It is a strategy that will be at the heart of the reindustrialisation of Scotland. If the European Union is to mean just that, all countries in Europe must have a say in what steps are to be taken to get us all out of this recession. Obama’s strategy was to invest in infrastructure in the United States, and unemployment there is gradually falling. There is money for investment around the world, in finance houses and in private hands, but those who might invest are not doing so because they are not seeing the stability that is required for that. Investment in infrastructure will create jobs and greater demand, and will get the economy moving. That needs to be happening worldwide. As Aileen McLeod said, the euro zone needs to develop euro bonds, so that we share the burden of debt, and so that austerity is coupled with investment. I had hoped that Neil Findlay—an avid reader of the Morning Star—would be reeling off ideas from that newspaper about what should be done internationally, but I see that he has been busy distributing a pamphlet in this country, saying that “to break the power of big business and neoliberal policies and promote social and economic justice” we need to stay in the United Kingdom. How many centuries of being in the United Kingdom does it take to show that the UK is the last place where we will get economic and social justice?

If Mr Findlay had looked at the SNP’s policy, he would have seen that it is exactly the same as the Labour Party’s policy. The Labour Party said that it would join the euro when it is right to do so. There is no easy answer. If there were one, it would have been found by now. Whether or not we are part of the euro zone, we are all affected in this globalised world. The SNP, with its emphasis on infrastructure investment as a way to growth and stimulus, has been proved to be correct. That is why I want full powers for Scotland.

I am delighted to take part in the debate. Many members in the chamber already know of my passion for language learning and how knowledge of languages certainly helped my career development. Strange as it may seem, I would not have been able to enter the oil and gas industry if I had not been able to speak German. Members may expect me to concentrate on Scottish languages, as I have taken my oath three times in Doric and am a strong supporter of Gaelic-medium education. However, I do not intend to focus on those languages this morning, although they form a strong basis for learning other languages. The reading bus in Aberdeen does wonderful work in promoting the Doric language, and Gaelic-medium schools such as Gilcomstoun school in Aberdeen do sterling work in promoting multilingualism. I do not know how we have come to be so dismissive in recent decades of the need to speak and understand other languages, but that is totally unacceptable in a globalised society, and I welcome the initiative from the minister. As an article that appeared in The Observer some time ago said, “Entre nous, the idea we need only English is totally passé. Without a commitment to language teaching we condemn our children to a tongue-tied future.” The charity Children in Scotland reminds us that around 137 languages in addition to English are spoken in this country, and that we have around 10,000 bilingual or multilingual children. We must build on that. Research shows that learning a second language builds on the first language and consolidates it, and children do not become confused when they are exposed in their early years to two or more languages. Marco Biagi mentioned the recent pilot project in my constituency at Walker Road primary school, which showed the benefits of total immersion learning in maths, geography, environmental studies and other subjects in French. That resulted in those children presenting early for standard grade when they went to secondary school, and it increased their ability to learn a second language at secondary level. My plea is that it is not only French that should be children’s first encounter with another language. My own local authority, Aberdeenshire, went from offering a choice of French or German to offering just French. I am sure that that put a lot of children off learning a language, especially when there are so many affinities between Doric and German that could be built on. We must use the skills of teachers and parents, and others in our communities, to introduce children to the diversity of languages, and we must use this opportunity to review the way in which we teach languages. Curriculum for excellence offers exciting opportunities in that field. It is not—as Liz Smith believes—about finding more time but about combining language learning with other subjects. When I, as we all do, visit schools and speak to children, I always promote language learning as much as I can. The minister posed the question of its use to working-class kids; I always ask the boys who want to be footballers what they would do about languages if they were good enough to play in Spain or Italy—and I always see a light going on in their heads. Teachers seem to face unnecessary barriers when they organise school exchange trips. A friend of mine who teaches languages at Alford academy told me that there had been a suggestion that German families be disclosure checked, which I think is going over the score somewhat. Although the Confucius hubs have been introduced, I am not sure whether they have been kept up across the whole of Scotland, and I ask the minister to ensure that they are all operating as intended. Many companies are also interested in helping with language promotion. Every year, my old company, KCA Deutag, sponsors two secondary school children on a work experience trip to its headquarters in the German town of Bad Bentheim, and I know that rotary clubs used to help with student exchanges to various countries. We must make it easier for language assistants to be used in our schools. Those assistants might already be living in our communities, but they might also be students in, for example, the Erasmus programme. Traditionally, there have tended to be more students coming to Scotland than Scottish students going in the other direction, but there has been much progress in that area in recent years. For example, the number of Robert Gordon University students going to other countries is now the same as the number who come here to go to that university. Actually, the Scottish figures for the Erasmus programme make exciting reading. Scotland now accounts for 12.6 per cent of the total number of UK students in the programme, with 1,507 taking part in 2009-10 and 1,273 the year before. However, although that represents a total increase of 26.8 per cent in two years, the percentage of the Scottish student population in the Erasmus programme is still very low, at 0.7 per cent. That is still slightly higher than the English figure of 0.5 per cent but nowhere near the figure for France, which is 1.4 per cent, or for Spain, which is 2 per cent. All, though, is not doom and gloom. I know one young lady who, as a young child, was exposed to “Salut Serge” CDs on car journeys; who took French in primary and secondary school and in one year—her sixth year—got her higher Spanish; and who at the University of Glasgow furthered her French and Spanish with business studies. She took French and German in her second year and next year is going to Toulouse University, where she will take all her classes in French and where she hopes to deepen her knowledge of Spanish and start Mandarin. She was one of more than 200 at the Erasmus induction meeting at the University of Glasgow the other week—and I have to say that I am disappointed that, as my friend Sandra White will point out, Glasgow is reducing the breadth of the languages available at the university while Toulouse offers 13 choices. Cue one proud mum of this young lady—I practise what I preach.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Minister for Local Government and Planning has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding its plans to improve public buildings. (S4O-01035)

Given that the redevelopment of Aberdeen art gallery is contingent on the use of tax increment financing, does the minister agree that Labour’s undemocratic decision to overturn the referendum on the city garden project could scupper the prospect of that redevelopment? Does he also agree that the Labour-Tory-independent council administration would do better to invest in Aberdeen’s infrastructure instead of rewarding itself with pay rises and plush offices?

I congratulate the minister on securing this debate on the national parenting strategy and the Government on taking the time to consult families from a wide variety of backgrounds and all the organisations involved in parenting in developing the strategy. There is no magic bullet in parenting; if there were, we would all be using it and would be having no problems in bringing up our children. I recall impending parenthood, the plethora of bestselling parenting guides and arguments with previous generations about the best way of parenting. We always ask children what they want to be when they grow up and give them lots of careers advice, but do we emphasise enough the enormous and lifelong commitment involved in being a parent? Nothing is more important than giving our children the best start in life, and parents must come to realise that parenthood is not about material things but about caring, nurturing and developing their children. As a result, I am pleased that a key part of the strategy is building parents’ resilience, skills, capacity and confidence and raising the importance and value of parenting—and, in turn, children—in our society. We are certainly not helped in those efforts by certain media outlets that portray children as little more than fashion accessories. Given my previous comments about the importance of antenatal classes as a vehicle for learning not only about the process of birth but about the wider context of bringing up children, I was dismayed to read last week about a recent National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children report that cited a survey suggesting that 65 per cent of new mothers from middle-class backgrounds but less than 39 per cent of disadvantaged mothers have attended antenatal classes. We need to do some work on that area, and it will probably fall to general practices and primary care to ensure that, through health visitors, midwives and others, parents receive the support in very early years that they need. The NSPCC report also touched on the isolation felt by new mothers. I know that, as a new mother who had just moved into a new area, I would have felt pretty isolated had it not been for the support of the local mothers and toddlers group. We must congratulate organisations such as Parenting Across Scotland that keep bringing the problems of families to our attention through their literature and the events that they frequently hold in Parliament. I always make the effort to attend those. As the minister has said, we know about the importance of the time between pre-birth and school. Long gone are the days when, once the health visitor’s visits had finished, children did not come to the attention of the authorities again until they started school at the age of five. We have seen the increase in childcare and nursery provision. The increase is on-going and exponential. Family-nurse partnerships are a great concept that is currently being rolled out, although we would not think so if we listened to some Labour members. I am glad that the minister mentioned the teenage years, and I commend the work of the Blue Horizon Youth Project in my constituency. The pressures continue, but we are working on them.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is taking to involve local communities in preventing the entry of contraband into the prison estate. (S4O-00985)

Involving the local community in helping to keep contraband out of prisons is particularly important in areas where the prison is sited close to local residents, as is the case in my constituency, so I am delighted that the prison watch scheme has been launched in HMP Aberdeen. Given the success of the pilot scheme in Edinburgh, will the cabinet secretary look at rolling out the approach in other parts of the country, if the evidence shows that the project continues to reduce the level of contraband that gets into prisons?

I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s wisdom in setting up the commission on women offenders and particularly in asking Dame Elish Angiolini to chair it. Her commitment to women’s issues in the justice system is well recognised. For example, we all remember her unstinting efforts to secure more convictions for rape and her commitment on that issue. The recommendations in the report are sound and far-reaching. I hope that, when the cabinet secretary gives the Scottish Government’s response in the summer, it will be positive. I speak as a former member of the visiting committee at Craiginches prison for 12 years. For the majority of that time, Craiginches had a small women’s unit. We witnessed the increase in women prisoners over that time and the changes in the type of offences, which Dr Richard Simpson mentioned. Members have mentioned that women need fairness in the justice system. By that, I think that they mean equality of treatment between men and women. No one says that women should not be sentenced if they have committed a crime, but the sentencing of men and women is not fair. Women are more likely to be sent to prison for lesser crimes. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is known for talking about locking up the bad and not the sad, but that definitely needs to be applied to female offenders as well as to male ones. Reoffending rates are higher not just because short sentences mean that little time is available for rehabilitation, but because, tragically, prison is the only safe place in many women’s lives. I witnessed women who had come into prison malnourished, ill-kempt and distraught, but who, after just a few weeks, looked so much better, with their hair shiny and nails growing as a result of getting good food, regular sleep and order in their lives. As John Finnie mentioned, one can see the self-harm scars healing. Regrettably, the SPS in its wisdom decided to close the unit in Aberdeen and move women offenders from the north-east to Cornton Vale. The visiting committee vigorously opposed that move because we knew that it would increase problems for the families with visits and maintaining relationships. Of course, it has now been realised that the move was a mistake, and the unit has been reopened. It is worth quoting some excerpts from the commission’s report that relate to Aberdeen. It states: “We were ... impressed with the Community Integration Unit at Aberdeen HMP which provides support for women to be part of a local community at the end of their sentence.” The report goes on to state: “The Commission visited Aberdeen Community Integration Unit and met with management, staff and prisoners, and former residents. We had lengthy discussions with prisoners away from staff and we were struck by the positive relationship which exists between the staff in the unit and the prisoners there. This seemed to us to be based upon a culture of mutual respect. We also noted the emphasis that was placed by management and staff on involving the residents in taking responsibility for practical decisions which affect their daily lives within the unit. It seemed to us that the women in the unit benefited from this approach and were encouraged by it to develop important life skills which may assist them as they prepare to return to their communities.” The report continues: “We recommend that the new national prison for women should include” a “Community Integration Unit based on the model in place at HMP Aberdeen to help women access community services and support networks prior to their release.” We should all congratulate Governor Audrey Mooney and all the agencies, including the Wise Group, that work in the community integration unit. I regret that I have not visited Cornton Vale. That is a gap in my knowledge, although I take on board John Finnie’s comments about the number of visitors. However, I know that the prison has links with prisons in Malawi, and I want to share my experience of visiting Chichiri prison in Malawi. In that prison, women can be held on remand for up to nine years; children are detained with their mothers; women do not have cooking facilities, but they have to do their own cooking, without a kitchen and just on bits of burning wood; and they have appalling shower and washing facilities. I agree that Cornton Vale should be replaced but, as others have said, we need to find ways of gaining retribution for women’s crimes other than putting them in prison. My biggest plea is for a change of culture in judicial services. Recently, Aberdeen prison visiting committee hosted a meeting that, as Lewis Macdonald knows, was well attended by a wide range of organisations, including police, social services and many third sector organisations. What struck me most was the heartfelt plea from a head of social work services about the huge burden that is placed on the public purse by the judiciary’s sentencing policy, whether that is in housing, fostering, kinship care, or mental health services. It is important that the judiciary recognises the wider consequences of sentencing policy. It is clear that David McLetchie did not read the briefing from Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, which calls for a distinct approach for women offenders. My hope is that, as a result of the report, we will see a change of culture in the judicial services and that the effects of sentencing policy on offenders and their families will be recognised. I also hope that there is a change in the SPS, so that it considers the longer-term outcomes.

I welcome the opportunity to open on behalf of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee the debate on the committee’s report on progress towards the implementation of Scotland’s 2012 homelessness commitment. It has certainly been a day of contrast in the Scottish Parliament. It has probably not escaped members’ notice that, this morning, one of the world’s wealthiest and most high-profile businessmen gave evidence to one of our committees. This afternoon, we are in the chamber discussing how we ensure that we deliver on a commitment to improve the rights of one of the most vulnerable groups in our society. The 2012 commitment, which was created under the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, entitles all unintentionally homeless people to settled accommodation by the end of this year. Currently, local authorities have to secure settled accommodation only for those homeless applicants who have been assessed as being unintentionally homeless and in priority need. The act stipulates that the priority need distinction must be abolished by 31 December 2012. That means that, from the point of abolition, all unintentionally homeless households will be entitled to settled accommodation. The 2003 act has been acknowledged as groundbreaking legislation by commentators elsewhere in the United Kingdom and around the world—we often beat ourselves up in this country, but many people have recognised that this is groundbreaking legislation. I do not consider it any exaggeration to say that it is one of the most important pieces of legislation that the Scottish Parliament has passed. Given the importance of the homelessness legislation, I was delighted that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee agreed to check on progress towards meeting the 2012 commitment and to identify any barriers to its delivery. I express the committee’s thanks to all the organisations and individuals that provided detailed and informative oral and written evidence to the committee during its inquiry. I also thank the clerks to the committee—especially Ruth McGill—and the Scottish Parliament information centre for all their help. The committee undertook a programme of informal visits to the Ayrshire and south housing options hub, Moray Council, Turning Point Scotland, Glasgow Housing Association, East Lothian Council and City of Edinburgh Council. We are grateful to all those who agreed to meet us and to provide an extremely valuable practical insight into the work that is being done on the ground to deliver the commitment. I also thank those who attended a lunch-time event with the committee today, prior to the debate, some of whom have stayed and are in the public gallery. I offer particular thanks to Angela, a former user of Shelter Scotland services, who kindly agreed to speak to committee members about her experience of homelessness, the options that were available to her at the time and her experience of raising a family in temporary accommodation. We are very grateful to her for giving up her time to share her experience with us. The committee acknowledges the varied progress among local authorities in Scotland towards meeting the 2012 commitment. However, we were encouraged by the fact that the majority either had already met the commitment or were close to doing so. The committee heard that the 2012 commitment has led to considerable improvements in the provision of services for homeless people in Scotland. One of the most significant steps forward, which we highlighted in our report, has been the development of the housing options approach. That approach allows for better assessment of people’s individual circumstances and enables local authorities to pursue effective prevention work. Indeed, it may be responsible for the overall 20 per cent reduction in the number of homelessness applications shown in the Scottish Government statistics covering the period from April to September 2011. Although the housing options approach is at different stages of development across Scotland, there are good examples of positive results. It is encouraging that the minister has indicated that the Scottish Government and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities 2012 joint steering group remains supportive of the approach and the benefits that it brings through homelessness prevention and sustainable outcomes. Another issue that the committee has highlighted is the importance of partnership working, which can result in early intervention to prevent homelessness. The committee heard how, in 2010, five housing options hubs were created to promote the housing options approach and to share best practice across all Scotland’s 32 local authorities. That initiative has met with considerable success, as the committee experienced when it visited the Ayrshire and south hub. The committee considers that that success should be built on and that, post 2012, the worthwhile work of the hubs should continue and be developed further. Therefore, we have recommended that the Scottish Government examine the potential for the provision of continued financial support to develop membership of the hubs. I welcome the minister’s indication, in his response to the report, that the Scottish Government is identifying additional resources to enable that work to continue and I look forward to hearing of the outcome of that exercise in due course. We also heard that, although there have been considerable improvements in partnership working between, for example, housing, health and social services, further work could be done. Therefore, we have recommended that the 2012 Scottish Government-COSLA steering group investigate and report on methods of further developing and improving such partnership working. The committee considers that it is not unreasonable to anticipate a link between achieving the commitment and an increased demand for temporary accommodation. We will continue to monitor the matter following the 2012 deadline to ensure that the commitment and other pressures that local authorities face do not lead to unacceptable levels of dependence on temporary accommodation. The committee has also recommended that the Scottish Housing Regulator should report to the Government and Parliament on how it will ensure that temporary accommodation meets acceptable standards. The committee hopes to engage with the regulator over this parliamentary session to discuss that and similar matters. Our report acknowledges that local authorities must juggle the requirements of building sustainable communities, serving people who are on waiting or transfer lists and ensuring that homeless people are allocated settled accommodation. We heard positive evidence about common housing registers, their importance to allocations policy and their importance to fostering partnership working in local authority areas. In his response to the report, the minister has provided a helpful update on CHRs, which states that 16 are in operation, with a further four launching imminently and another three in 2013. I hope that the local authorities that do not yet have CHRs in place will be given every encouragement and support to introduce them. Although progress towards achieving the 2012 commitment has been positive, the committee heard about potential barriers to progressing the homelessness agenda. One key issue is, of course, the supply of affordable housing. The committee will continue to monitor and assess the Scottish Government’s progress towards achieving its affordable housing targets and has made several recommendations on how supply might be improved across the tenure types. The role of housing in the private sector is particularly important to housing supply. I note that the Scottish Government, working in partnership with the Scottish private rented sector strategy group, published a consultative strategy for the private rented sector on 17 April, and I hope that the issues that the committee raised will be addressed as part of that consultation. In response to evidence that disabled people are still reporting that insufficient accessible permanent and temporary accommodation is available, we asked the Scottish Government to provide information on the levels of available accessible accommodation and its plans to increase the supply of such accommodation. The committee welcomes the work that is being undertaken on an accessible housing register and the work by the Government’s adaptations working group. It will monitor those important developments. Another potential barrier is, of course, the likely negative impact of the United Kingdom Welfare Reform Bill on the ability of local authorities to achieve the 2012 target. The main point of concern for the majority of the committee was the impact of the provisions that relate to underoccupancy, which could affect local authority applications policies—Alex Johnstone dissented on that, which was a surprise. Other points of concern were the general reduction in benefits, which could lead to increased arrears and evictions—again, Mr Johnstone dissented—and the change to providing universal credit, which will include a housing benefit component, to claimants monthly in arrears. The latter measure could cause problems for those who have difficulty with budgeting. The committee has asked the Scottish Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee to examine the full details of the regulations on those provisions. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s 2nd Report, 2012 (Session 4): Homelessness in Scotland: the 2012 Commitment (SP Paper 97).

Will the member give way on that point?

Does the member recognise that credit unions have an important role to play in that? Sometimes, people have money stashed away in a credit union and it is not taken into account when they are given advice in this dire situation, as we learned from the cross-party group on credit unions last week.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on the year of creative Scotland. (S4O-00890)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the work that is being done by organisations such as the Robert Burns World Federation, whose national festival schools finals are being held at Cults academy in my constituency over the coming fortnight, play a vital role in illuminating not only the work of the bard, but Scotland’s rich and varied literary history to young people, creating a legacy beyond the year of creative Scotland?

My colleague Nigel Don mentioned Steve Holt from Mearns FM. I understand from speaking to him earlier today that the Government pays for some broadcasting on local radio stations in the central belt but not for broadcasting on stations outwith it. Will the cabinet secretary look into that? Fiona McLeod’s local radio station might want to contact shmu FM in Aberdeen, which has been training disadvantaged youngsters for many years. I have often been to its graduation ceremonies in the town house, which are excellent. Its work gives young people confidence that they did not have before.

Almost two years ago to the day, the Parliament backed a motion that highlighted the threat that locational transmission charging poses to developing greater low-carbon power supplies and called for a review of the charging regime to take place. Two years on, we have the recommendations that Ofgem is edging towards. The alterations to the transmission charging regime will mean that generators are charged by output rather than capacity, which could reduce costs for some renewables generators by up to 60 per cent and could lead to lower bills for consumers, but there will be no fundamental overhaul of the locational principles that underpin the system. Any move to reduce costs for renewable energy companies in Scotland is positive, but the opportunity for positive reform is in danger of being missed. In the debate two years ago, I pointed out that it cannot be right that Scottish generators produce about 12 per cent of the UK’s electricity but pay about 40 per cent of transmission costs. The system of charging—or subsidising—producers on the basis of their location to encourage them to locate as close to the south of England as possible is an anachronism. It was designed for an era in which a small number of big power stations provided the UK’s electricity, rather than an era of renewable energy, which by its nature is inevitably more geographically dispersed. If the only factor that was in play in designing a system of transmission charges was the cost of grid infrastructure, locational pricing might make some kind of sense. However, that is not the reality of where we are today. Scotland and the wider UK have ambitious carbon emission reduction targets to meet that require significant growth in renewable energy. Economic opportunities from developing and installing renewables technologies can also provide a significant boost to local and national economies. Taking those factors into account and designing arrangements that facilitate a move to a low-carbon energy sector is what project transmit is supposed to be about. Transmission charges should reflect those wider priorities and avoid becoming a barrier to renewable energy development, as is currently the case. A postage stamp approach, where all generators face flat rates to use the national grid regardless of their location, is portrayed by some as being radical and undesirable. Yet it is a fact that that is the norm across Europe, with the vast majority of countries charging by how much power companies generate, rather than by where they are located. I cannot believe that it is beyond the wit of man to come up with a fairer and more equitable regime that benefits all the country. Although limited progress towards a fairer charging regime is better than no progress at all, Ofgem’s move towards ruling out a flat rate of charge is disappointing. The case for a flat charge has not diminished. I hope that the Scottish Government will continue to make the case for such an approach and that it will have the backing of the whole Parliament in doing so.

I think that we all agree that the programme has done outstanding work in protecting athletes since it was launched. However, while it covers young people taking part in organised sports, it does not yet cover all schools. Will the cabinet secretary look at the work that would be involved in extending screening to all senior school pupils so that as many young people as possible are tested for heart problems and potential tragedies can be averted?

The minister mentioned leadership and cultural change. With those things in mind, he will be aware how important it is to bring together private and public sector representatives to get to know each other’s problems. Having met the Trinity Group in Aberdeen, he will agree that it is setting an excellent example. Does he agree that that kind of forum is something from which other parts of Scotland could benefit, and will he consider ways in which best practice of that kind can be shared around the country?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the UK budget of 21 March 2012 will have on devolved matters. (S4O-00819)

The cabinet secretary knows as well as I do how significant the impact of high fuel prices is on the people of Scotland, particularly those in rural areas, who have no choice but to use their cars. High fuel prices affect every single one of us, as higher haulage costs lead to higher prices for everything that everybody buys, including the Government and local authorities. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the plan to hike fuel duty by 3p per litre later this year is entirely the wrong move at a time when everyone’s budgets are tight, and that it shows up the UK Government’s complete inability to get a grip on soaring fuel prices?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what progress local authorities have made in developing new local development plans. (S4O-00812)

The minister will agree that the structured planning for the future that the new type of local plan development offers is an important step forward for local authorities in boosting their future prospects. Does he share my welcome for the fact that Aberdeen City Council has led the way by adopting its local development plan before any other local authority? Does he agree that its plan will help to cement the city’s place as a major driver for the Scottish economy in future years?

Is it not also the case that the former Labour Minister for Education and Young People, Peter Peacock, believes that there should be no delay in implementing curriculum for excellence? Is it not also the case that, in 2006, when Mr Peacock unfortunately had to give up being minister because of illness, there was a delay of six months and the incoming SNP Government had to go hell for leather to get curriculum for excellence back on track? During those six months, the education minister was none other than Hugh Henry. He may have fine words now about jeopardising curriculum for excellence, but his actions speak louder than those words.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on her excellent speech. She spoiled it in her final sentence, but nevertheless, it was excellent. There is a maxim that, if someone is in a hole, they should stop digging. That is clearly a message that the Labour Party does not understand. Otherwise, it would not have brought the motion to the chamber for debate. The first indication that I received on my BlackBerry was that the Labour Party was to debate economic growth. The motion is the antithesis of economic growth. I first stood for elected office in Aberdeen in 1979. At that election, I said that Aberdeen should not be an oil capital with no legacy to show for it. Other cities throughout the world have Getty museums and art galleries, but Aberdeen did not have any significant investment from the oil companies that were based in the city and which benefited from its facilities. Do not get me wrong. Oil companies sponsor individual events, but there has been no long-term investment by those companies in the city. Now, nearly five decades later, Aberdeen is in the almost unique position of having a promise of £50 million from a local man who has only ever had the best interests of his native city at heart. He proposes to plough in his own money to regenerate the heart of the city of Aberdeen, hauling it into the 21st century so that more companies will locate in Aberdeen. That will ensure that those who do not need to be there any more will stay, and that Aberdeen remains fit to be the energy capital of Europe for many years to come. Given that the local Labour Party tried to make the development a party-political issue and, I have no doubt, was basing its local election campaign on the subject, it is now in panic mode. Holding a referendum was the right thing to do. Friends of Union Terrace Gardens supported a referendum, and it supported the question that was asked. Now, the Labour Party is questioning the validity of the referendum. I have known Crawford Langley for many years and there is not another person in whom I would have more trust to conduct a referendum. The words of Sarah Boyack are absolutely disgraceful. Yes, there were police investigations, but they proved invalid. There was no double voting. The counting officer was absolutely scrupulous. If Crawford Langley had had any questions about the validity of the referendum or the costs that were ploughed into it by either side, I have no doubt that he would have raised them.

I take Crawford Langley’s statement on board. Guidelines should be laid down for local referenda, but that is not what we are debating today. The people of Aberdeen have spoken. I thank Sir Ian Wood for his generosity and I welcome further contributions to the city garden project. We all need to get behind the project and make it all that it can be. I recognise that the project still has to go through the planning process. As I said, the Labour Party finds itself in a big hole. It is flailing around and failing to get out of it. I am confident that the people of Aberdeen will leave it there at the council elections in May.

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to improve childcare provision. (S4F-00496)

I know from what the First Minister has said that he is fully aware of how important it is to the economy that parents can access good-quality childcare. It enables parents to go to work and it is hugely important in our efforts to ensure gender equality in the workforce. Recognising that childcare in Scotland is partially controlled by funding mechanisms that are determined by Westminster, does the First Minister agree that one of the most damaging things that the United Kingdom Government could have done is to reduce the childcare element of the working tax credit from 80 per cent of costs to 70 per cent, which will cost the families that rely on it more than £500 a year? Does he agree that, if such a cut is the coalition’s priority, it would be far better for everyone if responsibility for benefits policy was in the hands of this Parliament and Government?

Every day we come across examples of the hardship that these exceptionally difficult times are causing in the budgets of households, and in the public and private sectors. Testament to the strain is the pay freeze that the Scottish Government had to impose on staff salaries above £21,000, which was a tough decision, but one that was necessary in order to avoid job losses. It is perhaps not a universally-held view, but it is a widely-held view, that having a job and a pay freeze is much better than having no job at all. However, that decision and the straitened times in which we live should not prevent continuing efforts to move towards the adoption of a fair living wage throughout Scotland. Indeed, the current situation makes the policy more essential. Since the start of the downturn, inflation has run well above the Bank of England’s target rate, so households’ purchasing power must be spread even more thinly. It is an inevitable fact—as others have said—that those who are on the lowest wages are most vulnerable to the increased day-to-day costs that inflation brings. With inflation eroding the real value of household incomes, a living wage is the only sensible way of fighting in-work poverty for the lowest-paid people in Scotland. The Scottish Government has been at the forefront of efforts to introduce a living wage, with the policy having been adopted by the Scottish Government and all its agencies as well as the national health service. The Government cannot realistically dictate the pay policy of local government, although I was surprised to hear Gavin Brown suggest to the minister that he might do that.

Wait. That is one of Mr Brown’s arguments; the next day it will be that national Government is interfering too much in local government. He cannot have it both ways. It is up to individual councils to follow the example that is being shown and to adopt the policy for themselves.

The Government is not dictating on the council tax. As Neil Findlay well knows, that is a voluntary agreement. It is heartening that 17 of Scotland’s 32 local authorities expect to have a living wage in place by April this year. My colleague Mark McDonald mentioned that Aberdeen City Council is one of those authorities, following its recent decision to allocate the necessary funding during the budget process. That is particularly welcome and will benefit a significant number of my constituents. Mark McDonald mentioned Kevin Stewart and Councillor McCaig, but that move is testament to the hard work of all my SNP council colleagues in Aberdeen City Council in the past five years. They inherited a council that was nearly bankrupt, but it is now receiving many plaudits for its significant performance in all areas of local government. If Aberdeen City Council can do it, I am sure that the other councils that still need to come on board can do so. Although the progress that has been made is welcome, there is still some way to go in the efforts to make the living wage the standard in Scottish society. I am sure that most members who are present sincerely hope, as I do, that the rest of Scotland’s local authorities will follow the example that has been set by the councils that have said that they will adopt the living wage in the near future. Of course, the real challenge is not just for the living wage to be implemented in the public sector: it is important that the living wage be adopted throughout the economy, including in the private sector. That challenge is even more pronounced in the current job market, as so many people compete for every job. The only way to ensure the roll-out of the living wage across Scotland’s private sector would be through raising the minimum wage. However, as other members have said, the power to do that is reserved to Westminster. Unfortunately, it seems less than likely that the UK Government will take any steps in that direction, particularly when it currently proposes attacks on employment law that would make the situation even worse than it is at present. Interestingly, Germany has the most stringent employment laws and the most negotiation with wage councils, but it still seems to be one of the most prosperous countries in Europe. This is another issue on which, if the Scottish Parliament had the powers to act, we could make Scotland a better place to live. The proposal to use public sector procurement contracts to specify that companies that provide goods and services to the public sector should operate a living wage policy has the potential to result in progress in the private sector. Other members have asked whether such a move would be compatible with EU law; I look forward to hearing the results from the EU. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is working with the European Commission to resolve the uncertainty and I hope that we will get a viable option in the future. The importance of a living wage policy is growing, as times get tougher for households that are on low incomes. So far, central Government has shown an excellent example in adopting the measure. We should all welcome the fact that many local authorities are following suit. The challenge that we now face is to build on that progress and to give more and more people in Scotland access to a fair living wage.

This seems a particularly appropriate week in which to be debating the need for greater growth and, in particular, the need for us to boost our international presence and exports, given that the Scottish Council for Development and Industry held a hugely successful event on the future of oil and gas across the road at Our Dynamic Earth on Tuesday. The north sea oil and gas industry is perhaps the most successful example of Scotland exporting its knowledge and skills around the world and attracting international investment to the waters off our shores. The industry still has a bright future. It is a major employer, particularly in the north-east of Scotland, and it will remain important for many years to come. The industry is important to the Scottish economy and the growth that it has achieved stands in stark contrast to the meagre levels of growth in the UK economy as a whole. That lack of growth should be of huge concern to George Osborne, particularly given the indications that it could soon lead to the UK’s credit rating being downgraded. Making cuts that are too far-reaching and too quick at the expense of economic growth is a dangerous path to take and it could cost us all dear. Austerity without economic growth leads in one direction, which is down the path that Greece has been forced to take. Making an ideological pursuit of austerity while ignoring the need for economic growth is simply no way to run a country. We are just a few weeks away from the Chancellor’s next budget speech. It should be clearer now than ever before that investment is needed to boost economic growth and create jobs. George Osborne should expand capital investment now to support the vital growth that we need in our economy. Boosting capital spending leads to higher employment in the short to medium term and more robust economic growth in the long term. With economic growth in the UK being as anaemic as it is, taking such action has become more urgent than ever. By cutting Scotland’s capital budget by 32 per cent over four years, the UK Government has done precisely the opposite of what the Scottish economy requires. Gavin Brown talked about what the Scottish Investment Bank has done. Perhaps he should do what the north-east MSPs have done and get a presentation from his local Scottish Enterprise company, along with the Scottish Investment Bank, and see the help that it is giving to growth.

No, I will not. Perhaps Joseph Robertson (Aberdeen) Ltd will show him what has been done to help it. Mr Brown is very good at trying to intervene on everyone else’s speeches, but he had six minutes and said virtually nothing. Next month, George Osborne has the opportunity to right those wrongs, boost economic growth through capital expenditure projects and create thousands of jobs for people as a result. People up and down the country will be hoping that he does so, but they have little expectation that their hopes will be realised. Having spoken of the positive things that the Chancellor could and should do in the coming budget, we should be all too aware of the potential for him to make things substantially worse. Next month’s budget will mark the anniversary of the surprise tax raid on the north sea oil industry that was dreamed up by Danny Alexander and implemented without warning or consultation by George Osborne. Of course, that contributed to the rout suffered by the Liberal Democrats. There should be no doubt of the severe and lasting damage that that action did to the confidence of the offshore industry. The risk of future tax raids has been factored into the investment decisions of oil and gas companies, thus jeopardising future jobs in what is perhaps the most successful part of our economy. It can mean the difference between a marginal field being viable for development or not, and consequently between job-creating investment, or not. One of the fundamental things that is necessary to the oil and gas industry—and, indeed, any other business sector—is a consistent and stable investment environment upon which it can base decisions. Pulling the rug from underneath the feet of some of our biggest employers without so much as a word of warning was utterly irresponsible. That is no way to encourage growth.

Mary Scanlon was completely wrong. Given that the tax was discussed during the previous session, the industry knew full well that it could happen. The UK Government’s approach is no way to encourage growth in the sector or the wider economy. One year on, the anger in the north-east at its behaviour remains substantial. The decisions that will be made ahead of the United Kingdom budget next month are critical. Scotland simply cannot afford to be shackled to a Treasury that gets it wrong again.

I, too, thank Helen Eadie for securing this debate on an important matter. I also extend my sympathy to her on her recent family bereavement. I had not made the connection. It is all too easy for people to overlook the hugely significant role that co-operatives play in our society, so I warmly welcome the opportunity to highlight their work through the debate. The Scottish economy has benefited from the £4 billion turnover of co-ops in 2010-11. With 28,600 employees in Scotland, they have also generated employment. They have helped Scotland to grow economically and have increased and improved community engagement throughout the country. Much of that success is owed to Co-operative Development Scotland. Last year, CDS exceeded its targets by supporting the creation of 30 new co-ops and increasing awareness of co-operatives in Scotland. As new co-ops are being created, there is a greater opportunity for Scots to become involved in one. Thanks to CDS, Scottish co-ops and their members have the support that they need to succeed. As the UN has declared this the international year of co-operatives, it is appropriate that, like other members, I speak about the progress that they have made around the world. Co-ops have helped UN members and other states to come closer to achieving the development goals that they have set. In North America, co-operatives have been set up to provide day care for children, while in Japan they are used to care for the elderly. In parts of Europe, they have helped to find employment for their members during difficult times. Claudia Beamish mentioned Malawi. When Liam McArthur and I were there last year, we thought that there was a huge gap in the Malawi economy that could be filled by co-ops, especially in relation to the wastage of food. The latest edition of the Association of British Credit Unions Limited’s publication Credit Union News reports that, “To coincide with the UN event,” the Co-operative Bank, which has been very active in micro-finance, has “announced the launch of a new type of international investment scheme that will provide much needed finance to third world co-operatives for capital and infrastructure projects.” We are beginning to see a start in that area. Co-operatives provide a fairer way of doing business through the application of democratic principles. Co-ops exist to meet the needs of their members and have helped to reduce poverty around the world. They show the importance of working together to achieve a common good by giving power to the people who might otherwise be powerless. They give their members a say in their own affairs and promote confidence in the partners as well as in the co-operatives. However, co-operatives are not just good for their members; they also have outstanding business performance across every sector. They are efficient and sustainable, and they have better customer services overall. Co-ops are especially useful in tough economic times because they do not face the same dangers that many businesses face and they are less risky, as they tend to rely on financial support from their members instead of taking loans from banks. While other businesses rely on bailouts, co-operatives are capable of sustaining their trade and have shown that there is a safe alternative to risky business. That is extremely important, especially in the current economic climate. Businesses need to be safer and more accountable to their customers, and co-operatives encompass those values while spreading the risk and wealth more evenly throughout the co-op. As a result, when one member of a co-op benefits, all members benefit. That makes for a more even distribution of wealth, motivated employees and superior customer service.

I am disappointed that Lloyds is now charging co-operatives for its services, but I congratulate the food co-operative in my constituency, Community Food Initiatives North East—CFINE—and the North East Scotland Credit Union.

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it encourages co-operation and collaboration between universities. (S4O-00609)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary shares my welcome for the recent news that the University of Aberdeen, which is ranked second in the United Kingdom for scientific collaboration, and Robert Gordon University, which is one of the highest-ranked universities on positive destinations for its students, have made excellent progress towards co-operation and collaboration with each other and the colleges in north-east Scotland. Is that co-operative way of working essential if a country such as Scotland is to use resources most efficiently and obtain the maximum economic benefits from our universities? Is co-operating nationally to compete internationally the way forward?

The First Minister and I are both old enough—unfortunately—to remember the 1979 referendum, whose process was gerrymandered by the Westminster Parliament. [Interruption.]

Does the First Minister agree that, if the coming referendum process is to have any legitimacy, it must be developed in Scotland rather than restricted by conditions that Westminster has imposed? Is it therefore essential that as broad a cross-section of Scottish society as possible is engaged and involved in shaping the referendum through consultation, evidence taking and debate within and without the Parliament? That is much more likely to happen through the Scottish Parliament than through any UK Parliament.

Given that the cabinet secretary has had to make cuts, is it not reasonable and realistic to make the cuts in the areas where other methods of finance can be levered in or where most savings can be made?

I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth on, once again, delivering a budget that has, as far as possible, protected services and boosted investment against a backdrop of continuing savage cuts that have been handed to Scotland as a result of the UK Government’s spending decisions. He is becoming highly experienced at it. The fact that he has again given us a budget that delivers the most possible from diminishing resources should be welcomed across the chamber. I will focus on capital investment, in part because of my role as the convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, but also because it is perhaps the most critical part of the Scottish Government’s budget when it comes to boosting Scotland’s economy. Ken Macintosh began to acknowledge that, but then said that it was not being delivered on the ground. I remind him of the M74, the M80, the Airdrie to Bathgate railway, the 250 new schools, the Southern general hospital, the dental school in Aberdeen, the Forth replacement crossing, the Borders rail project, the dualling of the A9 and the A96, and all the other projects that are outlined in the infrastructure investment plan. That pipeline of projects is welcomed by industry, and I am sure that Mr Park recognises that they are creating real jobs for apprentices in the future. With the taxation powers of the Parliament limited, the capital spend that takes place in Scotland is the biggest lever that we have to stimulate our economy. The continuing need for such stimulus should be obvious, given that encouraging growth must be the current top priority for the economy. That is why the UK Government’s decision to impose a real-terms cut of 32 per cent to Scotland’s capital budget over the current spending review period is particularly short sighted and the Scottish Government’s decision to reprofile £750 million of revenue spending towards capital investment is critical. That policy was even endorsed by Nicola Horlick on “Newsnight Scotland” last night. Boosting capital spending results in increased employment in the short to medium term and stronger economic growth in the longer term. As well as using traditional forms of capital spending, the Scottish Government has been innovative in using other means to up the level of capital spend that will take place in Scotland in the coming years. It is using Network Rail’s regulated asset base to draw in funding for strategic rail improvements; it is leveraging greater funding from the European Union’s joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas; it is implementing measures such as tax increment financing; and it is making greater use of the non-profit-distributing model of finance. Together with the excellent work of the Scottish Futures Trust, those are all ways in which the Scottish Government is squeezing out the highest possible level of capital investment despite the constraints that Westminster has imposed. As a result of all that, capital investment in Scotland will be 25 per cent higher in 2014-15 than in the current financial year. Having said that, even more action could be taken if the Parliament had access to full borrowing powers and, with that, the ability to boost our economy more rapidly. One key investment in north-east Scotland is the Aberdeen western peripheral route. I am delighted to note that a commitment to deliver that project through the non-profit-distributing financing model is an important part of the budget. I am sure that most members in the Parliament accept that, the sooner the infuriating legal delays can be resolved and work can begin, the better for the people of north-east Scotland. That position was reiterated by Alex Neil in Aberdeen on Monday and was widely welcomed by the business community, which he addressed. The great advantage of NPD financing is the substantially better deal that it secures for the taxpayer in comparison with some of the disastrous private finance initiative projects that Administrations prior to 2007 signed off. The bill for that toxic PFI legacy in Scotland is set to increase substantially in coming years, which will drain from the Scottish Government money that could be better put to work on strengthening Scotland’s economy. As well as having new capital projects, it is important to maintain existing infrastructure well and update it as needed. Making such investments is an important part of the preventative spend agenda, because a failure to maintain what we have will result only in increased costs for the Government further down the line. It is welcome that, despite the savage cuts that have been imposed on us, the transport infrastructure maintenance budget has been protected. By focusing on stimulating economic growth and thereby creating jobs, the budget takes the right way forward in these difficult times. The Scottish Government has been given an extremely difficult task because savage cuts have been handed down as a result of UK Government decisions. We should all welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has pulled out all the stops to boost economic growth through capital spending. Opposition members—John Park excluded—have so far moaned about savings that the Government has had to make, but we have heard not a word about their choices. Perhaps they will surprise us at stages 2 and 3 with their alternatives.

Will the member give way?

It was my fault; I did not have my card in. The member should get out a bit more. What he calls for is precisely what is happening in Aberdeen, where people are getting together in the way that he suggests they should, through the Trinity Group and ACSEF, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. That is why economic growth in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire is leading Scotland at the moment.

When I saw that the topic of Labour’s first debate since it elected a new leader was to be Scotland’s future, I thought that we might at last be about to see a transformation and that Labour might have converted to at least recognising and moving towards meeting the aspirations of people in Scotland. An extraordinary transformation has taken place in all the unionist parties, not just Labour, but it seems that it is not one that could be seen as remotely useful for Scotland and its people. Just a year ago in the previous session of Parliament, the UK parties were adamant that there should be no referendum—no way, no how—yet today they are the ones who are demanding that we stampede towards an early referendum, thereby breaking our commitment and denying the people of Scotland a full opportunity to debate what they wish their future to be. The hypocrisy and cynicism of their position is plain for all to see, and I know that people across Scotland are far from impressed by it. I say that that is the position of the unionist parties but, under the leadership of David Cameron, their approaches have been nothing if not fluid and constantly shifting. At the start of the week, we were told that Westminster would impose an 18-month time limit on when a referendum should take place. In the event, it was a policy that lasted barely 18 hours before a hasty retreat was made. Still, I am not complaining. As others have said, given that more than 300 new applications for SNP membership were made in the space of the 48 hours following Mr Cameron’s intervention, he is the perfect figurehead for the unionist campaign, and I hope that he will make many more similar interventions in the debate on Scottish independence. A striking aspect of the UK Government’s insistence on a single question—a yes or no ballot—has been the lack of dissenting voices in the chamber among those who claim to want more powers for Holyrood, short of independence. That is not an option that we favour, but it is interesting, to say the least, that no party here is giving voice to aims that, as the Labour motion says, a substantial part of civic Scotland has begun to call for. We might expect that silence from the Tories, or at least from those Tories who did not back Murdo Fraser in the recent leadership election, but to have that silence from Labour and Liberal Democrats really is bizarre.

No. Mr Rennie has had lots of interventions already. He should let me develop the point. Are their self-descriptions as devolutionists or federalists nothing more than token lip service or do they really believe that the hearts of the people of Scotland are crying out, “Calman and no further”? Are they really so out of touch that they cannot see that to have substantially more powers for the Scottish Parliament than the Scotland Bill offers is precisely what the people of Scotland want? If those parties wish to waive their opportunity to put that case, however, so be it. No doubt Ming Campbell will be glad to hear that he can cease work on the Lib Dems’ home rule commission as they apparently have no interest in actually asking the voters about such proposals.

No. Unlike other parties, we at least have the courage of our convictions and the determination to give the people of Scotland an opportunity to be heard. People have consistently been looking for that opportunity for many years and they will finally get it thanks to the overwhelming endorsement that they gave the SNP in May last year.

I am not at all shame-faced about what my party has done for Scotland in the previous and current sessions of Parliament. Now that we have an overwhelming mandate from the people of Scotland, we are going to deliver. Mr Rennie talks the talk but he never delivers on federalism for the United Kingdom. The issue of independence for Scotland is too important for us to have anything other than a full, wide-ranging and informed discussion across all sections of Scottish society about the future of our country. This is the most important decision that our country will make for 300 years, and the people must have time to consider the matter seriously and weigh up the future that is in front of us. A referendum in autumn 2014 will give people in Scotland, including our young people, time to do that. Like all my colleagues on the SNP benches, I look forward to making the case for an independent Scotland.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the barriers to securing prosecutions for driving under the influence of drugs must be addressed? Does he join me in welcoming the news that a panel of scientists is to be appointed to consider introducing drug-driving limits across the United Kingdom?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that attainment should not just be judged by a high place in the exam league tables? Schools must also have ambitions for those who have additional support needs and should see that they get the most out of education, particularly in numeracy and literacy, and, where possible, move back into mainstream education. A school that is high in the league tables but has an additional support department as its largest department is not really achieving the most for all its pupils.

Will the member give way?

Does Neil Findlay agree with the recent call from the Association of British Credit Unions Limited that credit unions should be situated in post offices so that people have much better access to them?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the impact will be on the oil industry of the United Kingdom’s recent use of its European Union veto. (S4O-00515)

Given the oil and gas industry’s strong expressions of concern about the impact of potential European Union regulations on the North Sea health and safety regime, does the minister agree that the United Kingdom Government’s political grandstanding is not a backdrop against which to ensure that the future of a vital industry is properly safeguarded during the important negotiations?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the police and judicial services in the Grampian force area. (S4O-00486)

The cabinet secretary will be aware, in the light of the construction of HMP Grampian and the closure of HMP Craiginches, of the need for remand facilities in Aberdeen. Given the inadequacy of the holding cells in the Queen Street police headquarters and in the court buildings, will he facilitate a meeting with all relevant parties in the north-east to see how the provision of the necessary facilities can be brought about?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate both as convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and as MSP for a constituency in the north-east. During the committee’s deliberations on the budget, there was much debate about the benefit of infrastructure investment and whether it contributes to economic growth. Would economic growth continue if there was no investment in infrastructure? As usual, there were different views from different academics, but even they agreed that there might be a negative effect if there was no infrastructure investment. That negative effect is a real threat in the north-east. Many oil and oil-related companies have located, relocated and grown up in the north-east, and as the North Sea oil industry grew, so did they. For some of them, the North Sea is no longer their major area of work as they have gone global. It is no longer enough that the north-east is an excellent place to live. As those companies and others grow, move into renewables and continue to expand, they need infrastructure that is fit for their purposes. The same is true of food and drink companies. Infrastructure is important if those companies are to continue to provide much of the growth and wealth of the whole of Scotland. That is why the delay to the start of the Aberdeen western peripheral route is not helping economic growth in the north-east. Although the case is now again in the courts, we must believe that early 2012 will bring an end to this sorry saga and ensure that legislation is in place so that this legacy of the previous Labour and Lib Dem Administration can never happen again. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitments to dual the A96 and improve the rail links between Aberdeen and Inverness.

I cannot believe that you just said that, Mr Macdonald. The main reason for the situation that we are in with the AWPR is that, under your watch and that of the Liberal Democrats, you changed the route. As I said, I welcome the commitment to improve the connectivity between Aberdeen and Inverness as that will stimulate economic growth in the whole of the north-east. It will help to transport vital whisky exports on their journeys to China and elsewhere. We have seen massive growth in those exports and the dualling of the A96 and the A9 will certainly help the whisky companies. The Government in the previous session delivered on hospitals, schools, new trains, affordable homes and energy efficiency in homes. The infrastructure investment plan, the regeneration strategies and the other plans that have been announced recently will continue that work despite the severest budget cuts for decades. Mr Macdonald mentioned the evidence-taking session that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee conducted this week. If he had been listening more closely, he might have heard Brendan Dick welcoming the fact that the Scottish Government has a Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment—the only post of its kind in any Administration in the UK. He said that it was an excellent post to have created. It is not only the projects that have been set out, but the means of financing them in times of dwindling public finance. Thank goodness that this Government has ditched the expensive private finance initiative/public-private partnership model, which the other parties in this Parliament whole-heartedly embraced, mortgaging this and future generations in order to pour much more money than was necessary into the pockets of the private sector. Before Labour Party members complain about the lack of money for schools and hospitals, they should ask themselves how much of the revenue budgets are committed to paying back PFI/PPP loans before other choices on spend are made.

I have taken an intervention from the member already, and it was not a very good one.

The NPD model for projects such as the AWPR, which is being bundled with the Balmedie to Tipperty project in order to achieve economies of scale, represents much better value for money for the taxpayer.

The SFT has played a significant role in getting more infrastructure for the money that is available, and more and more local authorities, health boards, colleges and universities are using their knowledge of and support for innovative financing methods to facilitate collaborative procurement and asset management across the public sector. Along with his colleagues in the Liberal Democrats, Alex Johnstone wants to set Scottish Water on the route to inevitable privatisation. Why on earth, when some parts of the country that is our nearest neighbour are experiencing severe droughts and water is becoming an extremely precious resource, would we sell it off to the private sector? The union dividend has seen anyone but our Scottish citizens benefit from our assets. I am happy that the Government has prioritised the connectivity of our cities, with work to promote connectivity through road and rail and through broadband, which, as Mike MacKenzie said, will help small and rural businesses to grow. We will have more schools and better hospitals and colleges. Instead of wringing our hands and adopting the woe-is-me attitude of the Opposition parties, the cabinet secretary and his minister are going out to find new sources of funding, such as joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas—JESSICA—funds, European structural funds, loan funds and hubs. No wonder support for the SNP continues to grow. The electorate can see that the SNP Government has ambition for Scotland, even though the bah-humbug Opposition cannot.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the use of pupil-owned technology in the delivery of education in schools. (S4O-00466)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the pilot in an Aberdeen city school where the parents are being encouraged to buy their children tablet computers for school use. Although we recognise that such technology can enhance the delivery of education, especially in the area of outdoor education, does the cabinet secretary agree with me and the convener of Aberdeen City Council’s education, culture and sport committee, John West, that parents should not be put in a position of having to rent a device or have their children do without one if they cannot afford to purchase one?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and in particular the announcement of the 85 per cent funding floor—another manifesto commitment met—giving more than £5 million in the first year and almost £9 million in year 3 to Aberdeen City Council. I have spoken to the council leader, Callum McCaig, who assured me that the money will be spent wisely on providing services for the citizens of Aberdeen. How far does the cabinet secretary estimate that the money will go in addressing years of underfunding at Aberdeen City Council?

The motion reaffirms the “commitment to eradicating all forms of violence against women”. I welcome the Government’s strong commitment to that, and the resources that it has committed to tackling the problem, but I do not think that that objective can be achieved without reducing all forms of violence in our society. There is still far too much violence in Scotland, which is why it is important that the violence reduction unit, for example, works not only with gangs on knife crime, but on violence as a whole; that we have the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill; that we have anti-bullying measures; and—I say to Ms Baillie—that we have a bill to tackle alcohol abuse. It is important that the police, social workers and community and sports groups that work with cashback for communities money all take a holistic approach to reducing violence throughout our society. Many aspects of our lives and our decision making are involved. In my view, we still have gender equality in name only. As Marco Biagi said, pay rates for women for some jobs are still well below what they should be, not least in the oil and gas industry in my area. The gender balance in boardrooms is still woefully inadequate, the gender balance in this chamber and council chambers remains a challenge to all of us, and women are more likely than men to be in part-time and low-paid employment. We must all accept that we have a long way to go to reach equality of the sexes. As others have said, domestic violence is not confined to one section of society, and it is not only physical abuse that is involved; psychological abuse can be debilitating as well. I remember that my first knowledge of domestic abuse came from hearing about a university professor. Outwardly, he was a very respectable married man when he was out with his wife at social functions, but he kept her locked in the house at all other times. She escaped when he inadvertently left a window open one day. As others have said, women have far too often had to fob off concerns about a black eye or other injury as resulting from falling down stairs or walking into a door. All of us who confront such situations must offer a listening ear and assistance, as we must do with women who have changed from confident and outgoing individuals to withdrawn and frightened individuals. I was struck by an article in this month’s Red magazine, which I read in the hairdressers—about the only time we get to read magazines these days. The article was written by Ruth Elkins, who is a victim of domestic abuse. She wrote that attachment for the sake of attachment is bad; that behaviour that makes a person feel bad is bad; that if the relationship that a person is in makes them scared, sick and upset, it is time to get out; that the most important thing is that people rarely change, at least not without professional help; and that a person cannot change someone just because they love them. Let us not kid ourselves. I went to Rhoda Grant’s event last night and was struck by the fact that virtually all the women said in their stories that they had had to leave. That has to change. Why do women and children have to flee their family homes? They have not only to live with violence, but have the further traumas of having to move house and perhaps school, and of leaving their friends and relatives. That is unacceptable. At yesterday’s Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee meeting, we took evidence on the homelessness target and heard about how much homelessness is due to relationship breakdowns. I firmly believe that more effort needs to be made to redress the balance, so that women can know that their first action does not have to be to flee, and that they can instead access services in order that they can stay in their home and the perpetrator of the crime has to leave. In conclusion, I believe that social work, medical staff, police, women’s aid organisations and locksmiths must work together to exclude the perpetrators of the crime, who desperately need professional help away from their families in order to address their issues. Jackie Baillie rightly highlighted the Christmas message. It is heart-rending: “all I want for Christmas is for the violence to stop”.

We have heard this morning about situations around the whole of Scotland’s coastline, including Mike MacKenzie’s gripping and compelling personal experiences. I share the frustration and deep disappointment that other members have about the decision to close the Forth and Clyde coastguard stations. However, it is the future of the coastguard at Aberdeen that I wish to focus on, as there is perhaps no better example of the piecemeal and incompetent decision making that has been the hallmark of this process. The original proposals that the UK Government first put on the table would have seen the coastguard’s operation in Aberdeen upgraded to a maritime operations centre and staff more than doubled. However, at the end of this process the decision has been made that Aberdeen’s watch-keeping staff should be reduced to the one-size-fits-all 23 members of staff that each maritime rescue co-ordination centre will have. Meanwhile, the single back-up maritime operations centre will be an unmanned station in Dover, which in an emergency will need staff to move from the main MOC located at Fareham, near Portsmouth. I will not argue that the original proposals were in any way acceptable, given how much damage they would have done to coastguard provision in other parts of Scotland, but taking plans at Aberdeen from one extreme to another is extremely poor behaviour towards the staff there. Placing both the primary and back-up maritime operations centre on the south coast of England is no way to build any kind of redundancy or resilience into the network, especially as it will take time to move staff to the back-up centre in an emergency, if that is even possible. The UK Government knows that full well, which is why the coastguard’s two data centres are to be dispersed—one at the MOC on the south coast and one in Aberdeen. If there is an argument for dispersing the data centres—as there clearly is, to build resilience into the network—that should also apply to the maritime operations centres. The valuable expertise that has been built up in Aberdeen as a result of the close work with the offshore industry cannot be overestimated. That expertise is a key component of safety in the offshore oil and gas industry. Cutting staffing levels in Aberdeen will only reduce the effectiveness of the coastguard in co-ordinating offshore search and rescue and dealing with the unique challenges that it faces in relation to the oil and gas industry. A one-size-fits-all approach to staffing numbers is not appropriate when one MRCC faces additional responsibilities and challenges. Staff at Aberdeen have hard-won specialist knowledge that simply cannot be replicated by remote assistance from another station or the MOC. Oil and Gas UK has put its concerns about this move on record, and it is easy to see the major disruption to current incident plans that the proposals will cause. The fact that Aberdeen’s unique position in relation to the oil and gas industry means that more members of staff are required has been acknowledged by the UK Government, which has indicated that HQ officers will be posted there to liaise with the industry, in addition to the 23 watch-keeping staff. That is instead of building on the relationships that have already been established. However, it is the additional watch-keeping staff, who allow MRCC Aberdeen to cope with the safety demands of the oil and gas industry, that are to be cut. I have heard directly from those staff just how concerned they are about the impact that that will have. Having the additional staff needed to maintain effective oil and gas incident co-ordination in Aberdeen would allow the site to operate as a far more effective and resilient stand-by MOC, without the inherent delays and drawbacks involved in using the site at Dover. That is the course of action that should have been taken in relation to Aberdeen, and the UK Government’s failure to do that is truly baffling. The entire process has been poorly handled, and it does nothing to put first the safety of people who use and work in the waters off our shores. With these changes coming so soon after the loss of the fleet of fixed-wing, long-range search and rescue aircraft, and with the future of the air rescue co-ordination centre at Kinloss still unclear, the UK Government seems determined to take extraordinary risks with people’s lives in order to slash costs. That is why it is important to debate the issue in this Parliament and, at 5 pm tonight, to send a clear message to the Tories and Lib Dems in Westminster that their decision is unacceptable to Scotland. It has been interesting to watch Alex Fergusson and Tavish Scott defending their colleagues’ stance. It is not difficult to see that both of them would have been on the other side of the argument if Labour had had an opportunity to take some of its proposals forward. We need the devolution of this responsibility, so that we can design a safety system tailored to the needs of Scotland’s people, its industry and its coastline.

6. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government plans to use the £103 million released from the fossil fuel levy account. (S4F-00264)

Given that the long-overdue release of that £103 million has been made possible only by the Scottish Government agreeing that the other half of the fossil fuel levy money that the Treasury holds would fund the creation of the green investment bank, does the First Minister believe that the case for Edinburgh to be the home of that bank is overwhelming?

I thank the member for recognising the future of the oil and gas industry. Is it not regrettable that in the second session of this Parliament his ministers—and Liberal Democrat ministers—talked down the industry and said that it was “finished”, as a result of which many people have not seen the industry as a career choice?

I welcome this debate, because oil and gas is a subject that is very close to my heart; I worked in the industry and went offshore as part of my job for some 15 years. In the previous session of Parliament, Jamie Stone and I were the only members who had experience of working in the industry. I am not sure whether any of the new intake of MSPs has worked in the industry. I welcome both the PricewaterhouseCoopers report and the motion, particularly the recognition of just how important it is to maintain and improve Aberdeen’s position as an energy hub. The report is right to stress that Aberdeen will not secure that role for the future without concerted effort and it will require extensive vision, collaboration and real improvements to the infrastructure and skills development opportunities that are on offer in the area. Organisations such as Aberdeen city and shire economic future—ACSEF—the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce and the higher education institutions in the area all recognise that and are working collaboratively to ensure that it happens. The north-east colleges are collaborating more than ever before, not least with the signing of a federation agreement between Aberdeen and Banff and Buchan colleges. However, as Mark McDonald mentioned, the report states that we must encourage the energy industry to collaborate more with Aberdeen’s academic institutions to ensure that Aberdeen is home to the skills that the energy industry needs for the future. Lewis Macdonald and other north-east MSPs have been to briefings from our colleges and our universities in the past few weeks and we know that they are working hard to make that happen. A seamless education from technician training and apprenticeships through to PhDs and management skills can be provided by the academic institutions in the north-east if they work together. That makes the first half of Lewis Macdonald’s amendment very relevant. Health and safety pervades everything that the oil industry does. Indeed, if anyone goes to an event sponsored by BP or the oil and gas industry they are given a little card that says to ensure that they hold on to the rails and not to carry anything when they are going down the stairs, particularly blunt instruments or glasses. Health and safety pervades everything that is done, even onshore, and it comes from the importance of health and safety offshore. Quality of life and good infrastructure in the city are hugely important in making Aberdeen a world-class energy capital for the future. That highlights the importance of projects such as the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which cannot be overstated. The report is right to highlight the need to ensure that the long legal delays it has endured are avoided in future infrastructure projects. Encouraging greater air links to strategically important locations should also be a priority and there is a strong argument for devolving air passenger duty for just such a purpose. It is important that we all do as much as possible to ensure the viability and continuity of the new route from Aberdeen to Frankfurt. The economic opportunities that are offered by the energy sector—both in oil and gas and in renewables—to Aberdeen are enormous and it is essential to the Scottish economy that efforts to secure them are fully supported. That brings me to the last line of the Government’s motion, which is perhaps one of the most telling recommendations in the PWC report. The North Sea oil and gas industry needs “fiscal certainty and targeted incentives ... from the UK Government.” Fiscal certainty and targeted incentives are, unfortunately, the direct opposite of what we got from Danny Alexander and the UK Government. The UK Government’s tax raid on the oil and gas industry came without warning or consultation and, if anything, was the absolute antithesis of the fiscal certainty that the industry requires. The Scottish Government has called for a statutory consultation period before changes to oil and gas taxation take place in the future. Surely we should all agree that such a measure would go a long way towards giving the industry confidence that it will not unexpectedly be raided again in the future. The tax increase made no recognition of the effort required, the costs of exploration and development or the variation in how profitable different fields are. Some months ago, the Scottish Government submitted proposals to mitigate the worst effects of the tax grab by calling for a rate of return allowance before a field is liable for the supplementary charge, an investment uplift allowance or an extension of the field allowance for small or technically challenging new fields. Those measures would encourage the industry to continue investing in exploration and the development of new opportunities. The lack of response to those much-needed proposals has been deeply disappointing to many in the industry, particularly as around a quarter of the previously planned projects have been sufficiently affected by the UK Government’s actions to reduce the probability of them proceeding. Significant investments in the North Sea have been announced since the increased tax bombshell was dropped, but they are in projects with the highest yields or the most investment already committed to them. The marginal fields are the most heavily affected. Oil & Gas UK has warned of a two-speed industry emerging on the UK continental shelf. Projects involving more than £12 billion of investment that could have led to £15 billion to £20 billion of tax revenues have been put in doubt as a result of the UK Government’s ill-considered actions. A few years ago, a politician spoke out to condemn the then UK Government’s focus on squeezing out short-term revenue from the oil and gas industry at the expense of investment that was needed to get the most out of the North Sea. That politician was George Osborne. The contrast between his comments in 2007 and his actions as chancellor can only be considered as representing hypocrisy of the worst kind. I hope that he has invested £150-plus in buying Alex Kemp’s two volumes on the history of the oil and gas industry in the UK, and that he learns from them. I support the motion.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that those five or seven pages are much more than Danny Alexander had before he made his decision on oil tax?

After Jackie Baillie’s track record last year, when she combined the housing budget with the NHS budget to claim wrongly that health spending was going down, I thought that she might be a bit more circumspect in her selective use of figures, but it seems not. She might wish to choose 2009 as her starting point for employment figures, but it is far more illustrative to compare the current situation with the situation when Labour was in power. Even with the recent changes to staffing levels, there are still significantly more whole-time equivalent staff than there were when the SNP first entered government. Unlike what happened in the dark days of Labour control, the NHS is meeting its targets and improving the incredible service that it provides to the people of Scotland. Before the 2007 election, there were 32,000 out-patients waiting for more than 12 weeks. Last year, there were just 150. Before the SNP Government, Labour utterly failed to meet its 62-day waiting time target for cancer patients. Under the SNP Government, we have not only met that target; we have halved it to 31 days and met that, too. The NHS budget is going up in absolute terms, from the £10.2 billion that it stood at under Labour to a record £11.9 billion in 2014-15. That is an increase of £1.7 billion under the SNP Government. The NHS’s share of the devolved budget is going up, from 42.4 per cent of the resource budget this year to 44.2 per cent by the 2014-15 financial year. As promised, the Scottish Government has passed on the full consequentials from Department of Health spending south of the border and, as promised, it has protected the NHS budget at a time when UK Government decisions have led to savage cuts to the Scottish budget. Labour motions usually contain demands for infinitely more resources, but there are never any indications of where those resources should come from. Is Labour suggesting that the proportion of the budget that goes to the NHS should be even higher than it already is? If so, what cuts to the rest of the budget is it asking for? The Scots have seen through the Labour Party, as was clearly demonstrated in May. It thought that, if it kept throwing money at the organisation and taxing Scots more highly in the process, things would only get better. That is not true. This is about how we make best use of the money and the tremendous talents of all in our health service to achieve the best outcomes for patients. It is the nature of the NHS that, as Bob Doris said, it needs ever-increasing resources to maintain its position as new treatments and drugs are developed. The biggest threat to the NHS is clearly not the actions of the Scottish Government, which is straining every sinew to protect Scotland’s health budget; the real danger is the rampant rate of inflation in the health service, which drives up costs while budgets are falling.

I have just given the Parliament all the figures. Dr Simpson obviously was not listening earlier. Why else does the Royal College of Nursing say: “the NHS settlement is as good as we could have expected in the current climate”? As long as we are tied to the dead hand of Westminster’s failed economic policy, we will continue to face those challenges. That makes the need for preventative spending more important than ever before. It must be at the heart of future plans for the NHS, and the money identified for that purpose in the spending review is perhaps the most significant part of the Scottish Government’s budget plans. I support the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon.

The First Minister will be aware of the double blow in my constituency this week. On Monday, the window manufacturer A C Yule and Son Ltd called in the administrators and made redundant 50 staff in Aberdeen and about 150 more throughout Scotland and the north of England. On Tuesday, the Argus Care group, which is based in my constituency and operates 12 nursing and residential homes throughout Scotland, appointed administrators. Can the First Minister assure me that a partnership action for continuing employment team is already in place to assist the redundant workers, and that the health and wellbeing directorate is fully involved with Aberdeen City Council and others to ensure minimum disruption to the care of the frail elderly people who are affected?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to support young adults with an autistic spectrum disorder and associated comorbid conditions. (S4O-00269)

As the minister is aware, the combination of an autistic spectrum disorder complicated by other conditions can create significant challenges when it comes to the provision of high-quality care and stimulating day facilities. There is a particular need to ensure that young adults in such situations can access suitable residential placements that provide learning opportunities as well as care once they have passed school age. Will the minister undertake to look at what can be done to improve the availability of appropriate, fully funded residential placements for young adults with an autistic spectrum disorder and comorbid conditions?

All of us in the chamber are only too aware of the impact that Supreme Court decisions have had on Scots criminal law, not least with such high-profile judgments as that on the Cadder case. We now have a UK court with the power to overturn and overrule the judgments of the High Court and radically reshape the Scottish legal system as a result. Make no mistake about it: this threat to the independent legal system that Scotland has held on to since the act of union has caused significant disquiet in the Scottish legal profession. What makes the situation more intolerable is that it has developed through a quirk of legislation, or a loophole in the system that has, at a stroke, jeopardised centuries of Scottish legal tradition and, indeed, given the UK Supreme Court more power over Scottish criminal law than it holds over equivalent courts in the rest of the UK. I do not believe that the situation that has been allowed to develop is an underhanded power grab or a premeditated effort to undermine the independence of the Scottish legal system. No: it is quite simply a result of a lack of consideration for Scotland and the failure of the then UK Government to think through the consequences that the legislation would have north of the border. As has often been the case at Westminster, Scotland was an afterthought—if it was considered at all—and, just a few years later, we are left to pick up the pieces. It was never intended that the Supreme Court would act as an appellate court in Scottish criminal cases and supplant the role that the High Court has held for centuries as the highest court of appeal in such matters. Restoring the High Court to the apex of the Scottish legal system is a matter of correcting something that was not at any time intended to be a part of the devolution arrangements. The report of the review group chaired by Lord McCluskey recommends that the Supreme Court be limited to interpreting and defining when and where breaches of the ECHR have taken place before remitting such cases back to the High Court to determine the appropriate disposal of the case. The Supreme Court should not have the powers of disposal over Scottish cases that it currently has. It is essential that that recommendation is acted on. It is difficult to see any justification for the Supreme Court continuing to hold the power to grant a leave to appeal where certification has been refused by the High Court in Scotland when it does not hold the power to do so in cases that come from courts in the rest of the UK. I hope that the need to alter that situation is universally accepted in the chamber and beyond. As others have said, it is somewhat perverse that devolution has resulted in the Scottish courts having less autonomy while Scotland has gained more autonomy over other aspects of Scottish life. Introducing a certification requirement would at least bring equality for the Scottish criminal justice system with its counterparts in the rest of the UK. It is worth noting that the review group’s report condemns the Scotland Bill, which is progressing through Westminster, as being “seriously flawed”. That description of the bill seems to be coming from more and more quarters these days. Will the report finally be the one that leads to a substantial reworking of the flawed legislation that is being proposed? I am not holding my breath. Far from limiting the inappropriate role that the Supreme Court has taken on in the Scots legal system, the current provisions of the Scotland Bill would entrench that role. Such a move is far from desirable and would be completely out of step with the review group’s recommendations. I understand that Lord Wallace is reflecting on that matter. The time has come for him to accept the need to change course and limit rather than enhance the role of the Supreme Court in hearing Scottish criminal cases. I welcome the review group’s conclusions and the case that it has made for restoring the High Court to its rightful place as the final court of appeal in Scotland for criminal cases. I hope that the UK Government can see the clear need to adopt its recommendations and alter the necessary legislation to address the issue.

Will the member take an intervention?

This week, we have seen just how far the UK Government and the Scottish Government diverge on housing policy. The short-sighted plans that have emerged this week from the Conservative-Lib Dem UK Government to try to encourage even greater numbers of people to exercise the right to buy and thereby significantly exacerbate the shortage of affordable housing, which has been the long-term legacy of Thatcher both north and south of the border, are extraordinary. The Scottish Government is trying to reverse that legacy.

Not yet. I am still in my first minute. The UK Government’s plans are another clear sign of how far out of step it is with the needs of ordinary people. Thank goodness we have a Government in Scotland that understands how critical it is to increase the availability of affordable housing rather than consign more people to ever-longer waiting lists. Between 2008 and 2011, the SNP Government invested a record £1.76 billion and delivered 27,828 affordable new-build starts. That equates to 24,646 completions over the same period. There were around 7,500 new housing units, compared with only 6,000 under Labour. We should never forget that only six new council houses were built between 2003 and 2007 under the Lib Dem-Labour Administration. I say to Hugh Henry and Lewis Macdonald that the SNP was voted in on its record, and I am sure that Scotland’s electorate trusts the SNP Government to deliver in this session. There were more new council houses in my constituency than Labour delivered in the whole of Scotland.

It is absolutely the right time to use reserves to build houses. People should not build up reserves when we are short of capital spending. Within the incredibly tight budget constraints that have been passed on to us from Westminster, there is little doubt that the target of 30,000 homes over five years is ambitious. To achieve it, Scotland will need to make the most of more innovative ways of funding house building and maximise the return that is received on every penny of public investment. As the minister said, the national housing trust is one such innovation. It has been extremely positive in delivering more housing and providing work to the construction industry on projects that would otherwise have completely stalled. Labour is stuck in the previous century in considering ways of financing house building while the SNP is forging forward and finding new and innovative ways to build houses. Keeping the construction industry building is a critical part of economic recovery. That is why it was important that the Scottish Government diverted resources into capital spending in the spending review. Whether we are talking about the demand for new property from the public sector or the private sector or greater efforts to renovate and refurbish buildings, the importance to the Scottish economy of ensuring that there is work for the construction sector is not to be underestimated. With just over 200,000 applicants currently on local authority housing lists, the need for more affordable housing in Scotland is unquestionable. At least two thirds of the affordable homes that the Scottish Government will support will be for social rent, which will go at least some way towards driving down housing waiting lists. The actions of the Scottish Government are positive, despite the extraordinarily tough financial conditions that have been imposed on it, and the Parliament should welcome them. The need to make housing more affordable also extends to the need to support first-time buyers seeking to make their first step on to the housing ladder. With schemes such as the new supply shared equity scheme, the open market shared equity scheme and the rural home ownership grants scheme, the Scottish Government supported 5,287 households into home ownership in the first three years of the previous session of Parliament alone. That is compared with the 3,371 that Labour and the Lib Dems managed over the seven years leading up to that. It remains the case that the biggest hurdle for first-time buyers is getting a mortgage. Shared equity schemes certainly help to lower that barrier, but housing developers need to ensure that there is a good supply of property that is aimed at first-time buyers rather than those further up the housing ladder. If suitable property for first-time buyers is scarce, it is inevitable that the demand will drive up the price and force buyers out of the market and on to housing waiting lists. Although the short-term interests of developers might dictate that building for the upper end of the market is the best way to maximise their profit, the long-term sustainability of the sector rests on first-time buyers being able to make it on to the housing ladder. The Scottish Government built an impressive record on housing during the previous session of Parliament and I am sure that it will do its utmost to meet its commitments this time. I was pleased to hear about the bill giving councils the powers to increase council tax and the strategy for old people’s housing, but the cuts in the Scottish budget mean that maintaining the progress that has been made will become more challenging.

It is clear that the Scottish Government will focus precisely on what matters most: the need to expand the supply of affordable housing. That focus will only serve Scotland well.

When it comes to the health of our housing sector compared with that of our neighbours, we are in the right position. I support the motion in the name of the minister.

If housing associations have such reserves, as some do, is it not the case that they are not using those reserves for repairs? Should not the reserves be used on a rainy day like today?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that more homes receive improved insulation. (S4O-00240)

I welcome the universal home insulation scheme to which the cabinet secretary referred. Strong efforts are being made to encourage the take-up of wall and roof insulation, but the benefits of underfloor insulation are promoted less often. Will the cabinet secretary consider ways of promoting such measures better for the properties that could benefit most from their installation?

4. To ask the First Minister what progress has been made on reaching a budget settlement with local authorities. (S4F-00175)

I am sure that Aberdeen City Council will be one of the most enthusiastic backers of the local government finance settlement because of the Scottish Government’s pledge to introduce an 85 per cent funding floor. Will the settlement address the historical underfunding of Aberdeen and give the granite city a fairer deal?

In yesterday’s debate on the spending review, there was, understandably, much discussion about the need to encourage economic growth in Scotland and the Government’s record in doing that. Sustainable economic growth has been the Scottish Government’s core purpose since the Scottish National Party came to power in 2007. Scotland’s economy needs to be sustainable not only in the sense of being environmentally responsible but in terms of creating a sector that will be with us for the very long term. Renewable energy offers Scotland the opportunity to achieve both those goals. The SNP has set an ambitious but achievable target of generating the equivalent of 100 per cent of electricity demand from renewable sources by 2020. We are well on the way to achieving that and I am sure that the minister was as pleased as I was yesterday evening when we heard from Ray Hunter of Renewable Energy Systems that our targets are totally achievable. It is unfortunate that Jackson Carlaw is not in the chamber to hear that. About 58 per cent of current consumption will be met from renewable sources once the projects that have received consent or are under construction are added to those already completed. That plan for such a major role for the renewables sector is not only essential if we are to meet our world-leading carbon emissions reduction targets; it is essential for the future of Scotland’s economy. To answer Jackson Carlaw’s point about nuclear energy, I cannot remember a time when this Government has not said that existing nuclear power plants have a role to play in the medium term until we can move to more renewables. Scotland enjoys 25 per cent of Europe’s offshore wind and tidal energy potential and 10 per cent of its wave energy potential. In the years and decades ahead we have the opportunity to generate and export substantial amounts of renewable energy, providing jobs and opportunities for thousands of people in Scotland. The national renewables infrastructure plan has already identified the key role that the north-east will play in the offshore renewables industry, building on the hard-won offshore skills and experiences that have been built up in the region by the oil industry over several decades. The national renewables infrastructure plan will be backed up by £70 million and there will be a significant return on investment for the Scottish economy. Neil Findlay cannot stand up and say that there is a budget line for only £5 million and then mention the £70 million in his speech. He needs to go back and study the budget document a bit more closely. The return on investment for the Scottish economy will help to establish Scotland as the international centre of excellence in renewable energy. My colleagues from Aberdeen have already mentioned the combined heat and power plants and the significant amount of energy that the Aberdeen renewable energy group test bed for wind turbines will generate for the people of Aberdeen. However, despite several years of work by the Scottish Government and others, there remain significant and unnecessary obstacles to Scotland fully seizing the opportunity that the renewable energy industry offers us. Most significant of those is the continuing ludicrous system of transmission charging, which would see energy developments in and around Aberdeen facing charges of almost £20 per kilowatt while an identical development in the south of England would be heavily subsidised for every kilowatt. That system of pricing is archaic and long overdue for reform. It takes no account of the need to reduce carbon emissions and to move to a low-carbon economy. Until it is finally replaced, it will fundamentally undermine the UK Government’s claim that it is serious about tackling climate change. As one of my colleagues said, as long as the fossil fuel levy, which, legally, can only be spent in Scotland on renewables projects, remains locked away in the Treasury bank account instead of being put to work in Scotland, the UK Government’s warm words on climate change will always ring just slightly hollow in the chamber and in the rest of Scotland. That £200 million would make a significant difference to the Scottish Government’s efforts to encourage the development of a low-carbon economy, and the Treasury’s continued intransigence is disappointing to say the least. Ultimately, Scotland will also need action at a European level. The construction of a North Sea supergrid will open up electricity markets for energy companies in Scotland to provide clean, renewable electricity. That project is critical to Scotland’s low-carbon future and is another reason why Scotland needs a strong, independent voice arguing for our interests in Europe. I know that the Scottish Government’s determination to move to a low-carbon economy will be taken as a positive sign by the many people in Scotland and beyond who welcomed the leadership that we showed in setting our climate change targets. Measures such as the carbon accounting that now accompanies the Scottish budget are vital to ensuring that progress continues to be made in reducing carbon emissions. We have come a significant distance in our efforts to address climate change, and I am confident that, under the leadership of this Administration, we will continue to go further. On such an important issue, there is simply no other option. I support the Government motion.

During the previous session of Parliament, the Scottish Government faced the challenges of coping with the recession and cuts in the budget imposed by spending decisions made at Westminster. Those challenges are much the same today, with the Scottish budget again falling in real terms. At least we can see how the decisions that John Swinney made in previous budgets have played out. Scotland has experienced a shorter and shallower recession than the UK as a whole, and the latest set of figures shows that Scotland is the only part of the UK where unemployment is falling and employment is rising. The Scottish Government put protecting jobs and returning to growth at the heart of its economic recovery plan, and it is no coincidence that the statistics are now painting a starkly different picture from that in the rest of the UK, where the focus has been on making cuts too swiftly and too steeply for the economy to handle. The Scottish Government has consistently put growing the Scottish economy at the heart of its activity, particularly during these difficult times. The spending plans only underline that fact. Danny Alexander claimed that the SNP is the enemy of growth in his bizarre conference speech earlier this week, but all he did was show how out of touch with reality he and his colleagues in the UK Government really are. This is the same Danny Alexander who seemed to take a perverse pride in launching a punitive tax raid on the North Sea oil industry, undermining plans for future investment in an industry that has yet again poured billions of pounds of revenue into the Treasury’s coffers. The industry is expected to generate £13.4 billion in tax revenue this year, yet the approach of the UK Government was to squeeze the industry and to smother its growth. People in Scotland know the real enemy of growth and it is certainly not the SNP Government That failure to encourage growth has been the hallmark of the UK Government’s response to the crisis and has put us on the brink of a return to recession. Rather than change course, as is so clearly needed, George Osborne seems incapable of saying that he was wrong and of doing what is clearly necessary to boost economic growth. We have heard that many people south of the border would like Alex Salmond to be their leader—perhaps they would like to have John Swinney instead of George Osborne. Capital investment is always at the heart of any successful attempt to grow an economy, yet Westminster is cutting the Scottish capital budget by 36 per cent between 2011 and 2015. When the Scottish Government accelerated capital funding into housing, the result was an 11.6 per cent increase in construction jobs compared with a 0.2 per cent fall across the UK. The chancellor may have tried to blame lower than expected construction figures for the need to downgrade growth forecasts but the Scottish Government has already demonstrated to him how to address that problem. The Scottish Government’s leadership in prioritising spending to drive economic recovery and growth should be commended as an example that the Treasury would do well to heed. It is right that the Scottish Government is doing all that it can to prioritise capital investment, using innovative sources of finance where appropriate to compensate for its reduced capital funding.

I could not agree with Margo MacDonald more. In particular, the non-profit-distributing model has a major role to play in financing £2.5 billion-worth of investment in the coming years, including in essential projects such as the Aberdeen western peripheral route. I know that people across the north-east will find that reassuring. A second wave of the national housing trust initiative will also go a long way towards helping Scotland’s construction industry continue to outperform the rest of the UK. These remain difficult times and the Scottish Government has had to make difficult decisions as a result, yet its focus on using capital investment as a spur to economic growth is demonstrably the right one. Whether it is called a plan B, a plan MacB or a plan SNP, this spending review shows that the Scottish Government is continuing to demonstrate the course of action that the UK Government should be following. George Osborne would do well to take heed, swallow his pride and follow suit before he drags the UK economy down into a second recession.

Given that schools with higher numbers of senior pupils are able to offer a wider range of courses for pupils to choose from, does the cabinet secretary believe that giving more pupils access to a wider range of courses is an important policy? Does he believe that the hub model that is used in Aberdeen could be applied elsewhere in Scotland?

4. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of its international development spending in Malawi, what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding aid funding for projects in that country. (S4O-00135)

Given that the UK Government has severed its funding to the Government of Malawi and has stated its intention to directly fund projects in that country, does the cabinet secretary believe that Scottish NGOs that are already operating in the country have an important role to play in stepping in to ensure that much-needed projects in Malawi continue?

Yesterday and this morning, we heard the Scottish Government set out its programme for government and we debated the priorities for the year ahead. This afternoon’s debate is in stark contrast to such wide-ranging discussion of Scotland’s priorities, as it is about our insufficient opportunity to participate in the most important decision-making bodies of Europe, which means that Scotland’s priorities can be bypassed or ignored. James Kelly says that we have conduits of influence but, if we are not at the top table, we are not where decisions are made. The stories of Scottish ministers being excluded from discussions in Europe and even at times being refused a presence on a delegation are not new, but they remain utterly scandalous. The fact is that things do not have to be that way. It is not as if we are asking for something that does not already exist. A look at some of our European neighbours illustrates that ensuring European representation from devolved Governments is perfectly possible and effective. As the cabinet secretary said, Belgium has had clear and agreed divisions of subjects between levels of government since 1994. On some topics, the federal Government takes the lead role, while on others, a minister from a region takes the lead role. In most discussions, a minister is automatically backed by a representative from a different tier of government. For example, when the federal Government takes the lead role for Belgium in Europe, a regional representative is present to ensure that the regional Government’s needs are fully taken into account and represented, and vice versa. Far from having to write a begging letter for permission to attend, as is the situation for this country, the Scottish ministers should have that accepted assumption of representation on UK delegations. On subjects that fall almost entirely within one region’s competence, such as fishing, that region acts as the sole representative for Belgium. If only the Scottish Government had sole responsibility for representing Scotland’s fishing industry in Europe. Fishermen have far greater faith in Richard Lochhead’s abilities than they do in members of the Conservative Party, which—let us not forget—once described the fishing industry as expendable. Scotland is home to more than 70 per cent of the UK’s fishing industry, so of course the issue is far more important to Scotland than it is to the rest of the UK. Despite that, as has been mentioned, the Scottish Government’s fisheries secretary was denied permission last April to attend an agriculture and fisheries council meeting, so that his place could be taken by an unelected member of the House of Lords who knew nothing about fishing and who was responsible for bee health. That situation was not just utterly farcical but an insult to everyone who is involved in Scotland’s fishing industries and whose livelihoods depend on the discussions and decisions in Europe. As the common fisheries policy is up for reform in the next year, it is more important than ever that Scotland is given the voice that it needs in European discussions. Similarly, the common agricultural policy is to be reformed. As Scottish farming is a very different beast from farming south of the border, Scotland has a clear need to play a full and active part in every UK delegation that deals with devolved policy. On justice matters, can a UK representative really be expected to take into account Scotland’s unique legal system without a Scottish Government presence on the delegation? It is clear that we are expected to hope so, given that Kenny MacAskill has been refused permission to attend justice and home affairs council meetings three times in the past two years. The way in which the UK Government approaches European discussions is a relic from a pre-devolution era and is long overdue for reform. Given that many decisions are made in Europe, Scotland simply cannot afford to continue to run the risk that UK delegations might ignore devolved Governments’ needs. Along with my colleagues in the SNP, I firmly believe that, as Christina McKelvie said, Scotland would be best served through independence and having its own representation in the EU. However, until Scotland reaches that point, we cannot continue with the status quo. Scottish Government participation in every UK delegation to the EU on issues that affect Scotland should be the norm, as happens in other countries. I hope that, through the debate and the resolution, the Parliament will send out a clear message on the issue.

As the MSP for Aberdeen South and North Kincardine, I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to introduce a funding floor for local authorities to ensure that none receives less than 85 per cent of the average. Can the cabinet secretary provide more detail about how and when that will be implemented?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I, too, welcome the cabinet secretary and the minister to their posts. I am delighted with my appointment as the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s convener and I look forward to working with them and holding them to account, when necessary, in my new role. I am sure that that role will present many opportunities to speak—whether in relation to committee reports, bills that are allocated to the committee or issues in our remit. I thank the cabinet secretary for appearing before the committee this morning and giving us his views on matters that are in his portfolio, which helped us to develop our work programme. As I will have many opportunities to speak in my role as convener, I will today highlight important infrastructure issues for Aberdeen and the wider north-east. No one should underestimate the importance of the oil and gas sector not just to the Scottish economy but to the UK economy. Aberdeen is Europe’s oil capital. It is an important hub for service companies that have located themselves there, and it is important to keep those companies there as their markets expand globally and they focus less on North Sea oil and gas opportunities, although much potential is still there and people are switching from using their expertise in oil and gas to using it in renewables. Infrastructure is key to keeping such companies in the north-east. The infrastructure debate has been dominated by the Aberdeen western peripheral route. The cabinet secretary said that the M74 project was first mooted 50 years ago; the Aberdeen western peripheral route was first mooted in the 1950s. The route was all ready for the off in 1996 under Grampian Regional Council, of which I had the privilege of being a member, but subsequent local authorities and transport ministers messed about with it. As Lewis Macdonald said, the project is now mired in legal challenge by a very few local protesters, who are backed by environmentalists who are mostly from outwith the AB postcode area. That frustrates the vast majority of people in the north-east and was a major issue on doorsteps during the election campaign. Does the cabinet secretary have any idea when the inquiry reporter will let us know the findings of his inquiry? It is completely unacceptable that it has gone on for months. Should a time limit or deadline for concluding such inquiries apply? The cabinet secretary will know that I wrote to him about the possibility of including in the tender for the Aberdeen western peripheral route a community benefit clause. Given the project’s scale, it presents an opportunity for the Scottish Government and its partners to secure additional economic benefits. The inclusion of a community benefit clause that would require the successful contractor and its subcontractors to undertake targeted recruitment and training to help to reduce unemployment—and youth unemployment—in target areas is one additional benefit that could be secured.

I thank the cabinet secretary very much for taking that forward.

I look forward to discussing the proposal in detail. I will close there, Presiding Officer.

Will the member give way?

I declare an interest as I served as a prison visitor for 11 years before coming to this place. Does the cabinet secretary believe that the frequent and regular independent oversight of prisons that visiting committees provide is worth preserving to ensure the good operation of prisons and to protect the welfare of prisoners?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the time taken by the United Kingdom Government in appointing a supermarkets ombudsman. (S4O-00075)

Given the extent to which household budgets are being squeezed, does the cabinet secretary believe that it is more essential than ever that the supermarkets ombudsman—or groceries code adjudicator—is put in place to ensure that consumers and producers both receive a fair deal from supermarkets?

As the former convener of the previous Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, I suggest that Jim Hume looks back at some of the papers that it produced on CAP reform, which is a subject on which a watching brief must be kept.

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to support the oil and gas industries. (S4F-00052)

I thank the First Minister for his answer. “The Chancellor’s short term focus on squeezing the maximum amount of revenue from oil and gas is putting at risk the investment we need in order to get the most out of the North Sea ... He’s more interested in cash today than investment tomorrow.” Those are not my words but the words of the chancellor George Osborne himself, when he was in opposition. Although many of my constituents who work in the oil and gas industry warmly welcome—

—the sensible suggestions that have been put forward, does the First Minister not agree that the incident highlights why it would be far better for the taxation of the oil industry to be in the hands of an experienced former oil economist, rather than in those of a distant Government whose sole interest is to slash the budget deficit?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Mark McDonald on securing this members’ business debate, particularly as it is his first one. The debate is on an issue that is fundamental to members of the parliament from across the north-east. I declare an interest as I used to work in the oil industry, as so many constituents of the north-east and other MSPs in the chamber currently do. As Mark McDonald said, the health of the industry has a knock-on effect on every part of the economy in the region, so I welcome this chance to debate this critical issue. As other members have said, George Osborne’s tax grab came like a bolt from the blue and sent shockwaves through Aberdeen and the wider region. Like Kevin Stewart, I was surprised by how many people it affected and by how many people articulated that to us on their doorsteps during the election. It has put investment in the industry and, consequently, jobs at risk. As Ian Bell of Optimus said at the time, “The chancellor has just brought the recession to Aberdeen. Thanks for nothing, George.” As someone who worked in the oil industry in the 1980s, when it experienced a severe downturn, I know how traumatic that can be. The tax rise has a fundamental problem at its core, which is that it was clearly drawn up by someone who has no understanding of how the industry works. I suspect that Danny Alexander is rather regretting claiming full credit for it. Obviously, like Alex Johnstone, he did not recognise that those who are operating the forecourts now are not the ones who are at the cutting edge of the technology that is required in the North Sea nowadays. The blanket approach to the increase in the supplementary charge takes no account of whether a field is new or well established; of whether it is profitable; or of whether investment in it is planned. It has already caused investments in the North Sea to be suspended, with Statoil's development of the new Mariner and Bressay fields put on hold, and that will only continue while the tax remains unchanged. Modelling by Professor Alex Kemp of the University of Aberdeen estimates that 79 fewer fields will be developed over the next 30 years than there would otherwise have been. That could have a huge effect on the economy of the north-east. I am glad that the Scottish Government has put forward constructive proposals for how the supplementary charge can be altered to mitigate its most harmful effects, and I welcome the engagement that it is having with the Treasury. It is seeking to make the system of taxation more progressive, so that investment in new developments is encouraged to the long-term benefit of everyone. It seems unbelievable that the Government is cutting off its nose to spite its face by cutting off a huge amount of future revenues just to meet a budget deficit in the short term. Mitigation of the effects could be achieved by introducing a rate of return allowance on field investment before a field pays the supplementary charge; by introducing an investment uplift allowance for the supplementary charge; or by extending field allowances. Any of those suggestions would go some way to mitigating the actions of the UK Government, and I hope that members across the chamber will agree that the Chancellor of the Exchequer should pay heed to them. There is also a major issue in current policy when it comes to decommissioning oil infrastructure. Previously, at the end of a field's life, companies could apply for tax relief up to the level of tax being imposed on a field to mitigate that cost. With the increase in the supplementary charge, that is no longer the case, as the amount of tax relief that can be claimed has not risen in line with the tax rise. Let us hope that, in the coming weeks and months, the UK Government decides to implement the Scottish Government’s eminently sensible proposal and the Treasury changes its mind.

In the run-up to the 1997 UK election, Tony Blair once famously claimed that it would be odd if the Scottish Parliament did not enjoy the same powers as an English parish council. He no doubt came to regret that statement as it was often misinterpreted, but it seems particularly appropriate to this debate as parish councils have a glaring power that we do not: they have at least some borrowing powers. I think that members on all sides of the chamber accept that the financial arrangements that were put in place for the Scottish Parliament in 1999 need to be changed and that the addition of borrowing powers must be part of those changes. However, the measures that the current Scotland Bill contains are neither sufficient nor appropriate for Scotland’s needs. Much of the Scotland Bill Committee’s work during the previous session of Parliament was controversial to say the least, but one aspect on which all members agreed was—as Richard Baker said—that the proposed borrowing powers do not go far enough. One consequence of the proposals to fund a sizeable part of the Scottish budget from a portion of income tax receipts—which the SNP has consistently warned about—is that we will become intensely vulnerable to fluctuations in the amount of income tax that is generated from year to year. It is a situation in which no normal independent country would find itself, as any other country—or indeed any federal state—would rely on a range of taxes to ensure that its budget was not subject to wild fluctuations in the receipts from a single type of tax from year to year. However, if that is the position in which the Parliament finds itself, borrowing to cover fluctuations in tax receipts will at least mean that public spending reflects longer-term trends, instead of having to rise and fall based on year-to-year changes.

I was referring to the fact that it will cause severe problems if we can make changes only to income tax. If we have corporation tax powers, there will be at least one more tax that we can use to even out fluctuations. We are suggesting that we need a range of taxes and powers, as well as increased borrowing, to grow the Scottish economy—which I hope all members are about. That would be a more desirable state of affairs, yet even a cursory examination of what is currently proposed shows that it will not be achieved without changes to the Scotland Bill. Between 2007-08 and 2008-09, the income tax yield in Scotland fell by £527 million, according to figures in “Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland”, yet the proposed cap on borrowing for current spending is just £200 million per year, up to a cumulative cap of £500 million. With such fluctuations demonstrably already having taken place in Scotland, the likelihood that the borrowing caps will quickly be reached is all too apparent.

I am sure that that issue will be examined when a local income tax is considered. At least local councils have the option of borrowing for projects, which the Parliament lacks. That is what this debate is about. The problem is only made worse by the requirement for such borrowing to be applied retrospectively, after tax receipts fall, rather than as a pre-emptive response to forecast reductions. When it comes to borrowing for capital projects, the current provisions in the Scotland Bill are similarly flawed. The whole point of being able to borrow for capital projects is surely to provide the Scottish Government with an additional financing tool. However, with a cap of just £2 billion, the entire amount could be tied up in a single project such as the Forth replacement crossing. Hitting that limit so easily removes borrowing as an option for other public sector infrastructure projects and limits its value. Rather than have artificial Treasury-imposed caps, surely what matters most when looking at how much the Scottish Government should be able to borrow is whether sufficient resources are available to cover repayments. That is even more the case when no expert or UK Government minister was able to explain to the Scotland Bill Committee how those caps were selected. Michael Moore has been performing some impressive political gymnastics recently, as his positions on more powers for Scotland seem to have altered on a daily basis. However, there can be no doubt that one of the changes to the Scotland Bill that simply must be made is to improve the borrowing provisions and accelerate their implementation. That is why I welcome Mr Clegg’s announcement today; we should invite him to Scotland more often. We look forward to hearing the details of what is proposed. It may be that, as with the fossil fuel levy, they are giving with one hand and taking away with the other. Improving the provisions of the Scotland Bill that relate to borrowing powers would by no means solve all the problems that are inherent in the legislation, particularly in relation to taxation, but it would certainly be a step forward from the bill’s current provisions. Given that the Scotland Bill Committee in the previous Parliament unanimously supported plans for greater borrowing powers and their faster introduction, I hope that members from all parties will back the Scottish Government’s call and send out a strong message that progress on improving the borrowing powers for which the Scotland Bill provides must be made.

Does Willie Rennie accept that the cabinet secretary must deliver some projects as a result of delay under previous Liberal-Labour Administrations, such as the Aberdeen western peripheral route? Liberal Democrat transport ministers dithered and delayed on that for years.

I congratulate John Mason on his first speech in this Parliament. It is clear that he will have a lot to offer, especially when we discuss our sectarianism bill. This is not my maiden speech in this Parliament, but it is my maiden speech as the constituency member for Aberdeen South and North Kincardine. I pay tribute to my predecessor, Nicol Stephen, and wish him well in his chosen destination of the House of Lords. I also pay tribute to Mike Rumbles, who represented the North Kincardine part of the new constituency. It is a privilege to represent the oil capital of Europe in this Parliament. Little did I think when I worked in the oil and gas industry that I would later come to champion it in this Scots Parliament. Scotland’s oil and gas industry has driven economic activity in Aberdeen and across Scotland for many years, and it has been a cash cow for Westminster. It is a resource that, as documents that have been released show, Westminster mandarins thought was too much for Scots to manage on their own. Can anyone truly believe that the resource has been well managed by successive Governments at Westminster? Where has been the union dividend for Scotland? Scotland’s oil and gas will play a critical part in taking Scotland forward in years to come, but only if the UK Treasury stops its short-sighted approach to the industry. It is shameful that a politician from the north of Scotland—Danny Alexander—claimed the credit for the tax raid on the industry earlier this year. Following the tax raid, the UK Treasury will this year rake in £12 billion from the North Sea oil and gas industry. The way that the additional £2 billion is being applied will strangle investment in new fields and the jobs that they bring with them. It treats the small companies—which are making the bulk of the investments in new development—as if they are the large players in established fields, and it is squeezing them all equally hard. That approach is short-sighted in the extreme and will stymie growth in the industry for many years to come if it is not addressed. That is why I know that those in the oil industry will be heartened that the First Minister made the issue a key priority during his meeting with George Osborne. I only hope that George Osborne will listen to reason. In his report, the renowned oil economist Alex Kemp said that the number of new developments in the North Sea could be cut by more than 35 per cent in the next three decades as a result of the tax. Nearly 350 undeveloped fields in the UK continental shelf could fall at the first hurdle as companies assess whether they are now economically viable. Alex Kemp also estimated that the UK’s oil and gas production could fall by 2.25 billion barrels because of George Osborne’s new tax regime. It is estimated that the oil and gas industry accounts for around 120,000 direct and indirect jobs in Scotland, while a further 75,000 are supported through induced and export activity as a result of the industry in the north-east of Scotland. If the approach to the recent tax hike on the North Sea industry indicated that the UK Government does not understand the oil and gas industry, the debacle over the air passenger duty surely confirmed it. The proposed changes would have meant an additional £165 million tax penalty for the sector, on top of the taxes that have already been levied. However, the swiftness with which the UK Government has backed down on the issue suggests that it should be given the benefit of the doubt—in all probability, it merely forgot about the importance of helicopter flights to the oil and gas industry. Surely one cannot say that our oil and gas industry is better run from Westminster when Westminster clearly does not understand the nuts and bolts of the industry. Scotland needs to control its own resources, rather than the Treasury being allowed to continue with its narrow, short-term focus. Annabel Goldie talked about sharing our assets within the UK, and of course we are prepared to share our wealth, but we are not prepared to have it raided and have nothing to show for it. While Norway built up an oil fund worth many billions, which has allowed it to stave off recession and invest in the country, the UK Government has squandered the wealth of the North Sea for decades. We would not be so short-sighted; we would both nurture the industry by supporting the development of new fields and use the tax that it generates.

We are currently supposed to receive money from the Crown Estate south of the border. However, as the First Minister said, it would be much better if Scotland, rather than Westminster, had control of the Crown estate around the Scottish shores. We would not be so short-sighted and would use the money for the benefit of Scotland. Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland as a whole have an exciting future in the renewables industry—one of my colleagues will go into that in more detail. Last week, an even bigger all-energy conference was held in Aberdeen, where there is great enthusiasm to develop renewables in our country and a great desire not only to see the fossil fuel levy that we have been promised but have never seen, but to have the green investment bank here in Scotland. If we are to reach our full potential, there must also be a change to the unfair and discriminatory system of transmission charges. We have not seen a great deal of benefit from the union dividend, but we can see a great deal of potential with independence.

It is unsurprising that the Liberal Democrats have chosen to debate local services. They are clutching at straws—no, at one very thin straw—as they face up to a humiliating slump in their support because of their stance on student fees and the deep and damaging cuts that they are making as members of the Westminster coalition. They took a humiliating sixth place in a recent by-election. Forgive me if I am wrong but, in all the budget discussions and parliamentary debates, I do not remember the Liberal Democrats asking for the justice budget to be protected. Did they? I do not remember that. The Liberal Democrats are cynically deceiving the public by claiming that the status quo is an option when it is not—[Interruption.] As usual, Mr Rumbles shouts from a sedentary position.

Not yet—let me continue. What is important to people is the number of police officers who patrol their communities, of whom there are 1,036 more under the SNP than there were at the end of the previous Administration, of which the Liberal Democrats were a part.

ACPOS’s view is only one of many. At least the SNP has engaged with people. I understand that the Liberal Democrats have not been in touch with the FBU or the fire services to find out their feelings. Police numbers correlate with a falling crime rate, which has reached its lowest level for 32 years. Against the background of a shrinking budget, the overriding priority is to maintain police numbers. Wild claims of massive reductions in police numbers from a single force are ludicrous and scaremongering. The Liberal Democrats at Westminster are taking 12,000 police officers off the streets in England, while the SNP is keeping police on the streets in Scotland. The wild claims of massive reductions do those who make them no credit at all. The chance of police numbers falling will be far greater if no structural reform is made as the Westminster cuts continue to bite. The Liberal Democrats talk about local accountability, but true local accountability is at present patchy. Many chief constables hide behind the tag of operational matters instead of being open and accountable to their joint police boards. In times of financial stringency, should chief constables receive thousands of pounds in performance-related bonuses? Where was the local accountability recently when Grampian joint police board’s convener—a Liberal Democrat—wanted to discuss the board’s response to the consultation behind closed doors? The discussion was delayed and was not in public. When the cabinet secretary discusses the future with that board shortly, he will discuss board members’ individual views and not the view of the board as a whole. We can ask the people of Parkhead in Glasgow whether they feel that local accountability exists. Glasgow’s east end is prone to a high rate of house fires and fire deaths, but Parkhead’s local fire station was closed as a result of decisions that were taken by councillors from Ayrshire and Argyll and Bute. Is it sensible that retained fire personnel in Stornoway are told which streets to cover for fire prevention by people in Inverness rather than by personnel on the ground who know the streets and households that have more fire risk? Is it sensible that, if Tayside fire personnel are called to help at an incident outside their area, they need to return to Dundee to refill their breathing apparatus, because fire boards have different BA sets? Fire services even use different sizes of fire hose. As the Liberal Democrats in Westminster impose massive cuts on Scotland, it is only right that we should consider how to deliver services in the most efficient way possible. As James Kelly said, do 32 local authorities, eight police boards, eight fire boards and 14 health boards all need their own procurement, human resources, IT and other back-office departments? In the face of the cuts, funding that type of duplication is simply not sustainable. Given the tenor of the debate so far, every party in the chamber bar the Liberal Democrats recognises the severity of the budget cuts and supports the Government in consulting on the shape of local service delivery, which will be influenced by the priorities of the ordinary people, one of which is safer streets. Unsustainable bureaucracies have blossomed under current structures. The shape of bureaucracy in the police force is an equilateral triangle and in the fire service it is cylindrical. I understand that a recent shift in Dumfries and Galloway comprised five front-line firefighters and 43 back-office staff. Is that the right balance? I do not think so. There is an opportunity to reduce duplication of effort, deliver services efficiently and increase local accountability and flexibility. Claiming that that is not the case, as the Liberal Democrats are doing, is completely disingenuous but utterly typical of the party’s approach to politics.

The minister will be aware of Graham Donaldson’s recommendations—in particular recommendations 4 and 5—on the initial selection of students who are recruited to become teachers. Does she agree that a teacher must, as well as being academically competent, have a personality that is enthusiastic, inspirational, keen and motivational? Although setting up a national assessment centre may be costly and perhaps over-burdensome, does the minister agree that some sort of initial test, along the lines of the United Kingdom clinical aptitude test that universities use for medical students, is necessary? Will she get the partnership to look at that?

As Liam McArthur has just indicated, the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill contrasts wildly with the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, which also fell within the remit of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and which was debated and passed last week. The passage of the WANE bill was long and tortuous and it had many major controversial amendments right to the end. The Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, in contrast, has been a bit of a breeze, although, as with many bills that look fairly straightforward at first glance, the devil ends up being in the detail—and the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill is very detailed. My committee member colleagues and I have valued the engineering expertise of John Scott, who used his background knowledge to good effect in teasing out many aspects of the bill. While I am in thanking mode, I also thank the clerks, SPICe staff and everyone who gave evidence and who was otherwise involved with the bill. Like Karen Gillon and Liam McArthur, I apologise for not being present for the stage 1 debate, which took place during the visit to Malawi, but I know that Bill Wilson and Sandra White spoke ably on behalf of Scottish National Party committee members. There is no doubt that if a reservoir were to fail there could be catastrophic results and it is right and proper for the Government to take preventive measures in that regard. Ten thousand cubic metres is equivalent to four Olympic-size swimming pools—that is the size of reservoir that comes under the bill. We can all imagine that a burst of that amount of water could inflict substantial damage and even loss of life, so it is important that the bill provides for reservoirs to be allocated different levels of risk and supervision at an appropriate level. The costs involved should also be appropriate and I will come back to that point. The committee had a worry about the availability of qualified engineers capable of undertaking the necessary work. It is good to note, as the bill is passed, that there must be significant employment opportunities for engineering graduates and technicians in this area. Concerns were also raised about conflicts of interest, with the same engineers working for different people and parties, but I am satisfied with the measures that are in place to deal with that. Chapter 8 of the bill deals specifically with dispute resolution and is an important part of the bill. Owners of reservoirs, especially those of small reservoirs that will now be regulated, are unsurprisingly nervous about the additional burdens, costs and paperwork involved. As with many regulations from various Government departments, full cost recovery of inspections is now the norm. That becomes more true as budgets decrease. It is important that costs are transparent. It is to be hoped that SEPA and other regulatory agencies become more open about how costs are arrived at and that all efforts are taken to keep costs under control—and not to shift unrelated costs on to the owners of reservoirs. It is also important that grants are available for owners who want to decommission their reservoirs, as Elaine Murray said. Reservoirs play an important part in our natural environment. They provide drinking water, of course, and smaller reservoirs are often used for angling and other pursuits. I often think that reservoirs are underutilised as a resource for leisure pursuits. As Elaine Murray and other members said, there was little in the bill that was contentious, and all parties agreed to the amendments. It seems pointless to speak for the sake of doing so, particularly given that we face a late decision time this evening. I look forward to the passing of the bill.

For members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, reaching this stage of the bill late this afternoon means that we see light at the end of the tunnel. It feels as though the process has been protracted, because of the sheer weight of evidence from various stakeholders and perhaps because of the need to debate amendments at stage 3 on issues that we dealt with at stage 2. I thank the people who were involved in the work on the bill. The work of the clerks and SPICe went well beyond the call of duty. I thank everyone who contributed to the process. Many articulated deeply and passionately held views. As I said in the stage 1 debate, it was difficult for members to decipher the true picture because of the sometimes exaggerated claims that were made. There have been attempts to use the bill to do things that it was never intended to do. The intention behind the bill is to ensure that Scotland’s wildlife and environment are managed successfully in future. It is not a vehicle for land reform or land tenure changes. The amendments that were agreed to at stage 2 and today will lead to a bill that is fit for the purpose for which it was originally intended. I am pleased that the minister has readily taken on board many of the committee’s recommendations, which we picked up as we went round the country. Examples of that are the catching-up and muirburn provisions, which provide sensible flexibility for work on the hills, taking into account the vagaries of the Scottish weather. Many safeguards and reviews are also built into the bill, and I have no doubt that we will return to many aspects of it in the future. However, I hope that its various elements are given sufficient time to work before people seek to amend them. For example, I hope that gamekeepers, landowners and land managers do not take their foot off the gas in relation to training, and adhering to the code of practice, on snaring.

I am confident that, because it has had such an airing at all stages of the bill, the code of practice will be adhered to. Marilyn Livingstone does not live in the real world of the rural economy if she does not realise that gamekeepers and other land managers are not the only ones who are involved in snaring. The code of practice on snaring will not help with illegal snaring anyway; that is a criminal matter and is one for the police. Similarly, I hope that the estates vigorously pursue the wildlife estates initiative and that they all come on board. If they do not, I suspect that there will be moves to introduce further legislation—such moves would not be unreasonable if wildlife crime, for example, does not shift significantly. All who are involved in our rural economy wish to manage it sustainably. That does not mean that it should be managed in the same way throughout Scotland. I hope that all involved allow diversity not only in wildlife but in the way in which our land is managed. I look forward to the passage of the bill tonight.

This is not the first regeneration debate in which I have taken part, but it is an issue to which we will inevitably and rightly return as long as parts of Scotland remain in need of improvement. There can be few MSPs who cannot think of parts of the area that they represent that could not benefit from being given a new lease of life through regeneration. I am puzzled as to what Helen Eadie has done to her party to have her members’ business debate this evening usurped this morning, especially as I think that this is one of only two Labour debating mornings remaining this session. Perhaps it is because of a lack of vision and not having anything to say—that is the inevitable conclusion. Coalfield regeneration is just one of many sorts of regeneration scheme. Like many members, I have seen the positive impact that the Scottish Government’s town centre regeneration fund has had in areas that I represent and the benefits that communities have enjoyed as a result. There are further successful regeneration projects that we can look forward to. The retail rocks project in Torry in Aberdeen, which is funded from the town centre regeneration fund, will help to create new businesses in the area. The project underlines the importance of successful small businesses in regenerating an area and makes Labour’s consistent failure to support the small business bonus scheme even more ill judged. Also in Torry, it was announced earlier this year that the disused Bon Accord drinks factory could be in line for residential redevelopment, bringing much needed construction jobs to the city and creating commercial space and a more pleasant environment. Those steps to regenerate part of Aberdeen are important in their own right, but they are also a signal of intent to make real improvements in the city. Aberdeen is examining the tax incremental funding model for providing finance for improvements through a number of projects in the city, funding growth through growth. The system has worked well in the United States and it certainly has potential in Scotland. Aside from the much publicised Union Terrace gardens, this funding mechanism is also being considered for extending the Aberdeen art gallery, regenerating Upper Denburn, preparing for the destruction and redevelopment of St Nicholas house and creating high-quality pedestrian routes through key city centre locations. It is a mechanism that can do a lot of good if it is successfully used to fund the right projects, and I know that people in various areas across Scotland will be watching what Aberdeen, and indeed Edinburgh, do with that funding model. Housing is a key area that needs to be at the heart of a successful regeneration strategy. Abandoned properties can suck the life out of areas and accelerate the decline of a previously successful community. When an area is full of empty homes, it is little wonder that some residents take little pride in their community, do not feel safe in the area and actively seek to relocate. That is why the SNP’s desire to give councils the power to increase council tax on empty properties to fund the construction of new house building is so important. That measure would discourage properties going unused and help to create more modern homes in areas that badly need them. The construction of new homes can have a real transformative effect on a community, returning it to a place where residents want to live. That is what makes the Scottish Government’s record of council house construction so important. More council houses were constructed last year than in the previous 20 years.

In my view it does not matter who builds them—and that did not happen anyway. The 1,000 new council houses built by the SNP represent positive action happening. They do not have to be built by housing associations—and in fact that number did not fall. The SNP is committed to having another 5,000 built over the next parliamentary session. Communities are gaining a new lease of life and people’s quality of life is immeasurably improved after four years of this Government. The construction of new homes is just as important a form of regeneration as upgrading a town centre or providing new opportunities. Whoever provides it—it has to be community led through community planning partnerships and the community has to be fully involved—successful regeneration can bring vibrancy back to local communities and improve quality of life and opportunities. It brings money back to areas and regenerates pride in the local community. In these difficult economic times, it is more important than ever that the right approach to regeneration is in place and that we ensure that every penny is spent to maximum effect.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the size of voluntary groups having access to funding to help reduce or prevent crime. (S3O-13059)

I have seen at first hand the important work that small organisations such as Drugs Action in Aberdeen do in their communities. They worry—understandably—that, in the current financial climate, they might find themselves squeezed out of accessing funding by larger organisations. Will the minister give an assurance that all organisations, regardless of size, will have an equal opportunity to access Scottish Government funding streams?

Does the member accept that the changes to the child care element of working tax credit that her party’s Government in Westminster is introducing will mean that 1,280 families will lose an average of £454 in help with childcare costs in the next financial year? How is that going to help?

I welcome the fact that we are debating early intervention in Scotland, which has such a lasting impact on the course of people’s lives. Study after study has demonstrated that the first few years of a child’s life are critical to their development and the opportunities that they are likely to have. The presentation that ministers were given by Harry Burns when we were developing the equally well strategy, in which he talked about the holes that can develop in children’s brains as a result of neglect, such as not being fed, changed or put to bed at the right time, will stay with me forever. Although a direct cause-and-effect relationship cannot always be proven, a positive nurturing environment is likely to help a child to develop, whereas all too often a negative environment can make it difficult for a child to succeed in education and can lead to health problems or to crime and antisocial behaviour. As much as we might wish there to be, there is no single silver bullet that we can use to ensure that every child in Scotland grows up in the kind of environment that we would want. Problems do occur, particularly when families are trapped in poverty, and when there is a risk of that happening, it is critical that any interventions to improve a child’s situation are as effective as possible and are taken as early on as possible. Communities and people who work in them know where those families are. At the same seminar, John Carnochan from the violence reduction unit said that it was possible to identify where in a particular postcode area the problem families were likely to be and where there were likely to be continuing problems. In my view, early intervention begins at the antenatal stage. Every woman who finds herself pregnant will pitch up at the doctor’s, go for a scan and be offered antenatal classes. Those classes should be not just about the process of childbirth and how to bring up a child in the very early months; they should be an opportunity for social workers and health workers to engage with the mother—at that stage, every mother wants the best for their child—to help them to break the cycle of poverty or drug or alcohol addiction so that they can begin to provide a better life for their child. Whether it is to address a child’s health, their educational attainment or their behaviour, the earlier that intervention is made to change a child’s circumstances, the more effective it is likely to be in the long term. Although speed is certainly no substitute for quality in such cases, the earlier a positive change can be made when a child’s opportunities are at risk, the better. As others have said, the alternative is crisis management. Waiting for problems to develop before trying to patch them up is more costly and more damaging to children and the people around them. I know that the Scottish Government has been determined to move away from that approach through measures such as its early years framework and the equally well strategy. Prevention and effective early intervention—addressing issues before things reach crisis point and irreparable harm is done to a child’s potential—are the only sensible approach to improving children’s start in life. Two years on from publication of the early years framework, demonstrable progress is being made in achieving the shift in attitude and philosophy that is necessary if we are to put prevention and early intervention at the heart of Scotland’s early years strategy. That was highlighted in a recently published report, which also identified further progress that can be made. It is estimated that if early interventions for children from pre-birth to eight years old were 100 per cent effective, up to £131 million of Scottish taxpayers’ money could be saved in the medium term. Not only is early intervention effective but it represents a more cost-effective option. As is the case for so many issues, it is far more expensive to deal with a crisis than it is to take preventive action. Against the background of the cuts to Scotland’s budget, which we debated yesterday, such efficiency is more important than ever. The undoubted challenges of recession, unemployment and reduced money for services make the successful refocusing of our strategy on prevention and early intervention even more essential. I welcome the progress that has been made so far. I firmly believe that the approach will stand us in good stead in the coming years. If professionals co-operate, rather than work in silos, no child should fall through the net, as Ross Finnie said. If all professions work together and enmesh their services, perhaps the mesh in the net will become tighter and fewer children will be likely to fall through it. Mary Scanlon and Jackson Carlaw should not get hung up on titles. The Royal College of Nursing Scotland said in its briefing for the debate: “Health visiting services are critically important to the present and future health of families, however, they must not be seen in isolation from the rest of the community nursing team. Healthcare and other professionals must be able to work together to support the development of children.” It is about all agencies working together. Identification of the most vulnerable families is crucial, and the policies that the Government has identified and is pursuing will bear fruit, if they are allowed to continue during a second term of office. I support the amendment in Shona Robison’s name.

While work continues on Kintore station, does the minister agree that the people of the north-east are welcoming today his announcement yesterday that work will start on Inveramsay bridge, for which they have waited for ages? That is happening under the current Government but was delayed under the Lib Dems.

Presiding Officer, as you know, I was part of the delegation that returned from Malawi this week. I was privileged to be part of that delegation. Mrs Constance Kilimo, who is in the gallery, travelled back with us. She is on a pilot programme in which she will receive direct support and training in priority areas that will best aid the running of the National Assembly of Malawi. She is a special assistant to the clerk of the National Assembly of Malawi. Does the Scottish Government have any similar schemes for Government officials from Malawi? If not, will the minister consider such schemes in the future?

Does the First Minister share my view that the only way for the Scottish Government to have a real voice when it comes to the common fisheries policy and the progression of innovative policies on discards and maintaining healthy fish stocks is for Scotland to become a full independent member of the European Union?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that a successful farmed salmon industry is an important part of the economy. (S3O-12690)

The minister is aware of the comments apparently made recently by the United Kingdom Government’s minister with responsibility for fisheries, Richard Benyon, attacking the farmed salmon industry. Does the minister believe that such comments are deeply unhelpful and does she agree that Mr Benyon should publicly retract his criticism of the industry, especially since there is now huge potential in the Chinese market?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many  medical professionals are employed by NHS Grampian compared with May 2007. (S3O-12484)

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the fact that NHS Grampian employs more nurses, doctors, dentists and other health professionals than it did at the start of this Administration—professionals who would not be there had Labour won in 2007—is a clear demonstration that the Scottish National Party Government has the national health service at the heart of its priorities?

I, too, congratulate Ted Brocklebank on securing this evening's debate. However, I cannot resist the urge to point out the irony of a Tory MSP being responsible for the debate, given that it is a member of his party at Westminster who is driving the threat to air bases in Scotland. I welcome the fact that at Holyrood, at least, there is clearly cross-party support for the retention of RAF Leuchars—although I note that although Iain Smith has urged us to support his motion, as of yesterday he had not added his name to Mary Scanlon's motion on RAF Lossiemouth. Just a few short weeks ago, I spoke in the members' business debate on RAF Kinloss and RAF Lossiemouth, and I was among the many people who marched to try to convince the UK Government of the need to retain RAF Lossiemouth because of the vital military functions it provides to the UK and the overwhelming role it plays at the heart of the local community in Moray. The large number of people who turned out to campaign for the retention of RAF Lossiemouth clearly demonstrated how strongly people feel about the need to keep the base, but I know that no one on the march would want the saving of RAF Lossiemouth to come about as the result of another base being ripped out of the heart of another Scottish community. Playing one community off against another, as seems to be happening, is frankly deplorable and it is not a trap that anyone who wishes to see the retention of RAF Lossiemouth and RAF Leuchars should fall into. Both bases have strong cases for their retention, and the message from the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Government and everyone who is campaigning on the issue must be that both bases should continue to play their vital roles. One of the most damaging aspects of the current discussions is the uncertainty they are causing for service personnel, their families and  the communities that rely on the bases for their survival. Whatever the outcome of the decisions that are made on the future of the bases, they need to be made in a far more timely manner than the current glacial speed of the UK Government. The Tory and Lib Dem Government says that it is undertaking a strategic defence review, but it does not say much about the efficacy of the review if decisions on the closure of air bases are already being made. No one has mentioned the role that the two bases play in mountain and sea rescue, which is a strong part of their training, never mind the vital role that they play for Scots in that work. Contradictory statements have been made about the criteria that will be used to make the final decision. That is also far from helpful. Given the scale of the impact that any closure would have, the process needs to be clear and transparent. The UK Government needs to make a clear and unambiguous declaration of how and when the decision will be made, to allow people throughout Scotland to make a loud and resounding argument for the retention of RAF Lossiemouth and RAF Leuchars. The people of Lossiemouth and the north-east have made clear their feeling about the air bases in the north-east. Many people, not least the thousands who attend Leuchars air show annually—I am among those who have enjoyed that spectacular—will be very sad if the UK Government decides to close RAF Leuchars, and I sincerely hope that that will not happen.

Given that local authorities south of the border have seen planned annual budget reductions of an average of 7.25 per cent, does the cabinet secretary believe that the 2.6 per cent reduction that has been offered to councils in Scotland will better protect services and represents a strong deal when looked at against the massive cuts that are being handed to England and Scotland by the Lib Dem and Tory Government in London?

To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage greater use of locally grown produce by businesses. (S3O-12314)

There are those in the hospitality sector who would welcome the opportunity to purchase locally grown surplus produce from allotments. Doing that would provide an economic boost for those who work the allotments and reduce the carbon footprint of the hospitality industry. However, it seems that local byelaws in some areas prevent such purchases from happening. Will the minister undertake to work with local authorities to look at easing such restrictions to allow the hospitality industry to make use of a fantastic local resource?

Consideration of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill at stage 1 was a challenging and fascinating task for the committee. The bill contains a number of different subjects as part of its package of provisions, covering game management, wildlife crime, species licensing, invasive non-native species, protection of badgers, management of deer and the administration of designated protected areas, such as areas of special protection and sites of special scientific interest. On the surface, the bill is largely practical and seeks to update and strengthen existing law to make it fit for the Scottish countryside of the 21st century. However, it also raised some fundamental questions that galvanised people across Scotland to make their views known to the committee. What should our priorities be in the countryside? What is the ideal balance between different management objectives, such as grouse moor management, protection of species, forestry targets and environmental concerns, and how can we achieve that balance? When the committee visited the Langholm moor demonstration project, which is an experiment that is attempting to manage a grouse moor with a sustainable hen harrier population, it became clear that what could appear on first sight to be a vast natural wild moor, is actually a piece of land that is extensively managed. Foxes are being controlled, birds are being fed and heather is being burnt. As much as the bill is about the natural environment, it is also about how land is managed. All committee members engaged with the bill from the outset, and I thank them for their dedication. I also thank all those who gave evidence to the committee, and those who  assisted the committee with our external meeting in Langholm, Dumfriesshire, and with our informative visits to the Langholm moor demonstration project, Alvie estate near Aviemore, and the RSPB Scotland-managed Loch Garten and Abernethy reserves in the Cairngorms national park. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for their support during stage 1. As I am sure that members will appreciate, there was no shortage of strongly held views on issues such as snaring, species licensing, game and deer management, and wildlife crime. I will come to each of those shortly. I should also say that, although the committee was not in complete agreement on how to take forward some of the issues, we were unanimous in agreeing that the bill is necessary and important and that the Parliament should support it at stage 1. On a general issue, it was made clear to the committee that wildlife law has become increasingly complex and difficult to follow. How can we expect everybody to understand the law when there is such confusion and lack of clarity? When the committee heard that respected legal experts struggle to make sense of it, it realised that consolidation of the law was overdue. The committee believes that that should be a priority for any future Administration. Let me now turn to the various issues in the bill, starting with the provision on game law. The committee supported the Government's intention to modernise archaic game laws and to bring game birds under the auspices of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. The committee also supported the creation of a single poaching offence, which should prove to be more transparent and effective. On the topic of ground game—brown and mountain hares, specifically—the committee welcomed the proposed introduction of close seasons to protect dependent young at important times for their welfare. Wildlife crime and single-witness evidence became a central issue in the committee's considerations, and a very lively session was held on the subject. The bill restates the current position that poaching offences and egg stealing can be prosecuted on the evidence of a single witness, but other wildlife crimes require corroboration. A majority of members thought that that position is not sustainable and that the law must be made consistent, either by extending single-witness evidence to all wildlife crimes or by abolishing it altogether. Members had different views on which route to recommend—I am sure that others will clarify their positions during the debate.  There was a great deal of discussion about the on-going problem of raptor persecution—a situation which seems, as the minister stated, to be getting worse, rather than improving. The committee agreed that the law is not working. We should be seeing more prosecutions for persecution of raptors and fewer reported cases, but sadly we are not. A majority of the committee therefore welcomed the minister's announcement that she intends to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to introduce a vicarious liability offence, which will target not just individuals who directly poison a bird of prey but landowners who direct them to do so. It is important that our laws can deal with the few who are tarnishing the reputation of the vast majority of estates, which do a great deal for Scotland both culturally and economically. The committee unanimously welcomed the recent wildlife estates Scotland initiative, a voluntary initiative that is managed by the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association and the Scottish Estates Business Group, supported by the Scottish Government. It seeks to set and maintain the highest standards for our sporting estates. Some committee members supported enabling powers being put in the bill so that future Administrations could introduce an estate licensing scheme if the vicarious liability offence and voluntary scheme were shown not to be making an impact on the problem. I note that I did not agree with that recommendation, but I am sure that other members will give their views on it, in due course. Deer management is another important issue that the bill deals with. It proposes a series of amendments to the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 in order to realise fully the intentions of that legislation. There can be few finer sights in Scotland than a red deer stag standing majestically on a hill, and many tourists come to Scotland to see deer in their natural environment. However, as Scotland has somewhere in the region of 750,000 deer and they have no natural predator, deer numbers need to be managed to prevent significant damage to habitat and to ensure that any threat to public health and safety is kept to a minimum. The committee agreed with the Government that the most effective method of managing deer across the country is to encourage co-operation and collaboration among all those who manage deer for a variety of objectives. However, the committee also heard persuasive evidence that the system is simply not working as well as it should be, and it therefore calls on the Government to re-examine the operation of deer management groups, which gather local landowners together to agree how to manage deer  numbers in a particular area, and to ensure that all those who are responsible abide by the proposed code of practice. The committee supported the Government's proposed presumption against the release of invasive non-native species. In this country, we have seen many examples of non-native species becoming invasive and damaging natural wildlife and habitat, from the non-native grey squirrel, which the minister mentioned, and the rhododendron to the signal crayfish, which was discovered only last week in the River Kelvin. The best way of preventing future generations from having to deal with problems that are caused by non-native species is to have a presumption against the release of such species. There were less contentious measures in the bill that the committee supported, such as bringing consistency to the laws protecting badgers; making changes to when and how muirburn should be practised; and the proposed streamlining of designations of protected sites, such as areas of special protection and sites of special scientific interest. The committee welcomes all those provisions, with some minor suggestions and recommendations. As I said at the beginning of my speech, in many ways the fundamental question behind the bill is what our priorities should be in the countryside. How do we achieve a balance between public and private interests, between landowners and environmentalists, and between animal welfare organisations and those who shoot for sport? The bill has begun to answer that question and to better address the balance. I look forward to its being strengthened further at stage 2.

I welcome this annual fisheries debate, which is an opportunity to send the cabinet secretary to Brussels with MSPs' comments and good lines of argument ringing in his ears. It is regrettable that, by announcing new quota proposals to the media before the industry had sight of them, the new commissioner, Maria Damanaki, has not covered herself in glory. That is not a good basis on which to start negotiations. How much we as a nation admire the bravery of our fishermen in undertaking such a hazardous job to bring fresh fish to our tables and to export high-quality products overseas can never be overstated. That is why the general public cannot understand why fishermen who catch good, edible fish have to discard them overboard because they cannot be landed as a result of quotas. The horrendous situation in which tonnes of good fish are discarded by fishing vessels is a direct result of the EU's common fisheries policy being based on landing quotas rather than catch quotas. The land more, catch less approach is a relatively new approach that is being pioneered in Scotland. With the right monitoring, it is possible to know exactly how much of a fish stock, including in mixed fisheries, is being removed from the sea. The need for effort restrictions can therefore be reduced. It is a win-win situation: fish mortality is reduced and fishermen are able to raise the value of the stock that they land by being awarded increased quotas for their compliance with the scheme. The technology is available to create a fully monitored fishery that not only gives fishermen a chance to demonstrate their compliance with regulations but creates a significant wealth of evidence on the health of fish stocks that can be pointed to in negotiations. It will also give a wealth of evidence to those in marine research. Given the cuts in budgets, it is obvious that there will have to be work with the industry in the future. Scotland has demonstrated that a catch quota system of management can be successful. The EU now needs to back that system and take action to significantly expand its availability. The industry here has rightly received international plaudits for its ground-breaking conservation measures. It is  imperative that the rest of the EU acknowledges those efforts and the need for change in practice, but the EU steadfastly refuses to see that as a basis for negotiation. It is right that the Scottish Government is putting catch quotas at the heart of our negotiating priorities, but without our own voice in negotiations, it can only be hoped that the UK Government fully understands just how important a priority they are. Given the way in which the Lib Dem-Tory Government at Westminster attempted to drop the annual fisheries debate, it is difficult to have much confidence in it. There is no better document for the cabinet secretary to have in his luggage than "The Future of Fisheries Management in Scotland: Report of an Independent Panel". We ought to thank Alan Campbell and his team for producing it. Among other things, it urges urgent reform of the CFP and recognises that Scotland, as a pre-eminent fishing nation, should be taking the lead in new methods and new trials. Times have changed. Fishermen are no longer able to catch as much as they want, but we now see non-governmental organisations and the fishing industry working together. We wish the cabinet secretary well in his efforts to continue to back and get the best deal for our fishermen.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support the use of the Scots language. (S3O-12091)

Does the minister agree that any successful strategy for encouraging the greater use of the various regional dialects of Scots must be based on an accurate picture of how widely they are currently used in day-to-day life? If so, does she agree that it is essential that members of the public are made aware of the  meaning of the Scots language question in the 2011 census in order to avoid confusion over its meaning and to ensure an accurate response?

Does the member agree with his colleagues in Westminster that student fees in Scotland should be up to £9,000 per year?

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. I, too, have previously written to NHS Grampian about self-monitoring and self-management of anticoagulation therapy on behalf of patients. It is important to debate it. I am sure that we all wish to encourage the principle of empowering patients with long-term conditions to take control of their own treatment. As Nanette Milne said, it is a key part of "Better Health, Better Care". Clear quality-of-life issues are involved when the self-management of conditions might allow patients to enjoy greater freedom in their day-to-day lives. Requiring patients to attend clinics regularly for their treatment also has implications for time and cost. That is a particular concern for people in rural areas, who may face longer journey times and, therefore, may see more of their day-to-day life sacrificed to managing their condition. Even if such visits are relatively infrequent, there is still inevitable inconvenience to the patients involved. Therefore, I believe that, where possible, it is right to consider alternatives. It seems strange that youngsters are encouraged to self-monitor and self-manage their anticoagulation therapy but that, when they reach adulthood, they are considered unable to do it. Given yesterday's budget and the severe cuts that have been passed down from Westminster for this year and the coming years, members will require no convincing of the need for treatments to be cost effective. A shrinking pot of resources is available to the Scottish Government, so the cost of change must, of course, be weighed against the benefit to those with long-term conditions. That said, I believe that we must be prepared to change current practice and I hope that the cabinet secretary will be prepared to examine the merits of the proposal in detail. Developments in health care move ever faster as every year passes. More and more ways of treating patients are being developed. Keeping up with the pace of change can be a challenge, but when treatments are developed that can provide people with long-term conditions greater freedom from their conditions, I believe that it is right to look long and hard at adopting them if they are cost effective. Encouraging greater independence among people with long-term conditions is always desirable when it can be achieved. I believe that greater self-monitoring and self-management of these treatments has the potential to do that, and I hope that encouragement for such practices will receive the consideration it deserves.

Will the member give way?

Having seen the amendments to the motion that have been lodged by the Liberal Democrats and the Tories, I can only say how disappointed I am to see that they have decided not to engage  seriously with this important issue. I am disappointed, but far from surprised. For Mike Rumbles to suggest that the issues at stake are in some way related to the intelligence of people in Scotland, as he does in his amendment, clearly shows that yet again he has either missed the point or is being deliberately obtuse. This is a serious issue that deserves serious debate, not the ridiculous approach that the Liberal Democrats have taken. For David McLetchie to be so dismissive of the arrangements to be made by the returning officers is insulting. We are so far out from arrangements being in place that we do not even know the electoral rolls that will be used. Will it be Westminster rolls for one and Scottish Parliament rolls for another? Can members imagine the chaos that is likely in polling stations? The fact is that for as long as we share media coverage with the UK, the better-funded and more prevalent London-based media will, as Pauline McNeill suggested, always have the power to overshadow events in Scotland. We need look only to the Westminster election just past, when wall-to-wall coverage of the TV debates was broadcast across Scotland with no recognition of the specific political situation here. Scottish issues were marginalised at that election and people in Scotland were subject to constant coverage of issues that did not affect them and could serve only to mislead.

Not if parties in Scotland that are also standing in that election are not allowed their due position in the debates. If the AV referendum goes ahead on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections, does anyone in the chamber truly believe that we will not see similar wall-to-wall coverage of Westminster representatives of the UK parties putting their cases for and against AV? We all know that that is exactly what will happen and that it will inevitably overshadow the debate on what direction the next four years at Holyrood should take. It has long been an article of faith that, because of the media's substantial power to influence people, there should be balance in television coverage, particularly during elections. That is not an abstract concept but a key component of a balanced and fair democracy. I hope that nobody in the chamber would wish to see the alternative, whereby TV stations are able to promote a particular political party, 24 hours a day, through  rolling news coverage. Allowing the AV referendum to proceed on the same day as devolved elections would irreparably shatter the balance. What makes the hypocrisy of the Liberal Democrats and the Tories even worse is that their counterparts at Westminster know full well that the UK media circus would inevitably overshadow the debate in Scotland. Why else would they have accepted that there is a need to prevent elections to Holyrood and Westminster from clashing in 2015? I might find deplorable their high-handed way of decreeing that the devolved elections should move, but at least they have acknowledged that there is a problem. What is good for the goose is good for the gander. If the election dates must be separated to prevent the London media circus from overshadowing the 2015 election, the AV referendum and Holyrood elections in 2011 must also be entirely separate. Any other approach can only be described as utter hypocrisy. The fact that the Liberal Democrats at Westminster are pushing so hard for the referendum to take place at the same time as the devolved elections is a sign of their desperation to show that they have achieved something—anything—by selling out and entering into a coalition with the Conservatives. Their support is in free fall and they hope that holding a referendum for a voting system that they do not even want at the earliest possible opportunity will somehow stop that slide. It simply will not work, and it is disgraceful that they seek to undermine the fairness of the Holyrood elections to achieve their desperate aims. They made the decision to enter government with the Tories without getting anything substantial to show for it, and they must face the consequences. The integrity of the Scottish elections cannot and must not be sacrificed in the way that the UK Government wants. It is putting the worst kind of short-term political expediency ahead of the right of the people of Scotland to have a proper debate on the issues ahead of the coming election. The Liberal Democrats and Tories should think again, and accept that the dates for the election and the AV referendum must be separate.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member acknowledge that the Electoral Commission said: "The rules on how the referendum will be conducted must be clear from at least six months in advance"? Have we not passed that date?

Does the minister believe that the harbours around the north-east, including Aberdeen, Peterhead and Dundee, have strong cases for funding from the national renewables infrastructure fund? Does he believe that that would provide a real boost to the renewables industry in the north-east of Scotland?

Will the minister confirm that Aberdeenshire Council has done as much as it can to learn the lessons from the flooding in Stonehaven and Huntly, and that the council and SEPA have put protection measures in place? Does she agree that each individual household must build its own resilience in dealing with the floods?

I congratulate Bill Wilson on securing this debate to coincide with the science and the Parliament event at Our Dynamic Earth today. I welcome to the gallery all those who are attending from the north-east who have contacted me about today's event and this debate, including Dr Janice Drew from the Rowett institute of nutrition and health and Gordon Doig from the Institute of Physics in Scotland. At the beginning of this session of Parliament, the Scottish National Party Government identified life sciences and energy as two of the areas that could help to drive forward economic growth. Both those sectors rely on science and engineering; they rely on strong research and development in the companies in the sectors and they require our universities and colleges to come up with innovative solutions and to work together with industry to ensure that the sectors grow in our economy. Bill Wilson mentions in his motion the good work of the higher and further education institutions in the West of Scotland. I would not stand here and not commend to the chamber the immensely innovative work of the University of Aberdeen and its institute of medical science, the Robert Gordon University, the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, the Scottish Agricultural College, the  University of Dundee's college of life sciences and the University of Abertay Dundee's computing science departments. In medical research, science and engineering and the environment, all those institutions play vital roles. So, too, do our colleges, which provide us with many higher national certificate and higher national diploma students who might go on to further study. They also provide the practical and technical support in our higher education and research establishments. Many colleges also produce apprentices for our industries, such as for Score Energy Ltd in Peterhead, which has contracts all over the world. That leads me to schools. I believe passionately that curriculum for excellence provides a marvellous opportunity for teachers to ignite in many more pupils the excitement of STEM—science, technology, engineering and mathematics—subjects. In some quarters, such subjects are seen as being dry and perhaps too difficult, but I believe that that view is based on ignorance and is not justifiable. Curriculum for excellence gives us an opportunity to instil in all our young people from an early age the relevance of, and a fascination for, science, which can be related to so many other subjects and can be taught in a collaborative way. If we combine learning that Scotland has produced so many renowned scientists and innovators with delving in some depth into what they studied, produced and invented, I am positive that many more youngsters, including females, would choose STEM subjects. If my teachers had explained that angles in geometry related to the aerodynamics and design of sports cars, a spark might have been lit in me and I might have chosen a completely different career path. That work must be done in primary schools. In my view, it is too late to do it when youngsters are making subject choices in secondary school. That is why the work of the Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology is so important, as are the facilities that are offered by places such as the Satrosphere science centre in Aberdeen and Dundee Science Centre for visiting school groups and family days out. Techfest, which is supported by so many of our businesses located in the north-east, is eagerly awaited each year by our schools.

Will the member take an intervention?

I add my congratulations to David Stewart on securing tonight's debate. This is a time when people in Moray are understandably shocked and angry over the coming devastation of their local economy. It is more important than ever that the issues are discussed in the Scottish Parliament, and I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate. In previous years, we have seen only too clearly the economic and social devastation that the loss of a local base can cause to communities in Scotland. There can be few examples of past closures, however, where two bases that are so tightly woven into the fabric of a local community and that are so integral to the local economy have been under threat at the same time. As a Keith quine, I know how far from Lossie and Kinloss—through Forres and Elgin—the influences of the bases stretch in the north-east of Scotland.  As the motion makes clear, and as David Stewart made clear in his speech, 16 per cent of all full-time equivalent employment in Moray is directly linked to the bases, and their loss would be a devastating blow to the area. As Rob Gibson and other members have mentioned, that loss would have a significant knock-on effect on local services, including education and health, and on the economic wellbeing of people throughout the area. I know that the Scottish Government and its agencies will work tirelessly to mitigate the impact of the SDSR's decisions as far as they possibly can, but there can be little doubt that there will be really tough times ahead for people in Moray. As this is a Westminster decision, it is vitally important that Westminster resources are also deployed if one or both of the bases close. Scottish Government resources must not exclusively be left to pick up the pieces after a Westminster decision. Perhaps the minister will tell us what Westminster resources he thinks can be made available. The importance of the Moray bases extends well beyond the communities that they are part of. As has been mentioned, the Nimrod fleet has played an incredibly important role in rescue operations in many parts of the world, perhaps nowhere as important as the waters off our coast. During tragic events such as last year's North Sea helicopter crashes, or the Piper Alpha disaster in the 1980s, Nimrods from RAF Kinloss have been on hand, often arriving first on the scene, to assist and co-ordinate rescue efforts. They have provided a vital function in saving the lives of people who work in the hazardous conditions of the North Sea, and the cancellation of their replacements will be of concern to many people. Whether it is in the oil and gas sector, the fishing industry or the growing offshore renewables industry, safety is the watchword of all those who work in the North Sea and anything that will diminish it is extremely concerning. I wonder whether support from those industries can be garnered in opposition to the proposals. The two bases are of local and national importance and the threat that they are under is extremely worrying. Given that the UK's defence footprint is already such that Scotland loses out on the proportion of military installations that it might reasonably expect, the further threatened losses are devastating. The UK Government needs to end the damaging uncertainty over the future of RAF Lossiemouth and RAF Kinloss as soon as possible. It should accept just how important the bases are to people in Moray and across Scotland, where alternative employment is scarce and current wages in the area are among the lowest in the country.

Given the fact that Nimrod aircraft based at RAF Kinloss have been critical to rescue operations in the North Sea, not least for the Piper Alpha disaster and last year's helicopter crashes, does the cabinet secretary share my concern that the cancellation of the Nimrod MRA4 is putting at unnecessary risk the lives of not only those working on offshore installations, but those aboard ships in Scottish waters, such as in the recent case of the fish-processing ship, Athena, which was deemed too far out to sea for other aircraft to reach?

Does the minister agree that, after 10 years of Liberal Democrats being in government in this place and 30 years of them representing the Gordon constituency in Westminster, it is only now, under the Scottish National Party Government, that Inveramsay bridge has featured in any transport plan and that action is being taken to address one of the most notorious bottlenecks in the north-east of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the Ofgem transmission charging review and the potential outcomes. (S3O-11639)

Does the minister believe that a situation in which electricity suppliers in north-east Scotland face some of the highest transmission charges in the United Kingdom is incompatible with promoting renewable energy? Does he also believe that Ofgem's current practices must change if we are to reach our ambitious climate change targets?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and to highlight the on-going efforts to provide a bright future for the Glencraft supported employment factory in Aberdeen. We all know that supported employment facilities provide an invaluable service to disabled people. They provide skills and training that help workers in their future careers and, most important, they provide vital employment to people with disabilities, who often find it harder than others do to find employment in the main stream, as John Park highlighted.  Unemployment rates among disabled people are significantly higher than they are among the rest of the workforce, so any measure that helps to counter that is welcome. Disabled people are no different from anyone else in their desire to have meaningful work and to receive a fair wage for their efforts. However, supported places are valuable not only for the social good that they provide, but for the long-term benefits that they offer to the public purse. The cost of supporting a person with disabilities is roughly halved if they are in employment. In 2009, the Scottish Government helped 23 supported workplaces with funding to the tune of £26.4 million, precisely because it recognises their value. As we have heard, the economic downturn has not left supported workplaces unscathed. Local authorities are trying to make resources stretch further than ever, while demand in many business sectors has fallen. That has created massive challenges for supported workplaces—not least for Glencraft in Aberdeen. When Aberdeen City Council had no option but to end its annual subsidy of £470,000 to the factory, the workforce at Glencraft faced extremely worrying times. The business could not find a way to operate without a subsidy and eventually went into voluntary administration. Glencraft has, however, become something of a success story for assisted workplaces by making the transition from local government subsidy to self-sufficiency. The personal intervention of the First Minister was critical in bringing on board the locally headquartered Production Services Network to offer support to a revived operation. The support of PSN financially and in providing expertise and advice to Glencraft was essential in giving workers hope for the future. Just as important were the decision of Aberdeen City Council to waive rent arrears for the factory so that it could become more financially viable, and support from the Scottish Government.

If the member will let me continue, she will find that I believe that lessons can be learned from the Glencraft experience. I hope that Blindcraft in Edinburgh has been in touch with people at Glencraft in Aberdeen to find out exactly how it secured private interest in helping the factory. I am sure that similar businesses in Edinburgh could be brought on board. As my colleague Ian McKee said, it is important that all Edinburgh members in the Parliament work together to make that happen. There remain challenges for Glencraft, not least of which is the need to raise £0.5 million to secure  new fit-for-purpose premises from which to operate. However, the real lesson is about the importance of businesses, members of the public, local authorities and the Scottish Government working together to secure a viable future for supported workplaces. I am sure that, for Blindcraft in Edinburgh, a good outcome is a possibility. Just last month, there was a fantastic fundraising effort that involved almost 200 people making the 17-mile walk from Banchory to Aberdeen through the night to raise £20,000. We should all pay tribute to those people for their efforts. People in Aberdeen have a special place in their hearts for Glencraft, which has been operating since 1863. I am sure that supported workplaces elsewhere are in a similar situation. In such times, we all need to buy that extra bed or replace our bed earlier to help those businesses to survive. People need to buy the products. In Aberdeen, businesses such as local hoteliers and public agencies are represented on the new board of Glencraft.

I absolutely agree that it cannot be a tick-box exercise. The approach must be long term and there must be a sustainable business with products that are competitive in the marketplace. People will not buy products if they do not provide value for money or are not competitive. We have a good and on-going success story in Aberdeen. That approach must be rolled out to other supported workplaces throughout the country; they can have a viable future. The commitment of the staff and all those who work at Glencraft is a great benefit. To me, that is the big society already in action, and David Cameron is a Johnny-come-lately on that. It can work when people come together.

I thank all the members who have stayed for the debate and those who signed the associated motion. Given that the Scottish low carbon investment conference took place this week, I believe that it is a timely moment to discuss the offshore valuation study and the challenges and opportunities that it sets out for Scotland's renewables industry. The subject is often discussed by members of all parties, and I believe that all members want Scotland to lead the way in harnessing the renewable energy off our shores to drive forward our economy. To get there, however, it is imperative that grand vision is matched by robust calculation and strategy. The offshore valuation study is an important document that goes a long way towards quantifying what must be done in the coming years and what the potential rewards will be. It is a solid basis for the long-term planning that will be the bedrock of making the most of the renewable energy resources off our coasts. Last year, the Parliament passed its world-leading Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which is one of the most important actions that members have taken since devolution began. The challenges of meeting the target of a 42 per cent reduction in carbon emissions by 2020 and an 80 per cent reduction by 2050 are significant, and the nature of our energy supply will play a key role. It is estimated that, across the United Kingdom, electricity supply will need to reduce its carbon emissions by 80 per cent before 2030 if we are to stay on track to meet the 2050 carbon emissions reduction targets. In Scotland, we have the opportunity to be well ahead of that curve. The First Minister announced just days ago that Scotland should aim to produce 80 per cent of the electricity that we need from renewable sources by  2020, and that there is the real prospect that 100 per cent of our electricity demands will be met by renewable means by 2025. Those are challenging goals, but they are made possible by the rate of progress in recent years. As important as it is for us to support the development of renewable energy for climate change reasons, there is an unprecedented economic opportunity for our nation, too. The offshore valuation study estimates that the UK's offshore renewable energy resources would, if developed to full capacity, produce six times the current UK electricity demand, or 2,131TWh. While any conventional resource will inevitably diminish with time, renewable energy by its very nature will always be there for us to take advantage of with the right infrastructure and equipment. The offshore valuation study outlines three scenarios that could be delivered with appropriate levels of investment. The first is that the UK would develop offshore renewables to the point at which any further development would require electricity to be exported. The second is that we would push past that to the point at which electricity exports would be equivalent to the electricity that is produced by all means other than offshore renewables. The third is that enough electricity would be produced to match the energy that is generated by electricity, gas, oil-based fuels and other sources. The aspiration to produce clean, renewable energy that provides for heat and transport needs across the UK in that way is hugely ambitious, but it is conceivable if enough was to be invested. Each scenario is progressively more ambitious, with greater initial investment demands and greater rewards in the longer term. The scenarios provide highly illustrative demonstrations of the level of investment that is required, but also the level of energy and wealth that can be produced. It is clear from the scenarios that if we have the ambition to export renewable electricity to other parts of Europe, the creation of a European Union supergrid is fundamental. The access to a European energy market that a supergrid would bring is essential if the potential revenues from offshore renewables are to be secured. The EU has identified the development of a European supergrid as a key infrastructure priority, but we cannot rest on our laurels and assume that that infrastructure will automatically be built without Scotland's continued input. As long as Scotland does not enjoy its own voice in Europe, I hope that all parties in the Parliament would push the UK Government at every opportunity to lead the progress that must be made on delivering a supergrid. That is a  development of critical national importance for Scotland's economic future. Of course, a supergrid is not the only infrastructure that will be needed to make a success of offshore renewables. Sites around Scotland that, with the right investment, can become hubs for the offshore renewables industry are identified in the national renewables infrastructure plan. In the north-east, Aberdeen is already the energy capital of Europe, thanks to the oil industry. It has rightly been identified as integral to the future of offshore renewables, too. Getting the right investment in place is critical if Scotland is to fully develop its own centres for manufacturing, maintaining and operating offshore renewables technology. We have a wealth of offshore expertise, thanks to the oil industry, and we can develop that expertise further to provide real jobs and economic opportunities to thousands of people throughout Scotland in the offshore renewables industry. Fully developing our supply chain is a key part of the progress that we must make if we are to ensure that the cost of offshore renewables is not to be prohibitive and that the Scottish economy enjoys maximum benefit from the industry's growth. The European Commission's North Sea grid co-ordinator, Georg Adamowitsch, recently said: "Taking into account the wind, wave and tidal resources of Scotland, you are in a position to help the rest of Europe to achieve its climate goals." A real leadership role is available for Scotland to grasp in moving towards offshore renewables to help to tackle climate change. The findings in the offshore valuation study are an invaluable outline of the challenges and opportunities ahead. We must ensure that we build on them to help Scotland to achieve our potential in the area.

Given the successful partial relocation of some women offenders back to Craiginches prison, is it not more important that we now have a community prison that serves all types of prisoners in the north-east?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Keenan (Recycling) Ltd on its work in diverting food waste from landfill by picking it up from major oil companies, other firms and hotels and restaurants in Aberdeen and throughout the north-east? What steps does he think can be taken to increase the amount of food waste that can be diverted from landfill?

Given that Moray Council has taken into in-house operation a similar respite unit in Forres that was also run by Grampian Living Options, does the cabinet secretary believe that, instead of attacking the Scottish Government, Mr Rumbles's time might be better served in pressurising his Liberal Democrat colleagues on Aberdeenshire Council to follow suit and take in house the Achbuie centre? Recent figures show that the SNP Government has delivered its manifesto commitment to provide 10,000 additional respite weeks. Aberdeenshire needs some of those.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that this is, in fact, a good-news story in which social work colleagues, the discharge co-ordinator and health service staff have worked together to reduce the  bed blocking that was prevalent under the previous Government? Will she confirm that the staff who currently work on the ward in question will all be redeployed within Woodend hospital?

To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken since 2007 to support the development of the computer games sector in Dundee. (S3O-11346)

The computer games industry is of substantial economic significance, particularly to Dundee, but it is currently facing hard times as witnessed by the recent difficulties faced by Realtime Worlds and Cohort Studios. Does the minister believe that the industry's financial position would be far stronger if the UK Government had not withdrawn planned tax breaks for the industry—tax breaks that for years the Scottish National Party has called for?

The cabinet secretary said that the disruption spread from Inverness to Glasgow through the connection between the systems. Will the review look into whether the response centres can be isolated or separated without affecting integration of services?

This morning, we heard much noise and fury from the Opposition about the Government's failure to be more specific at this stage about where the impact of Westminster cuts will fall. In the absence of specific details from Westminster, they are, in effect, asking the Government to do back-of-a-fag-packet calculations which, of course, they would go on to criticise just as much. However, we have not heard from any of the Opposition members who have spoken in the debate what their red-line issues might be. They are happy to vent their spleens on the suggestions that the independent budget review panel has made, but the idea of being responsible enough to explain how else budget cuts could be made is totally alien to them. They are bereft of ideas, bereft of credibility and bereft of purpose. This morning, George Foulkes asked us to look at alternatives to cuts, so let me do just that. What Opposition members refuse to understand is that there is an alternative to being forced to swallow the cuts that are being forced our way from London. As long as the Scottish Government's budget is set outside Scottish borders, we will never have the powers that we need to grow our economy, but it does not have to be that way. With full control over our own finances and the Scottish Government's hands on the economic levers, we could protect the most vital services, grow the Scottish economy and achieve a combination of investment and cuts that is right and appropriate for Scotland, rather than for the desires of a Tory Chancellor of the Exchequer. As long as we are left to set our budget on the basis of how much of Scotland's money Westminster decides to return to us, we will simply not have the flexibility that any normal Government around the world would expect. At the weekend, Unison general secretary Dave Prentis described the independent budget review as "ice cream van economics" and said that a proper review of the budget does not look at a Government's finances and say, as youngsters do at the ice-cream van, "We've got this much—what can we get for it?" He is absolutely right. A Government with the powers of a normal country would be able to assess which services it needs and to find ways to finance them.

I am not rubbishing the independent budget review; I am saying that there is an alternative, which is what we will put to the Scottish people next May. It is the Scottish Government's lack of financial powers that has put us in precisely the situation that Dave Prentis finds so objectionable. Perhaps he will begin to press MSPs in the Labour Party, which his union funds, to support real financial powers for Holyrood—but perhaps that is too much to hope for. That severe cuts are coming is an indisputable fact, but with control of Scotland's resources we could stimulate economic growth, thus ensuring that people in Scotland benefit from the success of industries that are based here. The oil industry in my part of the world should have a key part to play in Scotland's recovery, with significant new finds over the summer and an estimated £45.1 billion in revenue expected to be generated between now and 2015. Instead of flowing to the Treasury, that wealth should be creating a long-term platform for investment in Scotland. Norway has avoided entering recession in the current downturn thanks to its £186 billion oil fund, and it is instructive how Nobel prize-winning economist Professor Joseph Stiglitz recently forcefully described the need for Scotland to follow suit with its own oil fund as "imperative". Can we rely on any of the Westminster parties to save rather than squander our national resources? Not a bit of it. As the renewables industry in Scotland develops, it too has the potential to provide real growth, but we need the power to ensure that it is Scotland that benefits. We have paid a heavy price for the lost opportunity that Scotland's oil previously represented, and we cannot allow the same thing to happen again. That is why the First Minister's announcement on Scottish Water yesterday was so exciting. With full financial control, and encouraging growth in new and existing sectors, we can negate the need for some of the coming cuts in the long term. In the short term, however, and as long as we do not have the financial powers that we need, those cuts are unavoidable. The independent budget review does not make for comfortable reading, but it has laid out some of the options that are available and it will be down to MSPs of all parties to find a way to make the savings that are required. I can only hope that as the budget approaches we will see a greater willingness to accept that  reality than we have seen so far today. The fantasy politics of making extravagant spending commitments, as Labour members have done over recent months, while refusing to identify what must be sacrificed, is completely untenable and will not wash with the people of Scotland. They deserve better—

I am in my last minute. The people of Scotland deserve better from their politicians, and we can only hope that the empty rhetoric from those on the Labour benches today is replaced with serious engagement with John Swinney in the weeks to come. The people of Scotland deserve nothing less.

Although members may have thought that the stage 3 proceedings this morning were rushed, as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, I assure the Parliament and all those with an interest in crofting that the committee scrutinised the bill thoroughly. Indeed, crofters have written to me to thank the committee for coming to see them in Shetland, Caithness and Sutherland and the Western Isles and for discussing the bill with them. That is also the case for all the stakeholders who have been totally involved throughout the process. Members of the Labour party, against the advice of most respondents, did not agree to the need for a map-based register. The committee also saw robust debate in many other areas and reached broad agreement on many of them. I commend the minister for taking on board many of the committee's suggestions and for getting the bill to this stage. I, too, put on record my thanks to the committee clerks and staff, and to the staff of SPICe, who put in so much work to assist the committee. My thanks also go to our very knowledgeable adviser, Derek Flyn, and to my committee colleagues for all their work. The passage of the bill tonight will signal the Government's long-term commitment to crofting and its future. Although, as members have said, the bill alone will not secure the future of crofting, it provides a clear commitment that the crofting  commission, with a partly elected board, will have a duty to get on with the job of tackling absenteeism and neglect, while allowing those who clearly wish to live in the area and work the land for their own and the community's benefit to do so. The crofting commission will have to prioritise its work—the Crofters Commission has itself said so—but, under the bill, the commission will be given a clear steer to get on with that work, and it will be monitored closely by both the Parliament and the Government. I look forward to seeing the Scottish statutory instruments relating to the elections. They, too, will be closely scrutinised, as the Government still has some work to do in that regard. It will also be interesting to watch how local planning applications on inby land and common grazings will be handled. You will appreciate, Deputy Presiding Officer, that as the committee went round the country and held its meetings, I was struck by the great degree of optimism in the rural sector, as participants monitor their costs and consider new ways to use the land to maximise their income. The sheep and cattle that come off the crofts are key in getting food from the hill to the lowlands, and to the plates of our citizens. The window for the community mapping of crofts provides a mechanism for crofters to come together on that and other matters that affect their communities, and that can only be for the long-term good. Sarah Boyack is correct to say that assessors will have a more important role in the future, highlighting the uses and abuses of crofts in their area. All aspects of the bill will provide crofting with a future, and I urge members to support the bill at 5 pm.

I understand and sympathise with the intention behind Karen Gillon's amendments and the need for the Parliament to be mindful of equal opportunities, but I believe that she has not fully thought out the consequences of her amendments, which are more likely to lead to family fights than to make everyone feel involved. I and others were struck by the number of women who gave evidence to the committee and the number of women who are grazings committee clerks. During our visits, other women were very helpful and knowledgeable about crofting. Previous legislation requires the croft to be in the name of one person. Having more than one vote per croft would be a minefield, especially where sons and daughters are more likely to be active in crofting than partners. Karen Gillon has overegged the pudding and interfered with  complicated business partnerships that may already exist.

The previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration set up the committee of inquiry on crofting—the Shucksmith inquiry. That inquiry said: "An accurate and current Register of Crofts is a prerequisite for effective regulation of crofting." The majority of respondents to our consultation who expressed a view on a register said that they  wanted one and, this morning, Patrick Krause of the SCF said that there was a need for a register. It seems ridiculous that Peter Peacock wants hill tracks but not crofts to be mapped. If we are to have effective regulation of crofting, we need crofts to be mapped.

The minister will have read—although Cathie Craigie has not—paragraph 35 of the Audit Scotland report, which states: "Financial projections showed that the event would be loss-making except if it attracted the most optimistic gate numbers. The company directors considered a loss was acceptable in the first year as they intended to carry on the company after the event, with a view to holding a similar event in the future." The gathering, although loss-making, generated huge amounts of money for tourism businesses, and there is talk of a homecoming in the future. Does the minister believe that a gathering will be part of that, due to the huge support that such an event gives to tourism businesses in the face of austerity from successive Westminster Governments?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much it estimates has been invested in renewable energy and supporting infrastructure in the north-east under the current Administration. (S3O-11022)

I am sure that the minister will agree that those are encouraging levels of investment. Nevertheless, if Scotland is to achieve its renewable energy potential, more will be needed. Does he believe that gaining access to Scotland's fossil fuel levy to encourage further investment in renewables is vital for the renewables industry in the north-east and throughout Scotland? Does he believe that the refusal of the previous Labour United Kingdom Government to consider allowing that was indefensible?

I have not been a member of the Health and Sport Committee, but I congratulate its members on their detailed work and I welcome the debate. I cannot think of a bill that has generated more debate among a wide cross-section of the community than the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill has done. Our young people have become extremely interested in the debate and, as a result, in the wider politics of health, crime and social responsibility. I am the mother of an 18-year-old student youth and a 17-year-old who is younger than her classmates, and goodness knows I have had my ear bent during the past year or so. As the debate has progressed, more and more people have become aware of their drinking habits and the alcohol problem that blights Scottish society. The problem not only makes a night out in our town and city centres a frightening experience, creating no-go areas for decent folk who want a good night out, but denies people access to health services that they require. I cannot be the only member who has spent night shifts with the police or the Scottish Ambulance Service and witnessed alcohol-related incidents. Are we serving the public to the best of our abilities if ambulances are being diverted to incidents that are the result of binge drinking at home or on nights out, instead of meeting the needs of elderly people, who might have less dramatic symptoms but more serious long-term illnesses? Aberdeen royal infirmary is not the only hospital in which, on any night of the week, beds and trolleys are blocked by people who are sleeping off the effects of too much drink. I recently obtained figures that show that alcohol-related hospital discharges in Aberdeen have increased by 30 per cent since 2004-05—that is the second highest percentage increase in Scotland. At any time, never mind in a period of public spending austerity, do taxpayers think that that is a good use of taxpayers' money and health professionals' time? I do not think so. Scots have the eighth highest consumption of alcohol in the world. Half of all prisoners in Scotland's jails were drunk when they committed their offence. As others have mentioned, 14 of the 18 murders in Strathclyde since 1 April were drink related. An estimated one in 20 deaths in Scotland is attributable to alcohol. Our relationship with booze is killing our country. The total cost of alcohol misuse to the Scottish economy is £3.56 billion annually. Harmful drinkers spend far  less per unit than moderate drinkers do, so minimum pricing would clearly have a greater impact on them, as it is intended to do. Harmful drinkers represent an estimated 6 per cent of all drinkers but represent 41 per cent of the anticipated reduction in hospital admissions. Murdo Fraser mentioned the Scotch Whisky Association's opposition to minimum pricing. I have worked in the whisky industry, and I remember the days when employees were given a dram at lunch time and in the evening. That practice was replaced with the provision of a bottle a month. I do not think that that happens now. Perhaps the industry has recognised the problems of harmful drinking. Murdo Fraser was selective about the information in his speech. For example, was Whyte & Mackay not forced to concede that a 40p minimum price in Scotland would mean that job losses were unlikely? Murdo Fraser's call to wait for the outcome of one budget decision on alcohol from Westminster is, frankly, derisory. Both Richard Simpson's and Richard Baker's opposition to minimum pricing at all costs—the costs to our nation's health and wellbeing—without proposing any alternatives and kicking the proposal into the long grass by setting up a commission cannot lead to any conclusion other than that they are playing party politics with the nation's health.

When the committee gets to stage 2, it will of course consider all of that. Of course, the bill proposes aspects other than minimum pricing. Thank goodness that I belong to a party that was principled enough to support the Liberal Democrat-Labour Executive when it took up SNP members' suggestion on smoking legislation, instead of opposing for the sake of it. It seems that Labour opposes minimum pricing only because the SNP proposes it. Otherwise, why did Labour choose to come out against minimum pricing on the day that the bill was published and before it had heard any evidence? I accept that minimum pricing is not a silver bullet—we have never said that it is—but it will tackle the serious problem of overconsumption of alcohol. I was in Alberta on the day that it introduced restrictions on promotional activity, sales and licensing for alcohol, and I have been interested to watch the results of that. In Scotland, the price of alcohol is at its lowest for 30 years— that must be addressed. Minimum pricing will mean that people, especially young people, will go out drinking on fewer days of the week, because they will simply not be able to afford to do otherwise. For the Opposition to say that minimum pricing should not be tried means that it is burying its head in the sand.

Does Murdo Fraser accept that some estates agree that there should be no hill tracks over 2,000ft, where regeneration is virtually impossible after however many decades? Does he further agree that the scree left at the side of the bulldozed tracks does not allow for fast regeneration?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

VisitScotland recently set out to members who represent the north-east a series of initiatives and campaigns for the coming years, which will build on the huge success of homecoming 2009 in Aberdeen and the north-east. Can the minister confirm that the expectations for those campaigns  chime with the Scottish Government's aim to make tourism in Scotland a growth industry in the face of the Labour-induced recession?

When does the minister expect the Department for Transport's new passenger numbers model for anticipating usage levels at proposed new stations to be completed? Does he believe that it will make the business case for a station at Kintore more robust?

The process of considering the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill and agreeing a stage 1 report on it was not straightforward. I make it clear at the outset that the stage 1 scrutiny of the bill was  nevertheless an enjoyable and rewarding experience for the committee and there is much on which we have been able to agree. The single most important thing on which committee members agree is that the bill should proceed to stage 2. I hope that the Parliament will approve that at 5 o'clock. For committee members, the most rewarding aspect was our visits to many parts of the crofting counties, including Benbecula, North Uist, South Uist, Caithness, Sutherland and Shetland, where we met local people in their living and working environments. We met crofters, aspiring crofters, landlords and factors. Croft boundaries were walked over, livestock and crops were examined, polytunnels were inspected, antique maps were pored over and plenty of home-made scones and mugs of tea were consumed. I pass on the sincere thanks of all committee members for the hospitality and kindness of the people whom we met, and I offer particular thanks to those individuals who were our guides, took us round their local area, pointed out things that we would otherwise have missed and passed on their local knowledge. I also express our thanks to Derek Flyn, who has been our knowledgeable and experienced adviser on the complexities of crofting law. A December introduction of the bill meant that those visits took place in the depths of winter rather than at a more clement time of year, but that had its own rewards. Winter visits, with the snow often thick on the ground, helped to disabuse committee members of any romantic notions about the realities of crofting life, albeit that, as I come from a farming family in the north-east, I was perhaps less in need of that reality check than were others. Either way, as many crofters reminded us, crofting is not easy and probably never has been. Crofting is a vocation that requires mental and physical toughness, flexibility, entrepreneurship and patience. As the committee report points out, crofters also need other things, which do not lie within their control. Crofters need strong and diversified local economies, because few crofts are self-sufficient and crofting households need other income to help to make ends meet. They also need a decent price for livestock, a fair system of agricultural subsidy and affordable local housing. I make those points now before turning to the detail of the bill to underline the point that the regulatory aspect is just one small part of crofting. To put it differently, it would be unfair to judge the success or failure of the bill against whether we think that it alone will deliver a secure future for crofting. As the Minister for Environment said, we should be realistic in our appraisal of what legislation can achieve on its own.  In turning to the four main parts of the bill, as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee I will focus on those issues on which the committee was largely agreed; others will have their chance to express their views on other points. Part 1 deals with the Crofters Commission, which is to be renamed the crofting commission. The bill proposes that the commission be part-elected, with six constituencies electing six commissioners and the Government appointing three more. Like most witnesses from whom we took evidence, we support that proposal as a welcome injection of democracy into the commission's operation, but our support comes with a few minor reservations or uncertainties. One of our concerns relates to the proposed electoral franchise. A central feature of crofting law is that, per tenanted croft, there can never be more than one crofter. Two or more adults might live in the croft house and help to work or support the croft, but only one of them is legally the crofter. The Government currently proposes that only that crofter should get the vote. My committee colleague Karen Gillon has been very exercised about that point, which I think Elaine Murray will develop later. Part 2, which deals with the main issue on which the committee was split, provides for a new comprehensive map-based register that is to be held by Registers of Scotland. As convener, I will highlight those areas on which we found agreement. All members support the proposal for community mapping exercises, which I am pleased to note is also supported by the minister. We believe that it would be a good thing if people in crofting townships were encouraged to sit down together to draw up croft boundaries so as to pool all the available information and to make use of local knowledge—the folklore, as some witnesses called it. Drawing up maps in that way would help to deliver greater local certainty and capture that folklore, some of which is at risk of being forgotten. There might also be further benefits, in that the process might help to identify the development potential of underused community assets or simply get some communities into the habit of working together more on local projects. Members also suggested that the minister might wish to consider delaying for a time the introduction of compulsory trigger points for entry in the register. That would provide a window of opportunity for those voluntary mapping exercises to take place before registration becomes mandatory. We note the minister's views on that, and no doubt the discussion will continue as the bill progresses. Part 3 mainly concerns new measures to tackle neglect and misuse of croft land, and to deal with crofters who are absent from their crofts. In  particular, it imposes on tenant crofters and owners of crofts the duty to be ordinarily resident on the croft and not to neglect or misuse it. Again, that was a difficult and contentious issue, but for the most part committee members were able to forge consensus on key issues. There is much to discuss, but I will focus on croft occupancy. Many witnesses, mainly crofters themselves, argued forcefully that it would be misguided to give the crofting commission increased powers to address crofter absenteeism, and that neglect is a more serious issue. They warned the committee against too dogged a pursuit of absentee crofters, arguing that many people are technically absentees but they have strong links with the community, work the croft regularly and are frequently there. The committee fully accepts that point. We are also reassured by what we heard from the Crofters Commission and others that such absentees are unlikely to have anything to fear once the bill is passed. To that end, our report proposes that the commission should make publicly available the criteria that it will apply to judge when to pursue an absenteeism case. We are pleased to note that the Government has accepted that. In the end, however, we were persuaded by the simple argument that, if crofting means anything, it means a critical mass of people living on the land year round in sustainable communities. Only then will schools, shops, lifeline services, farming co-operatives and local businesses have a reason to be there. The committee has seen and heard enough on its visits and in the evidence sessions to recognise that in parts of the Highlands and Islands levels of absenteeism are a threat to the crofting way of life. In those, thankfully extreme, cases, it might regrettably be necessary for the commission to take action, and committee members are satisfied that the bill takes a step in the right direction. Our report stresses the need to proceed with sensitivity in such cases. Part 4 mainly concerns speculation in croft land and how it can be addressed. The committee welcomes the provision in the bill to increase the discretion of the crofting commission and the Land Court to refuse an application to decroft land, even though planning permission has been granted. The committee considers that that will offer further protection against the speculative activity that is contrary to the interests of local communities. I should also take time to highlight the committee's recommendation on how planning law and policy could be made to serve better the interests of crofting, such as the establishment of a rebuttable presumption against zoning croft inby land for development.  Sadly, time prevents me from explaining to members other matters that arise under part 4, such as the point of law that was established in the celebrated Whitbread v Macdonald case, or the controversy around how landlord clawback is correctly calculated under section 14 of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993. I am sure that other committee members will be delighted to take up that challenge during this debate. Committee members fully recognise that crofters are an independently-minded bunch, and that not every aspect of the bill finds favour with them. However, there is much in the bill that is worth taking forward. I ask members to support the general principles of the bill and I and the rest of the committee look forward with interest to stage 2. I thank the minister for accepting many of the committee's recommendations.

I pay tribute to the dedicated people, from a wide range of professions, who contribute to the provision of social work services. As Ken Macintosh said, some of our work as politicians and representatives seems like social work sometimes, but it is not a job that I could do full-time. As Irene Oldfather said, when social work services are at their most successful, we do not hear about the work that is done. By its nature, it is a sector that receives publicity almost exclusively when it fails, and we do not hear about the incredibly difficult task that thousands of social workers throughout Scotland perform or about the many successes that they achieve. No one can overestimate how stressful and thankless the job of social worker is. The nature of the job is often a cause of high staff turnover. I have huge admiration for new social work recruits who are catapulted into the difficult area of children and families services. It is sad that too many social workers—even the most dedicated social workers—suffer burnout. They need all the support that is on offer to encourage them to stay in the job. The strength of leadership is fundamentally linked to the recruitment and retention of people in social work services. Good leadership is likely to  improve staff morale and confidence and increases the likelihood that people will remain in their jobs, whereas poor leadership has the inverse effect. It is also the case that high turnover of staff has an impact on the quality of leadership. As people leave social work, the number of experienced staff who could take up leadership roles is reduced. That cycle needs to be broken. I welcome the greater focus that the Scottish Social Services Council and the four Scottish social services learning networks are putting on the development of leadership abilities among people in the sector. I am sure that all members hope that there will be improvements in social services as a result of that focus. Leadership is not confined to senior management in council social work departments and the private and voluntary sectors; leadership and drive are required throughout the workforce. Of course, it is important that the focus on leadership does not distract from the need to put new ideas into practice and improve other aspects of social work services. As Hugh O'Donnell said, it is about putting in place a care package that places the user at centre stage and shows what choices are available to the individual and their family. It is about seeing the implementation of the package—refined, if necessary—right through to an end game in which the individual is resilient and able to live as independently as possible. There are many excellent examples of good practice. At Craiginches prison in Aberdeen, a scheme will soon be a piloted in which a support team will mentor and advise offenders while they are in prison and after they have been released into their communities. The aim is to break the cycle of crime whereby all too often the same people are locked up in prison time and again. The provision of continuous support to get offenders' lives back on track after they leave prison is vital. I am sure that prisons throughout Scotland will closely monitor the scheme's impact on reoffending rates. A joined-up approach to all aspects of social work services, such as the approach that will be piloted at Craiginches prison, is fundamental to the provision of effective care to everyone who needs it. Often, multiple organisations are responsible for services that fall under the broad umbrella of social work, so the need for clear and unambiguous leadership is vital if a joined-up approach is to be achieved. If there is confusion about who is responsible for delivering different aspects of social work services, or if there is a lack of communication and co-ordination about what is happening in vulnerable people's lives, problems can quickly emerge. The key goal for the clients of social workers, education professionals or people who are  involved in drug or alcohol rehabilitation is to build up resilience and self-reliance, thereby going some way towards reducing dependency. The Government's embrace of early intervention and GIRFEC should, in the longer term, increase the number of families who can live fulfilling lives without intervention. What is important is that people who are involved in providing social work services have the confidence in their decisions to be willing to make early interventions when needed before a crisis point is reached in people's lives. That confidence can be achieved only through good leadership of social services staff and through those staff members having a wealth of experience behind them, which makes the need to lower the high turnover of people in the sector even more important. Having worked closely with the minister, I know the drive and leadership that he is providing and the efforts that he goes to, travelling throughout the country to enthuse people in the sector to drive up standards and to improve the lives of children and families, older people and offenders who need our support.

Given that, as the cabinet secretary pointed out, flights to and from the North Sea continue to be disrupted, I am sure that he will join me in welcoming the Maritime and Coastguard Agency's relaxation of restrictions that, for example, prevent stand-by and diving support vessels that might have capacity being used to transport crew to and from installations. However, the decision was not taken for a couple of days and, indeed, happened  only after oil companies had chartered and then cancelled suitable certified ships to carry passengers. Does the cabinet secretary believe that contingency plans should be put in place to ensure that such restrictions can be lifted swiftly and temporarily if helicopters are unable to fly?

The issue of transmission charges is one of great importance for the future of the north-east and of  Scotland as a whole, and I welcome the opportunity to speak on the topic. Electricity producers in Aberdeenshire pay some of the highest transmission charges in Scotland. It is a disgrace that they have to pay almost £20 per kilowatt when producers in some parts of the south of England receive a subsidy of more than £6.50 per kilowatt. Even energy producers in the area of Scotland that has the lowest transmission charges still face paying more than those in the highest-charging parts of England and Wales. There is no doubt that Scotland can and should become the renewables powerhouse of Europe by taking advantage of the abundance of renewable energy potential that exists across the country and, more significantly, in the waters off our coast, but, however laudable that aim, it will not be achieved automatically. Achieving it will require the right policies to be in place to encourage investment in the renewables industry and a level playing field for electricity producers. I welcome the briefing note from Scottish Power, which is extremely helpful in setting out the arguments in that regard. The UK Government may talk about its climate change targets, but if it were serious about achieving them, it would not perpetuate a system of transmission charges that is based on proximity to London, where there is very little in the way of renewable energy potential. That bias makes no sense and puts current and future jobs in Scotland at risk. As other members have said, it is not just renewable energy producers that pay the price of UK policy. As the minister mentioned, Peterhead power station in the north-east recently announced that the soaring transmission charges that it faces will force it to shut unit 2 of its power plant in 2011, unless those charges are changed. Up to 70 jobs at the plant have been put at risk as a direct result of the manifestly unfair transmission charging system. How can it possibly be right that Peterhead power station is charged £29 million a year for the privilege of sending electricity to people across the UK when an identical power station in the London area would be paid £3 million to do the same? Fortunately, following discussions with the chief executive of Scottish and Southern Energy, the MP for Banff and Buchan has received some assurances about the future of the Peterhead plant, but the urgency of the need for change cannot be overstated. Yesterday, the combined voice of Scottish energy producers, business groups and trade unions called loudly and unequivocally for an end to locational transmission charging. At all levels, the SNP has consistently backed that position, but it is incumbent on other parties to come in behind us. I do not necessarily want to be  confrontational—as Patrick Harvie suggested—but, last month, Labour's Secretary of State for Scotland took the absurd position that connection charges are not a problem for Scottish generators. Why on earth does Jim Murphy think that he knows better than Scottish electricity generators, business groups and trade unions about the damaging effects of transmission charges?

I recognise that the system is complicated, but it needs a root-and-branch review that only Westminster can provide. However, the UK Government's characteristic drift and inattention to Scotland's needs are proving extremely damaging for our existing power plants and our renewable energy sector. In that sector, some 26,000 new jobs could be created in the next 10 years, but that will not happen with the barriers to Scottish electricity producers that Labour in Westminster has perpetuated. Future and existing jobs in Scotland are at stake, and the current wilful ignorance—or lack of willingness to do anything about the situation—is utterly inexcusable. As Rob Gibson highlighted, most other European countries recognise the folly of a locational model of transmission charges. Such countries either do not charge generators for transmission costs or use a uniform postage stamp model, whereby the charge is the same regardless of where an electricity generator is located. That latter system is what we need and is what the Scottish Government has continuously pushed for. Given that the Scottish generators produce around 12 per cent of the UK's electricity but are forced to pay 40 per cent of the transmission costs, something is clearly wrong. Scotland's generators simply cannot afford to keep on paying £100 million more than their fair share, year after year. That must be changed. It is incumbent on all the parties in this Parliament to urge change on that reserved matter as soon as possible.

Scotland currently exports electricity to the rest of the UK and would export much more if we could expand our renewables sector, for which we could identify a separate charge. Would Scotland not profit from that instead of being dependent, as the member suggests?

To ask the Scottish Government when it estimates that engineering work to stabilise the Bervie braes will commence. (S3O-10125)

The cabinet secretary promised to make a swift decision on carrying out work at the Bervie braes, and residents of Stonehaven and Aberdeenshire Council were delighted when he did so and decided that it should go ahead. Does he agree that it is important that legal agreements and the tendering process be completed as quickly as possible to ensure that the work on making the braes safe can begin at the earliest opportunity? Does he expect Aberdeenshire Council solely to take forward this work or will his directorate play an on-going role?

This is a timely debate, given that petrol prices are at the forefront of many people's minds because of the recent price increase. The first part of the Liberal Democrat motion has little in it that one can disagree with. The SNP has long championed the case of people who live in rural communities where remoteness and lack of public transport make a car a necessity rather than a personal choice. With fuel duty due to rise again by 2.76p in the current financial year, it is the rural motorist who will pay the heaviest price. The situation is totally unfair, and I know that the SNP group at Westminster has tried repeatedly to change it. While the current  Liberal Democrat claims of support for the SNP's position on fuel prices are welcome, it is a shame that they have not been backed up by action when the Liberal Democrats have had the opportunity to make a difference to people who live in rural areas. The situation of Liberal Democrat elected representatives in rural Scotland is often made completely untenable by the utterances of their London-based colleagues, who construct their policies from a London perspective. In 2009, Liberal Democrat MPs voted to increase the money that people must pay in fuel duty, but every time the SNP has tried to introduce a fuel regulator into Westminster's budget, they have failed to support it. As ever, it is a case of the Liberal Democrats saying one thing to their electorate while ignoring it when it is time to take action.

The member brought the debate to Parliament today, but 37 Liberal Democrat MPs voted for the UK budget, which included the fuel duty increases. Of those, 24 Liberal Democrat MPs, including some from Scotland, were not there to vote on behalf of their constituents. The hypocrisy of the Liberal Democrats in the chamber this morning is unbelievable. It is true that a fuel duty regulator would be a welcome measure for the reasons that have been set out. It would help motorists by putting an end to the wild fluctuations in fuel prices, and it would help businesses, such as the road haulage industry and those in the fishing and farming sectors, by allowing them to plan their operating costs with some certainty. The other parties have failed to back such a regulator when given the chance, which undermines any shred of credibility that they have on fuel prices. The latest example of that failure occurred earlier this week with the chancellor's rejection of the Scottish Government's call for a derogation for fuel prices in rural areas, which would recognise and mitigate the premium that remote locations pay for their fuel. Given that the Labour UK Government backed such measures for France, its opposition to implementing them here can only be described as utterly hypocritical. People in rural areas and the businesses that rely on fuel to operate deserve much better than that. What is the difference between the SNP's long-held fuel regulator policy and the Tories'—what do they call it?—fair fuel stabiliser? The Tories  recognise that there is little difference. It is another example of the Johnnys-come-lately to sensible SNP policies. Once again, the SNP's consistency has been shown to be right. That is why the people of Scotland need the SNP as their champions in Westminster so long as we remain there.

I am sure that the minister will join me in warmly welcoming the launch at the start of the month of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's new flood detection and warning system in the north-east. The system will affect the Don, the Dee and the Deveron—

—but not the Carron. Will the system be rolled out to ensure that flood risks are dealt with on more rivers?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to recycle unused stones located on rural land for construction projects. (S3O-9957)

Unused large stones are a common feature of many fields and could provide a cheaper, more environmentally friendly alternative to disruptive quarrying practices. Will the minister undertake, along with local authority officials and construction companies, to examine ways of encouraging the use of such stones in construction projects, which would reduce carbon emissions and damage to the environment?

As the minister knows, the new model that is being examined by the DFT uses evidence from new stations that have been opened in Scotland. Does the minister believe that it is important to learn from the lessons that are offered by comparing estimated passenger numbers and actual passenger numbers at other stations that have been opened by the Scottish National Party Government, so as to apply them to future projects such as that at Kintore?

The minister is obviously keen to impress on us how important aquaculture is to Scotland's lucrative food and drink sector. As other members have said, this is the third time that we are debating the topic in 18 months, which is a sign of how highly the Government regards the sector. It is keen for all members and for the wider Scottish public to know that. Scotland has a key place in the global aquaculture market, as the minister said. Aquaculture is hugely important as an export industry—it is worth hundreds of millions of pounds to our economy. Scotland is now the second-largest producer of farmed salmon, largely because of the collapse of the Chilean market. As a result, it is obviously the largest producer of farmed salmon in the EU. That is perhaps another reason why Scottish ministers need to lead on fisheries at the top table in the EU.  However, the Norwegians still enjoy the vast share of the global market. Unrelated to the debate and not knowing that it was coming up, I read an article on how important aquaculture and sea fisheries are regarded in Norway. The importance of fish is embedded in the psyche of the Norwegians—not only their politicians but the public at large. I am sure that as long as Scotland is thirled to Westminster, fish will not enjoy the same importance in the UK. As long as Scotland is peripheral, fisheries will be peripheral, but it is important to recognise that fish are highly important to Scotland and the rest of the UK. In 1992, Scottish farmed salmon was the first product outside France to be awarded the prestigious label rouge mark—a testament to its quality and status as a premium product. Indeed, despite the harsh economic conditions, sales of label rouge Scottish salmon grew by 19 per cent in 2009 to reach a record level of 7,251 tonnes. Such expansion is important and welcome, but it must go hand in hand with maintaining quality because a reputation for quality will be a key part of our aquaculture sector's future success if it is to continue to grow. Like Robin Harper, I have had people raise with me issues about protected geographical indication status. PGI status is an important designation that protects Scottish salmon in the same way as, for example, champagne is protected by the requirement that the product comes from a particular region of France. Does the minister agree that it is important that salmon eggs and smolts originate in Scotland in order to ensure that our PGI status is protected? For example, cattle must be born, bred, slaughtered and dressed in Scotland in order to qualify for labelling as Scotch beef. That issue warrants further consideration if we are to maintain Scotland's reputation for high-quality salmon, so I would welcome the minister's thoughts on that in her closing remarks. A key part of the reputation for quality that Scottish salmon enjoys is due to the efforts that have been made to keep our farmed salmon sector as free as possible from infectious salmon anaemia. The ISA virus has recently had a severe impact on the industry in Chile, as has happened in other countries in previous years. The renewed strategic framework that was published in 2009 clearly recognises the need for continuing efforts to maintain high standards of biosecurity. Although last year's outbreaks of ISA in Shetland were cause for concern, I welcome the fact that they were effectively contained. The severe outbreak of ISA in Chile is a tragedy for the industry in that country—production is not forecast to return to previous levels until 2015—but, nevertheless, the outbreak in that country has created an opportunity for Scottish aquaculture.  As members of all parties will surely agree, aquaculture is an industry that is ideally placed for expansion and for a larger share of the international market. In our previous debate on the topic, in May 2009, the obstacles to such growth were clearly identified as a perceived lack of sites available for expansion and difficulties in accessing finance. Although the continuing economic situation will have done little to help to increase access to sources of finance, yesterday's publication of proposals to streamline the planning process will indeed be welcome news for the sector. Expansion in the aquaculture sector is very much welcome, and I am glad that the Scottish Government is making significant efforts to encourage it. Such expansion is not at odds with ambitions to ensure that aquaculture in Scotland is the cleanest and greenest in the world. The value of the product that is produced here lies in its quality, which can only be increased by ensuring that best practice is maintained and marketed. As the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee went round our coastal and remote communities, taking evidence on the Marine (Scotland) Bill—which has now been passed—and, more recently, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, we saw that aquaculture is one of the most important businesses for families living in our coastal communities. Aquaculture can also provide an additional source of income for crofters, so its importance to those areas cannot be underestimated. I believe that Scottish aquaculture has a bright future ahead of it and, with the right encouragement, significant opportunities for expansion. Scottish aquaculture's reputation and the value of its brand lie in its quality, so I welcome the work that is being done to ensure that quality fundamentally remains at the core of this valuable industry.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, as regeneration is an issue that affects communities the length and breadth of the country. I am sure that there are few MSPs who cannot think of an area that they represent that would not benefit from being regenerated and given a new lease of life. The sad fact is that the number of communities in such need has no doubt increased significantly as a direct result of the recession. Empty shop fronts and derelict housing may be a clear sign of the economic damage that has been done to individuals and businesses, but they also represent real blows to the vibrancy of a local community.  Without successful businesses at the hub of local communities, there is less interaction between residents, fewer visitors to an area and, of course, less money circulating locally. That is why, as well as the town centre regeneration fund, the Scottish Government's small business bonus has been a crucial measure during the economic downturn. The money that small businesses have saved has often made the difference between their folding and their being able to continue as a viable concern. The recession might have done major damage to many businesses and the communities that they support, but how much worse would things have been without the small business bonus, which Labour and the Liberal Democrats sadly failed to vote for in the 2008 budget, which introduced it? I am glad that the Scottish Government recognised the importance of local businesses to the future of communities in some of the awards that were made under the town centre regeneration fund. For example, the retail rocks! Aberdeen project, in the Torry area of the city, received £573,000 from the fund towards its plans to provide up to nine empty shop units rent-free for a year to budding entrepreneurs. That will help to re-energise the local community. I hope that some of those entrepreneurs will come from the Polish community, which already has some shops there, and that that will help community and social integration. I look forward to those businesses being developed in that area later this year. Similarly, the safer places improved spaces project will benefit the Mastrick shopping centre in Aberdeen, which has been on a downward spiral since the demise of its largest shop, Woolworth's. Because of the project, that empty unit will be occupied by a new tenant, which has already been identified.

I think that Cathie Craigie will find that the poundage will still be lower than it is in other places. Just as important to successful communities as flourishing businesses are the facilities that are necessary for social groups to meet in and local events to take place in. I am therefore pleased that the town centre regeneration fund has awarded funding to improve town halls across the country. In Laurencekirk, the Dickson hall trust received £467,000 for a complete upgrade of the hall and its facilities, and Stonehaven town hall received £181,000 for roof repairs and other improvements. The importance of such halls is never greater than  in times of crisis, as was demonstrated by the fact that St Bridget's hall in Stonehaven was used as an evacuation centre for people who were affected by the recent flooding in the area and the landslips at the Bervie braes. Such halls help to tie communities together, and improving the facilities that they offer has a knock-on effect, as it can stimulate community groups and generate pride in a local area. Karen Gillon made a point about vacant and derelict land. The Scottish Government has a fund that provides money to local authorities that have great concentrations of long-term vacant and derelict land, to enable them to bring that land back into productive use. Surprise, surprise—that fund totals £36.6 million and is ring fenced for the period from 2008 to 2011.

I agree, but I think that, sometimes, local authorities do not use the powers that they have to drive that forward. As many members have said, community planning partnerships are best placed to do the sort of work that we are talking about. However, the efforts that the Scottish Government has made to encourage regeneration across communities are welcome and have, in many cases, made a real difference to the lives of residents.

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to speak in the debate on the interim report of Brian Pack's inquiry into how support for Scottish agriculture can deliver on the key objectives for a sustainable, prosperous future for Scotland. Agricultural support is a hugely complicated issue. Every time it is reviewed, the industry asserts that there are more losers than winners—I presume that the winners keep quiet. I am delighted that Brian Pack is leading the inquiry. As someone who has had a close association with Aberdeen and northern marts all my life—and, in fact, never seems to be away from Thainstone these days at some event or other—I know that Brian Pack commands huge respect not only in the north-east of Scotland but all over. I have benefited from his sage advice on many an occasion. I am sure that it is as a result of the high regard in which Brian Pack is held that the report is being given serious consideration by all those who have an interest in this field. Sitting in an audience of 250 farmers at a ring at Thainstone at the beginning of the month, I was impressed by the measured contributions from the farmers present. They are people who I know are not usually reticent and they can be raucous when it suits them. As the cabinet secretary said, the inquiry team is holding an impressive series of meetings throughout the country. Indeed, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, in its consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, and his team seem to be following each other around the country, as we have visited Benbecula and Stornoway, where his team are still to have meetings, and this week and next the committee is visiting Thurso and Shetland, where Brian Pack and his team have already been. He is getting a great feel for the life and work of a politician—I wonder whether he has caught the bug. I welcome the fact that, as Sarah Boyack said, the review recognises that agriculture has a pivotal role in tackling the challenges of food security, water supply, energy supply, climate change and protecting biodiversity and that the beautiful countryside of Scotland is largely due to the sound land management of crofters, farmers, foresters and all the others who are involved in working the  land. We must recognise that certain things that are done already contribute to sustainability and the mitigation of climate change—even just grazing the land soaks up the carbon. Everyone knows that the common agricultural policy is up for review and Scottish agriculture is only one of the many voices that will be trying to influence the policy makers in Brussels. The CAP currently accounts for 41 per cent of the total EU budget, although it is falling and is likely to fall further as there are more pressures on the budget. When 10 new members joined the EU in 2004 and another two joined in 2007, it brought an additional 7 million farmers and increased the area of agricultural land in the EU by 40 per cent, so the pressure on the EU budget is great. It is important that our negotiators from Scotland speak with one voice in Brussels. Farmers who have approached me hope that the issue does not become an election football in the elections this year and next. In that respect, I am pleased by the consensual nature of most of the amendments for the debate. I was disappointed that union leaders did not agree last year to top-slicing to help with short-term changes to address immediate problems in our agriculture. I am therefore pleased that the inquiry team regards the top-up fund as a sensible way forward. It will of course mean reduced area payments, so we must take account of the serious concerns of people such as cereal farmers. We must also ensure that reduced area payments do not mean inflated rents for tenant farmers. I urge the Pack team to consider putting a cap on the total amount that can be paid out to individual farmers, estates, farming organisations and landlords in order to encourage them to let their land rather than take it into their home business.

I was going to say something about the hectare payment. Together with the use of top-slicing, that could go a long way to providing opportunities for new entrants. Top-up and a graded system of agricultural payments, dependent on the type of land, would help to promote the sustainability of sheep and cattle in marginal land and even out the volatility to which farmers are subject through market prices. I am glad to see that slipper farmers will be no more because of the new basing in 2009 that has been recommended and welcomed by the STFA. The interim report provides a sound basis for further discussion. Most farmers want everybody to look at opportunities to secure the long-term future rather than focus on the threats to vested interests. Farmers have always been flexible and have adapted to changing circumstances. With the  Pack inquiry, they have a fantastic opportunity to influence change, and I hope that they do so with relish.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the increased thresholds in the small business bonus and the continued council tax freeze that was agreed in the Scottish budget yesterday will help Aberdeen City Council to meet its business-related and deprivation-related outcomes?

I congratulate Richard Baker on securing this evening's debate and welcome the Glencraft workers to the public gallery. The problems of Glencraft in Aberdeen are not new. Since 2000, various councils have been grappling with the problem of grants and subsidies to Glencraft. Because of the straitened times in which we live, and especially the straitened times in which Aberdeen City Council found itself in recent years, the massive subsidies to Glencraft became unsustainable. The annual subsidy of £470,000 from Aberdeen City Council was reduced to £300,000 in 2008-09 with the aim that it would subsequently end completely. The council did purchase and lease back Glencraft's factory in late 2008 at a cost of £1.7 million, but unfortunately Glencraft could not find a way in which to operate without subsidy, so the board decided to put the company into administration before Christmas, which was much regretted by everybody involved. The company's debts were more than £3 million, which comprised a £2 million share of Aberdeen City Council's pension fund deficit, £400,000 in redundancy packages, £430,000 in Department for Work and Pensions grants that had to be repaid and £330,000 for creditors and suppliers. It was unusual for a local council to have such financial involvement in a business. Labour is all over the place on the issue. Over the years, the United Kingdom Government has wanted to get rid of supported workplaces. Indeed, some years ago, we were all involved in trying to keep the Remploy factory in Aberdeen open, a campaign which, I have to say, was successful.

As I said, we were successful in securing the future of the Remploy factory in Aberdeen, although the same cannot be said of Remploy factories in the rest of the UK, very many of which were closed. Aberdeen was saved—and rightly so—but the fact is that the UK Government's long-term aim is to reduce the number of supported workplaces. The Parliament should pay tribute to the Scottish Government, the First Minister, Aberdeen City Council, business and the local community on progressing matters and allowing us to see a future for Glencraft. We should also pay tribute to the willingness of Bob Keiller and Duncan Skinner of PSN to get involved and help to provide a future for such an important supported workplace in Aberdeen. Like Richard Baker, I hope that article 19 of the public sector procurement directive will be considered in more detail. However, we must also ensure that Aberdeen City Council and its council tax payers get best value. I am sure that PSN's expertise and assistance will be invaluable in helping Glencraft to become profitable and to secure its long-term future, and I hope that everyone in the chamber will congratulate Aberdeen City Council on agreeing this afternoon not to charge Glencraft rent this year at a cost of £225,000—

That will go a long way towards securing the company's future.

To ask the Scottish Government what impact it considers a supermarket ombudsman will have on farmers and consumers. (S3O-9352)

The fact that the United Kingdom Government has at last accepted the need for the creation of a supermarket ombudsman is a welcome development, but that development will be meaningless if the body is not given the powers that it needs effectively to police the food supply chain. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to make the strongest possible representations to the UK Government to ensure that the body is given all the powers it needs to ensure a fair deal for everyone who is involved in putting food on our tables?

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the tenant farming sector is an important route for new entrants into farming and that the changes to limited duration tenancies and short limited duration tenancies that the tenant farming forum recommended in August 2009 would help to encourage more new tenant farmers?

Since we are discussing Craiginches and Peterhead prisons, I want to take this opportunity to express my regret at the recent untimely death of Bill Rattray, a former governor of both establishments.  I take part in this Public Petitions Committee debate as someone who was a member of the Craiginches prison visiting committee from 1994 to 2006, during which time I visited the prison at least every two months and visited other prisons in Scotland, including Peterhead. Nobody could argue that Craiginches and Peterhead are fit for purpose, and they have not been so for many decades. I cannot put a figure on the number of times our visiting committee lobbied ministers on the urgent need for a new kitchen in Craiginches, to no avail. More important, we lobbied for a new visiting room and better facilities for partners and children, as the available facilities were and are woefully inadequate—indeed, I remember taking in toys for the amusement of the children who were visiting the prison. Apart from the fact that we were fobbed off with a few tables and chairs, nothing happened to the visitors room. Obviously, the SPS, under successive Governments, was told that there should be no investment in Craiginches prison, because it would be window dressing and a waste of taxpayers' money in a prison that was well past its sell-by date. Richard Baker knows perfectly well why there has been no investment in Craiginches prison. I agree with others who have quoted Andrew McLellan's observation that good family contact is important for reducing reoffending. However, good family contact was not possible in Aberdeen prison. As John Farquhar Munro said, there is no definition of a community prison. Aberdeen currently has a prison in its community, but in no way can it be described as a community prison. As far as I am aware, it has never housed convicted young offenders, and for the past few years it has not housed female offenders—I and others vigorously fought against that situation arising, but female prisoners were moved to Cornton Vale anyway. As the minister indicated, the majority of prisoners from the north-east—56 per cent—are housed in the prison estate outside the Aberdeen postcode area. The decision to establish a new prison in Peterhead will create in the north-east a prison that can house long-term offenders, short-term offenders, sex offenders, women offenders and young offenders, and that can begin to reflect the north-east's community and become a north-east community prison that can begin to work on restorative justice—an issue that is dear to my heart and to Robin Harper's. Following the establishment of the prison, we can begin to work with families in the interests of reducing recidivism. Of course, we will never have a prison that can house 100 per cent of prisoners from the north-east, because of prisoner safety and gang culture issues.  Removing the uncertainty surrounding the prison estate in the north-east is welcomed by staff and their families. There is a high turnover of SPS staff in the north-east. Burn-out is a major issue, especially in the sex offender unit, but the fact that staff will have the opportunity to move within Peterhead prison and work with different groups will reduce the turnover. Having had a prison in its midst, the community in Peterhead must be unique in accepting a replacement. Those who object to the siting of a prison for the north-east in Peterhead have not suggested in which other community a new prison might be sited.

I welcome the decision on the new prison. Let us look at the opportunities, not the threats.

Will Richard Baker give way on that point?

Like many people in the north-east, I am delighted that the AWPR is set to proceed and look forward to the economic benefits that it will bring to the region. Like Nanette Milne, in 1996 I thought that we had a done-and-dusted route at a cost three to four times lower than the current estimate.

Given that the current economic downturn has affected the construction industry and that plant hire costs are now much lower, does the cabinet secretary believe that the AWPR may benefit from reduced costs, potentially saving the public purse money?

Will the member give way?

I suggest that Lewis Macdonald does not need to go as far as Copenhagen to see such schemes. He mentioned the ones in Aberdeen, but he may also be interested in the one in Banchory, which has received from the Scottish Government grants to develop biomass.

To ask the Scottish Government when the Minister for Environment will next meet officials from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to discuss issues relating to flood management. (S3O-8489)

I am sure that we all hope that the level of preparedness for the present flooding is better than it was previously. The minister will be aware of the recent flooding in Stonehaven. Locals tell me that the Carron Water and the Cowie Water, which burst their banks, used to be significantly deeper than they are now. SEPA does not allow them to be deepened, as that would disturb wildlife habitats.  Will she ask SEPA to review that policy, which has resulted not only in the destruction of wildlife nesting sites but in the devastation of the homes and businesses of many families?

The cabinet secretary and others may not have heard the Grampian news on Tuesday, when it was reported: "experts say that NHS Tayside has done all it can to contain this outbreak."  Professor Hugh Pennington said: "They've taken this very seriously. They've closed a ward. There haven't been any more cases for 10 days—that's good news." Would it not be more helpful if the Labour Party listened to its own adviser and recognised the good work of all staff instead of criticising in the media all those in NHS Tayside who have done all that they can to contain the outbreak and fight what Professor Pennington calls "a very cunning and subtle adversary"?

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that it appears that the scientists have no reliable up-to-date data on west coast cod, and that the Commission is making recommendations on the basis of last year's data, without any new science? Does he agree that that is worrying? Will the minister urge the Commission to leave the quota as it is?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the University of Aberdeen regarding the provision of student accommodation. (S3O-8248)

The cabinet secretary will no doubt be aware that the University of Aberdeen has this year climbed a remarkable 24 places in The Times Higher Education Supplement world university rankings to reach its highest ever position of 129 th . Given that and given the outstanding reputation that the university already has for engineering and other science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM—subjects, it can reasonably be expected to see a significant number of the 3,000 new student places that she recently announced. Will she undertake to discuss student accommodation with the university to ensure that any eligible new students at Aberdeen will not find themselves—as has happened this year and in recent years—unable to find suitable accommodation?

I am pleased to speak in the debate on behalf of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. This is a big bill on an important subject: the custodianship of Scotland's coastal waters out to the 12-mile limit. Scrutinising it at stage 1 meant some hard work for the committee, but I think that I speak for all members when I say that it was also an enjoyable experience. It was particularly rewarding to make fact-finding visits earlier in the year, when the days were longer and the weather just a little warmer, to three beautiful stretches of the Scottish coastline: at Buchan, on the Firth of Lorne and on the Solway Firth. There, we heard first hand from people who live by the sea or make their living from it about the effect that they think the bill will have on them, and what changes they would propose to make it better.  On behalf of the committee, I express my thanks to the people who gave generously of their time on those visits, one of which also involved a full committee meeting in Kirkcudbright. I also pass on our thanks to the many people, including two petitioners, who provided evidence to us in writing or in person at our five stage 1 meetings. I thank the entire membership of the committee. I also thank its clerking team, past and present, and the staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre—Wendy Kenyon in particular—for their unstinting work. Finally, I thank the cabinet secretary and his officials for the hard work that they have put into getting the bill this far along the road—if that is the right metaphor for a marine bill. It is only fair to note at the outset that the bill builds on work that was undertaken by the previous Administration and on an important report that the former Environment and Rural Development Committee produced in 2007. Scotland's inshore waters are among our most precious resources, as a source not only of food but, increasingly, of renewable energy. They are a resource for boat cruises, recreational angling, activity holidays and so on and they are also simply where we go to relax and enjoy the beauty and sea air. Our seas are also—or certainly should be—a haven for a diversity of animals, plants and birds. It is therefore vital that they enjoy adequate protection. That said, anyone making a living from our seas might be forgiven for thinking, "Oh, no, more laws about marine management are on their way!" Fishermen, in particular, complain with some justification that, at times, they are practically drowning in a sea of rules and regulations. I want to make it clear that the committee would not have supported the bill at stage 1 if we had thought that it was likely to add to the administrative burden. On balance, we do not, which is why we recommend in our report that the general principles of the bill be approved. Indeed, we are hopeful that the bill has the potential to make things less rather than more complicated and that it will improve channels of communication between the many diverse users of the sea. In particular, we are cautiously optimistic that the introduction of statutory marine planning will enable more rational and well-informed decisions about the use of the sea to be made and allow misunderstandings about controversial matters such as inshore dredging or the siting of fish farms to be sorted out sooner rather than later. Meanwhile, the creation of a national marine plan should provide an opportunity for the Scottish Government to demonstrate leadership in identifying national priorities, including in emerging industries such as offshore wind and tidal energy production.  Another key aim of the bill that we broadly welcome is the new rules on the marine protected areas, which will increase the opportunity to designate appropriate sites. A further key area of the bill that the committee supports is the provision to modernise our laws on seal conservation. We agree that that is overdue and that the provisions that are set out in the bill are a step in the right direction. Presiding Officer, you would not expect any lead committee convener to conclude a speech at stage 1 without expressing at least some reservations, and I do not propose to disappoint you. In the remainder of my speech, I will refer to some of the matters in our stage 1 report on which we said that we would welcome movement or clarification from the cabinet secretary. I expect other committee members may wish to focus on matters of particular concern to them. First, as our evidence gathering made clear, there are serious concerns about the state of Scotland's seas and the loss of biodiversity within some marine ecosystems. There is on-going debate about the causes: are they the result of overfishing in some areas, natural or man-made environmental changes or some sort of complex interplay of factors? Whatever the causes, the evidence gives rise to concern. The committee is under no illusion that domestic legislation will, of itself, turn things round; we simply query whether the bill in its current form has grasped every opportunity to try to put things right. We make a number of recommendations, two of which I will highlight. First, we suggest that the bill should set out an overarching duty on all public bodies in Scotland, including the Scottish ministers, to have regard to the need to safeguard the health of the sea when exercising any relevant function. Secondly, we propose that the bill should make it mandatory rather than discretionary for the Scottish ministers to create a coherent network of marine protected areas. The committee considers that the two proposals, if taken together, would help to strengthen the conservation element of the bill. Another concern relates to the proposals for the regulation of fish farming. In the main, the bill proposes the retention of the status quo, with licensing decisions being made at local authority level rather than becoming subject to a centralised licensing system. It is important that, as convener, I make it clear that the committee was divided on whether the approach that is set out in the bill is the right one. This was the only matter on which we formally split. I respect individual members' right to agree to disagree. Nonetheless, a clear majority of the committee is not satisfied that the approach that is  set out in the bill is the right one. We think that it goes against the entire philosophy that the bill seeks to champion of making the marine licensing system more streamlined and consistent. Our report tentatively suggests that there might be room for some compromise whereby Marine Scotland sets the licensing rules for aquaculture but they are administered at the local level. Finally, I draw the Parliament's attention to the provisions on seals. The committee is satisfied that the overall direction of travel under the provisions is towards improved conservation and animal welfare, which we welcome. However, we make a number of suggestions about how the provisions could be strengthened. For example, we suggest that the licensing conditions relating to the skill or training of the marksman or the type of weapon that is used should be mandatory. On the basis that prevention is always better than cure, we think that implementation of the bill affords an opportunity to ensure that the aquaculture industry takes all reasonable steps to apply preventive measures against seal incursions, such as the installation of anti-predator netting, to ensure that shooting a seal is truly a last resort. Those reservations aside, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee is happy to support the general principles of the bill and to wish it a safe journey as it negotiates the remaining shoals and narrows of the parliamentary process.

I thank Mike Rumbles for securing the debate and for giving us the opportunity to highlight the fact that the Scottish National Party is delivering for the north-east. I put on record the fact that I lodged an amendment to the motion. The delivery of a reopened Laurencekirk station under the SNP Government after years of talk has not gone unnoticed by the good people of Laurencekirk. The usage figures for Laurencekirk  station, which are 84 per cent higher than predicted, are outstanding and demonstrate that the station is making a real difference for people in Laurencekirk and further afield. The success of the reopened station underlines the damaging lack of progress and the failure to deliver the station under the previous Administration. I commend the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change for delivering the project. I cannot help but note the contrast between his record of delivery and the failings of previous transport ministers. Mike Rumbles's motion also deals with the crossrail project and Kintore station. Frankly, his suggestion that movement on the project has stalled is ludicrous, considering that, in the eight years of the previous Administration and under two Lib Dem transport ministers, no tangible steps forward were made on delivering any aspect of the project. From that standing start—purely a vision, as Mike Rumbles said—activity is happening and progress is being made towards implementing the aims of crossrail on an incremental basis. That is manifestly the correct way to proceed, as Nestrans acknowledged after a feasibility and technical study into the project. Increasing services and the frequency of trains is an important part of improving rail links for communities between Inverurie and Stonehaven. The number of trains going to Inverurie has increased significantly since 2007, with many more services that previously terminated in Dyce continuing to Inverurie. Additionally, from December, there will once again be an evening link from Dyce to Portlethen and Stonehaven, thanks to coming scheduling changes. Those changes are important improvements in their own right, but they will also provide an invaluable measure of the extent of the improvement in the number of people using the services. Establishing those numbers and the potential demand among rail users for a reopened Kintore station is vital to ensuring that the right decision is made on the station. Mike Rumbles might gleefully demand funding for projects before they are examined and scrutinised fully but, thankfully, the Scottish Government takes more responsibility when it comes to investing taxpayers' money. It is simple common sense to grow the number of potential users for Kintore station and to firmly establish evidence that there are enough users to make the service viable before committing investment to the project. Plans for Kintore station will be examined as part of the Aberdeen to Inverness rail line improvements, which I believe are to be studied by Network Rail this year. The delivery of Kintore station through those improvements would avoid the duplication of effort and would help to keep the project costs down. I look forward to the outcome of that study and to the improvements in rail  services in the north-east that it will help to drive forward. I believe that the incremental and evidence-based approach that is being taken to delivering the elements of crossrail is the right one and that members from throughout the north-east should back it.

I am very pleased to open the debate on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on rural housing, and pleased that the whole Parliament has the opportunity to discuss this important issue. When I joined the committee this spring, the inquiry was drawing to a close, so you will appreciate, Presiding Officer, that when I use the words "we" and "our" in this speech, I will be using them not in the royal way but in the corporate sense, to describe things that the committee did before and after I joined it. It is therefore particularly appropriate for me to begin by thanking my colleagues on the committee for their work throughout the inquiry and by thanking former committee members, too—the inquiry was long and we went through quite a few membership changes. Of course, I note the huge contribution of my predecessor, Roseanna Cunningham, who steered the committee through the evidence-gathering stage and early consideration of the draft report. I must also thank the committee clerks for the outstanding work that they did throughout the whole process. It was at the committee's first away day, in Aviemore in late 2007, that the unaffordability and unavailability of rural housing came on to the agenda. Contributors to our away day—people from all walks of life united by the fact that they lived and worked in rural Scotland—told us almost unanimously about the urgency of the issue. Situations where young families are unable to afford a property that would let them live in and contribute to their community over the course of their lives are fundamentally unsustainable. Tight-knit rural communities cannot survive in the long term if young people are prevented from building their lives there and if key local jobs are left unfilled. More needs to be done to increase the availability of rural housing. Shortly after our away day, we launched an inquiry with the following remit: to identify the obstacles preventing people in rural Scotland from gaining access to appropriate and affordable housing; to assess the effectiveness of existing mechanisms for overcoming those obstacles; and  to identify further measures that could be taken, locally or nationally, to help to address the problem. The committee, by its very nature, has to get out and about. Over the course of the inquiry, members went to three rural housing hotspots: highland Perthshire, East Lothian and the Isle of Arran. We also held a full committee meeting in Melrose to hear about the situation in the Borders. Those visits helped members to build up a composite picture of the issue across Scotland. We also gathered evidence in more conventional ways. We held meetings here in Edinburgh and gathered written evidence from a call for views. I thank the many people who provided that evidence and, crucially, pointed us towards some practical solutions. So, what did we find? As I said, the inquiry was lengthy and it took place against the backdrop of a rapidly changing financial situation. When we began our inquiry, interest rates were at 5.5 per cent, Howard from the Halifax was still on our screens singing the praises of 100 per cent mortgages and the phrase "credit crunch" still had the ring of novelty about it. How things change. However, some things have not changed. Recommendation 1 of our inquiry was: "The committee is clear that many more houses need to be built in rural Scotland ...this assumption is fundamental to the overall approach taken in this report." That was true when we launched our inquiry and it is just as true now. Yes, there are differences across the country, but the fundamental rural housing problem is that demand outstrips supply. However, as we say in the report, that does not mean that there is one "magic bullet". Instead, the various factors that contribute to the situation need to be teased out. Only then is it possible to identify bespoke solutions that can help to provide a way forward. Our inquiry identified five main themes. I will use the time that I have left simply to introduce them; I will leave it to others to address them in more detail. The first theme is the planning system. It is not all bad news—there is good practice out there—but the balance of evidence that we considered made very clear that planning is considered to be part of the rural housing problem. The witnesses told us that the planning system is too slow and overbureaucratic, that plans can be outdated and that councils' planning policies sometimes contradict their housing or environmental policies. As the chief planner himself acknowledged, the planning system has been "niggardly" in the allocation of rural housing and needs to refocus itself as an enabler of development. Leaving aside rules and policies, that requires a cultural shift as  much as anything. That applies particularly in relation to building in the countryside, rather than within the envelope of existing towns and villages. We need to overcome the false perception that the countryside is somehow meant to be empty because it has aye been that way. As Rob Gibson has always told us—and as anyone who knows anything about this country's history will tell us—it hasna aye been that wey. It is entirely right that most planning decisions are taken at council level. However, the committee strongly believes that improving the affordability and availability of rural housing is an issue of national importance, which means that national leadership is needed on the planning issue. The implementation of the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 affords a golden opportunity to set a different tone, as does the current revision and consolidation of national planning guidance. Another key theme was land supply. It is perhaps a uniquely Scottish paradox that while so much of Scotland lies apparently empty, it is extremely hard to get hold of suitable land. There are various reasons for that, but the fundamental problem is that not enough suitable land is being offered for development at a realistic price. In other words, the problem is partly market-based. It has been said that you cannot buck the market, but the committee considers that there are some practical steps that planning authorities could take. We suggest that if owners of land that has been zoned for housing are holding out hopefully—the less charitable might say greedily—for the optimum offer, why not consider de-zoning the land? Might that not help to produce a sudden sense of urgency in some cases? What about compulsory purchase? Of course, it should be only a last resort, but the evidence we heard was worrying, because the suggestion was that in much of Scotland compulsory purchase is never used at all. What is the point of having the power if it is never used—not even, for example, to stop a perfectly habitable building falling into disrepair in an area of high housing need? Of course, many landowners want to be part of the solution. In particular, the committee heard that some landlords would welcome having a greater role in the private rented sector—which is proportionately much smaller in rural Scotland—but when it comes to building new private rented housing, they have difficulty making the figures stack up. That brings me on to the third key theme of the inquiry: government funding of affordable rural housing. Government support comes at both the macro and the micro level, and our report touches on both. There are the big top-down spends, mainly via the housing association grant, then there are bespoke schemes that are available to  individual applicants, such as the rural empty properties grant and the rural homes for rent scheme. Those are potentially useful, and it is important that landowners and prospective householders know that they exist—the trouble is that many do not. We also heard concerns about bureaucratic overload in administering those schemes. I know that the Government has been reviewing the effectiveness of those schemes and I look forward to an update from the minister. The fourth major theme in the inquiry was social rented housing and the right to buy. Whether or not members support the principle behind the right to buy, one thing became very clear: in some parts of rural Scotland, it has had a devastating effect on the availability of affordable housing. One of the key messages of the inquiry was the importance of, as one witness put it, "holding on to what we have". There will shortly be a housing bill concerning the right to buy, and I look forward to the minister's comments on that in relation to rural housing. Some way into our inquiry, the committee began to note recurring concerns about the impact of homelessness legislation on the availability of social housing. Clearly, that is a sensitive issue, and it would have been easy to sweep those concerns under the carpet—easy but irresponsible, especially since we encountered perhaps surprising evidence that, far from being comparatively insulated from the problem, many rural social landlords are at the front line in dealing with it. I know that homelessness legislation is a thorny issue, but I simply pass on the committee's observation that, whatever the good intentions behind it, it has created some practical difficulties and—at times—perverse incentives, which need to be looked at. The final main theme identified by the committee was the sustainability and affordability of housing and infrastructure, in which we sought to get down to the literal nuts and bolts of rural housing. We picked up a few concerns but, in the little time that I have available, I will pass on just one: the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's regulatory role in relation to water and sewerage. Bluntly, there were concerns that SEPA was gilding the lily somewhat, and our report calls for its role to be rebalanced to ensure that it serves as much as an enabler of development in the countryside as a regulator. I am interested to hear the minister's thoughts on that. In outlining those five key themes, I have stressed the need to consider a variety of approaches to rural housing. However, before concluding, I draw the Parliament's attention to one more cross-cutting suggestion in our report.  Earlier, I referred to rural housing pressure points—or so-called hot spots—where the strains on the community are most acute. What about giving councils a right to apply for some sort of enhanced pressured area status for hot spots? If such a status were granted, councils would have access to a toolkit of measures to reduce housing pressure, which might include not only suspending the right to buy but applying a special rate of council tax on second homes, the proceeds of which could be used for an affordable housing fund, or allowing for an expedited compulsory purchase procedure. I know that the minister's initial response to that proposal was lukewarm, and I do not dispute that the policy would need to be fine-tuned, but I simply point out that if we are serious about restoring balance, fairness and sustainability to rural housing, we might have to consider more radical approaches in some especially pressured parts of the country. I hope that the Parliament appreciates that our report is comprehensive. Even with the comparative luxury of a full thirteen minutes, I have had time to bring out only its key themes, but I look forward to hearing those themes being discussed and developed over the course of the afternoon. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's 5th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Rural Housing (SP Paper 256).

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing a debate that highlights the decline in the number of blood donors in Scotland. Debating the issue gives the Parliament the opportunity to highlight the reasons and set out what can be done to reverse the decline. I well remember the first time I gave blood. I went with my father to the blood donor bus on one of its visits to Keith. It was Sunday 22 June 19—whatever, one day short of my 17 th birthday. As the bus came to Keith only twice a year, I was keen to donate and not wait for another six  months. I was accepted despite not being 17 and the procedure was over in a short time. Meanwhile, my father's donation was turning into a bit of a struggle—they could not get the blood to run into the bag. I think he stopped donating from then on; another family member was doing their bit. In the four years that I spent at university, I gave blood only once, when the blood transfusion service came to the university. I do not recollect giving blood while I worked in England, but I started to donate again when I worked in Aberdeen, during my lunch times. I was asked to give platelets—the hereditary clotting property that led to the painfully slow process of giving blood for my father came good in my blood donations—as part of the supply for haemophiliacs. At that time, one platelet donation was worth two normal blood donations. My donation count rose rapidly as a result: I got my bronze, silver and gold pins and silver quaich. People have to take time out from donating following childbirth and, as Rhoda Grant said, after certain illnesses or periods on medication. I say that to highlight the everyday interruptions that can interrupt donation even for those who want to give regularly. I would like every 17-year-old to be as keen to give blood as they are to obtain a driving licence. Some sixth year pupils at Banchory Academy looked into getting together enough peers and staff to justify the donor bus visiting the school, as it does the offices of some large companies. The donor bus is important in rural areas, where volunteers do not live near a donor centre. The rurality of Scotland is an issue. I am against payment for blood donation, but young people and students could be reimbursed the cost of the bus or train fare for attending a donor centre. Getting people through the door for that first donation is key. If people are on the books, they can be reminded by text or phone call to make a repeat appointment in three or four months' time; once on the books, they can be cajoled into coming again or be persuaded to become platelet donors. Anyone who can give platelets should say yes. It takes longer, but donations can be made more frequently—every four to six weeks. In our busy lives, it can be a bit like time at the hairdresser; for me, it is a welcome opportunity to relax completely and read magazines that I would not normally buy or give the time of day to. There could be more flexibility on the times of day and the days when donor centres are open or buses come to visit, and there could be more eye-catching and innovative ways of catching blood donors. In the end, it is nae sair and is certainly life giving.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take in response to the interim report of the inquiry into future fisheries management. (S3F-1905)

Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish fishing fleet is leading Europe in developing innovative measures to make fishing a sustainable and profitable industry and that the United Kingdom should, therefore, give clearer priority in the coming discussions on what should replace the discredited common fisheries policy to securing regional management of fishing grounds? Does he believe that, as with environmental issues, in relation to which Scotland plays a leading role, Scottish ministers should be at the top table in any discussions?

Will the member give way?

I wish to highlight just how significant the publication of Scotland's first road safety framework is. This is the first time that Scotland-specific casualty reduction targets have been set. Although they are ambitious, they are wholly necessary if the progress that has been made in reducing casualty rates is to continue. It will be no easy task to halve the number of serious injuries and achieve a 40 per cent reduction in fatalities over the next decade, but I am confident that the Scottish Government will work hard to achieve those targets. In the north-east, we know only too well the importance of making improvements to road safety, given how many families have suffered the tragedy of seeing a loved one injured or killed on our roads. As I have said before, I, like many others in the north-east, dread opening the local papers after the weekend, when there are nearly  always reports about fatalities or serious injuries. The pain that family and friends feel can never be reduced to a mere statistic. That fatalities are at their lowest level in Scotland for more than 50 years is of little comfort to them so, for their sake, more must continue to be done to make our roads safer and to prevent other families from experiencing that pain. Every death on Scotland's roads is one too many. Although the north-east has seen more than its share of tragedy on the roads, we are also seeing innovations to improve road safety. As the minister mentioned, Aberdeenshire Council is trialling SeeMe technology in the Banchory area. SeeMe has proved successful in improving the safety of children boarding or getting off school buses in Sweden. Children are given a transponder that is placed in their school bags and which causes warning signs to flash when a child is near a bus stop, warning motorists to take more care. I am sure that all members share my hope that the pilot scheme proves to be a demonstrable success and can be used to help to protect children throughout Scotland in coming years. That the north-east was selected for the trials is testament to the tireless campaigning of people such as Ron Beaty, whose granddaughter was seriously injured after getting off a school bus, and the many other people who are involved in his campaign to make improvements to all aspects of school bus safety. I pay tribute to all their efforts and the changes that they have already achieved. As the school bus safety group—and, no doubt, other campaigning organisations—has found, there are still significant powers over Scotland's roads reserved to the UK Department for Transport. I sincerely hope that the UK Government will play its part in striving to do more to improve safety on our roads where the responsibility rests with it. Like others, I call for those powers to be devolved. Inaction that puts people at risk is surely inexcusable, and I hope that members of all parties will play their part in pushing the UK Government to take action in those areas where the Scottish Government identifies changes to reserved policy that could help to save lives on Scotland's roads. I hope that the new Scottish road safety framework will give a new impetus to build on the casualty reductions that have already been achieved, and that improvements in Scotland's road network and road safety technologies will help to bring down the figures still further. Highlighting the fact that road safety is everyone's responsibility, as the framework does—and as Charlie Gordon did—is important and will, I hope, encourage a fully joined-up approach to safety on Scotland's roads.  I welcome the progress that has been made to date in reducing casualties on our roads by such significant numbers, and I am confident that everyone who is involved in road safety, from Government to individual road users, will play their part in making Scotland's roads even safer in the decade to come.

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate and add my welcome to those in the public gallery. I offer my sincere congratulations to the girl guides at the start of their centenary celebrations. With such a remarkable anniversary, I know that this will be a wonderful year for all who take part in the events that will take place. The north-east has been playing its part to the full in the centenary celebrations, which kicked off at the weekend. More than 1,500 current and former rainbows, brownies and guides took part in a parade in Inverurie to celebrate the event. Another large centenary event took place at Seaton park in Aberdeen at the weekend. Indeed, more than 550,000 past and present members are estimated to have joined in events across the  United Kingdom. The range and scope of the activities that have been planned between now and next October are truly remarkable, but that is reflective of the truly remarkable nature of the girl guides. The fact that there are some 60,000 girl guides in Scotland means that Girlguiding Scotland is the country's largest voluntary organisation for girls and young women. As Jeremy Purvis said, it is part of an international organisation that has more than 10 million members in 144 countries. Half the women born in Scotland have belonged to Girlguiding Scotland at some point in their lives. The influence that guiding has had on the development of many Scottish women is incalculable. Until I did my research for the debate, I had not known that the girl guides came about when some girls gatecrashed the scouts' first rally at the Crystal palace in 1909. Baden-Powell was confronted by a small group of determined girls—representing hundreds of others—who insisted that they wanted to be scouts, too. The girl guides' website describes the reaction of critics of the idea. Some called girls' involvement in camping, hiking and similar activities a "mischievous new development", a "foolish and pernicious movement" and an "idiotic sport". I say to the girl guides, "Och well—girl power rules okay." Today, Girlguiding still retains the goal of empowering girls and giving them greater confidence for their future years, which is why it has chosen to remain a single-sex organisation. That is a big part of what makes it such a unique and positive organisation, and it lies behind the influence that it has had on many women's lives. With the curriculum for excellence looking to recognise the worth of extracurricular activities, and schools, universities, colleges and employers looking for that extra something, achievements that have been made in the girl guides can only enhance a CV. Unlike Jeremy Purvis, I am a product of the brownies and the guides. The highlights of guide camps stick most in my memory—I loved them. I still retain a love of camping, but I am so glad that we no longer have to lash our own pot stands and tripods using knots that we have learned. The discipline of keeping the site tidy and camp inspections is an abiding memory. Today, guides are more likely to learn how to assemble flatpacks and other equally more useful and up-to-date skills. I pay tribute to the 9,000 trained adult volunteers who help with guiding in Scotland. However, there are some 4,000 girls who still want to join, so we must encourage more adults to volunteer. I am sure that this year's highlighting of Girlguiding will help to make more adult volunteers a reality. In  addition, my aunt would not forgive me if I did not mention the work of guide commissioners. The past 100 years have seen remarkable changes, but the guides go from strength to strength. I am sure that in 100 years from now, when the organisation celebrates its second centenary, it will still be thriving and playing a valuable role in the lives of Scottish girls.

Does the member accept that the closure of Woodgrove by VSA has nothing to do with the council and that the council's position on the matter has never changed? Does he also accept that Woodgrove is now not up to the standard that is required for dementia sufferers and that in Aberdeen we have a new facility called Rubislaw Park, where there are 40 beds specifically for sufferers of the condition?

Like Irene Oldfather, I come to the issue from the personal situation of having had a relative who suffered from dementia. My mother suffered from dementia for several years before she died, so I hope that I do not introduce too much emotion into my speech. It was ironic that she died suffering from dementia. When I was a child we did not have the awareness that we have now of Alzheimer's and dementia, and I recall elderly relatives who would be recognised as getting gey raivelled or being a bit dottled. At that time, they usually died of something else before dementia became the main issue. I remember their instructing us, because they were practical farmers, that we were just to take them out. As members can imagine, that was because they did not want to be seen in that state. Of course, doing what they suggested was totally out of the question, and I will not stray into the end-of-life debate today. However, that was their attitude. We do not really know what goes on in the minds of dementia sufferers. Like other sufferers, my mother had moments of complete lucidity, but would then retreat into the dark world of dementia. That is why research is so important, as is early diagnosis, and making family members and others aware of the early signs of dementia. I know that the stroke leaflet has been well received. People have mentioned to us that it has come through their door and that, having read it, they can now recognise the signs of stroke. I ask the minister whether something similar can be done for dementia. It is important, too, to recognise the different forms of dementia—vascular dementia is different from Alzheimer's disease—and that sufferers require different medical treatment and care strategies. In addition, elderly and not-so-elderly sufferers should be allowed, as far as possible, to stay in their own environment for as long as possible. That is not possible in many cases because their behaviour means that their dignity and safety is compromised, so the security of a care home environment is the only option. Like others who have been directly affected, I know the huge burden that is put on carers of dementia sufferers. We owe a great deal of gratitude to all those who are involved in providing such care. It is absolutely vital that on-going training is made available for carers and others who are involved in the running of care homes and day care centres. As more research into dementia is done, more guidance becomes available on how to enhance the quality of life of sufferers. As the minister and others have mentioned, that is not only about diet and physical activity but how to provide mental  stimulation. As others have said, it is not acceptable that any care home resident should be left sitting all day in the same chair watching television. Different and stimulating environments should be provided through, for example, outings and taking people for fresh air in the garden. In the care homes that I have visited, I have noticed how important it is to have many people who come in as, for example, a volunteer manicurist or hairdresser. Encouraging relatives to come in to give manicures or facials or to talk to the old people about old photographs is an important way of enhancing the quality of life of dementia sufferers. Many members have mentioned the widespread and inappropriate prescription of medication, which is totally unacceptable. In some incidents, such as where the patient is distressed and wandering, it may be necessary and in the patient's own interests to prescribe antipsychotic drugs. However, as Robert Brown and others said, such prescriptions should be made only after consultation with the patient's GP. I commend the work that is being done by the University of Aberdeen, which is at the forefront of research into Alzheimer's and dementia. A team that is headed by Professor Tibor Harkany is studying how nerve cells communicate with each other and is looking for biomarkers—biological clues—that might diagnose people who have the condition. Professor Harkany's team is trying to find out what causes brain cells to become damaged in Alzheimer's sufferers. In looking for new ways to diagnose the disease, the team is looking for new targets at which future drug treatments could be aimed. I also want to mention groups such as Banchory's Forget Me Not Club, which allows carers and others to have some free time and lets dementia sufferers meet and be involved in different social interactions. Local schools raise funds for that club and encourage pupils to volunteer to help out there. I also want to mention—

Given the challenges that we face, does the cabinet secretary believe that MSPs should follow the example of councillors in Aberdeen and set aside party differences to back the Scottish Government in its opposition to the £500 million of cuts to the Scottish budget that are planned by the UK Government in each of the next two years?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement and congratulate Brian Pack on his appointment. Brian Pack and I have had a number of robust discussions over the years. He is regarded as one of the brightest brains in the industry, and I look forward to the outcome of his inquiry. I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that new entrants to farming are vital to the sector's long-term future. Will the forthcoming inquiry give careful consideration to the needs of new entrants in any reform of single farm payments and seek to build on the improvements that the Scottish Government has put in place to support new entrants?

I am pleased to take part in the debate, and I welcome the publication of "A Fresh Start: The renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture". I echo members when I say that the industry is hugely important to the Scottish  economy, particularly in some of our most fragile communities in the Highlands and Islands. At the Glasgow fishing expo 2009, which took place last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment urged the nation to eat more fish. I think that I am right in saying that the consumption of salmon has grown annually by some 8 per cent in recent years, but I agree with the cabinet secretary that more needs to be done to promote the consumption of fish, not least for its health benefits. Consumers in Spain, Portugal and Norway eat twice as much fish as Scots eat. We need to grow the internal market for fish products and capture a greater share of the huge market for fish in Europe and further afield. I attended the European seafood expo in Brussels and was captivated by the great optimism that Scottish exhibitors showed at their slick promotional stand, which had been co-ordinated by Scottish Enterprise and Seafood Scotland. I think that many people were drawn to the Scottish stand by the wonderful Cullen skink that was served throughout the day. We need to do everything that we can do to help our successful exporters to expand existing markets and develop others. The salmon industry in Scotland is the third largest in the world, after the industries in Norway and Chile, and the opportunities for expansion are substantial, not least because of the unfortunate outbreaks of ISA in those two countries. We must ensure that aquaculture in Scotland comes to be known as the greenest and cleanest in quality. I welcome the Government's strategic objectives of promoting "high standards of husbandry and biosecurity" and "Continual development of control strategies and making best use of available medicines as well as research and development into emerging diseases". There has been a reduction in escapes, but the number remains unacceptably high. The reduction of escapes is of economic benefit not only to the fish farms concerned but to businesses that rely on wild fish stocks, which can be threatened by parasites that are carried by the farmed variety. The objective of improved systems for licensing aquaculture developments is also welcome but trickier, and it will obviously exercise the minds of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee members as we take evidence around coastal areas on the Marine (Scotland) Bill. We are already being made well aware of the competing demands on our coastal waters, but the opportunities for expansion in other shellfish and fish farm species, such as mussels, halibut, cod and haddock, must be encouraged. There are  opportunities for the taking not just in increased fish production but in developing and retaining a skilled and knowledgeable workforce, not to mention the opportunities for scientists, given the large number of scientists supporting and pioneering new efforts in this field, as we saw during our committee's visit to Marine Scotland earlier this week. Like Peter Peacock, I want to raise with the minister the issue of finance, as well as the concerns on trade credit insurance that were raised by exhibitors at the Brussels seafood exhibition, given that companies in the middle east and elsewhere default on their payments for products that are sent to them. Our exporters simply cannot bear such non-payment. The opportunities for the aquaculture industry are there to be harnessed. I am confident that, with the renewed framework, the Scottish Government is providing the right climate for growth.

I start by mentioning that I was not on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for stage 1. At stage 2, I was in the unusual position of considering Government amendments that had been lodged by my predecessor as convener, who had convened stage 1 proceedings. I add my thanks to all the clerks for their hard work, and to all those who gave evidence on the bill. The process began for the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee away back in September 2007, when the committee agreed to conduct an inquiry into flooding and flood management. It was undertaken in the knowledge that the Government intended to introduce a bill. Such pre-legislative scrutiny proved very valuable, as it allowed the committee to feed its thinking on the best approach to flood risk management into the Government's work at a very early stage. As a result, the bill as introduced to Parliament reflected a number of the committee inquiry's recommendations. In addition, the issues and associated inquiry recommendations that the Government did not  endorse served as a useful starting point for scrutiny of the bill. In its stage 1 report, the committee highlighted concerns, for example about resources and the shortage of specialist staff to implement the bill's provisions. Given the skills that we require in this country, youngsters might consider becoming water engineers. The committee also noted that there is uncertainty about the funding that will be provided to local authorities and Scottish Water to implement the legislation, and expressed concern about the conflict between SEPA's role in implementation and its priorities as an environmental regulator. I am pleased that the Government has responded positively to a large number of the committee's recommendations. I am also pleased that points to which the Government did not see fit to agree were doggedly pursued to the end of stage 3. I am glad that the committee has ensured that flood risk will be managed sustainably and that existing natural features, such as wetlands, will be used to manage flood risk, wherever that is possible. The committee's recommendation that clear strategic priorities be derived from the risk assessment process and be made publicly available has also been adopted. We have also received assurances that local authority development and flood risk management planning processes should prevent developments in areas that are subject to significant flooding. The need for more detail on how local authorities can recover expenses or fine landowners who do not maintain watercourses has been addressed, as has the need for more detail on how landowners can be compensated for loss of earnings if their land is required for flood prevention work. We have a good bill. The committee reserves the right to conduct post-legislative scrutiny.

I had hoped that my self-denying ordinance not to speak on education-related matters would last a bit longer, but when I saw the motion it was a case of haud me back. The debate has nothing to do with our pupils, teachers or schools, and everything to do with the Tories pandering to the readership of the Daily Mail and promoting the private education sector at the expense of the public one. The record on school exclusions in the past two years, which has built on the foundations that were laid by the previous Executive, has been one of very good progress and is likely to continue to improve. The main reason for that is the enthusiasm with which many schools have embraced the positive behaviour initiative.

I could speak about the issue for 40 minutes, never mind four, so I will not take any interventions. We can clearly see that there has been a dramatic effect in school communities that have embraced positive behaviour methods. That is happening throughout Scotland, as each education authority has an officer who is dedicated to helping schools to introduce those methods. I cannot praise enough the positive behaviour team in the Scottish Government, who travel around the country offering advice and support. It is not just  public authorities that are working on the issue; I congratulate UNICEF UK and Bruce Wilkinson on introducing the rights respecting school initiative, through which children learn that they have rights but also responsibilities to ensure that those rights are respected. The majority of primary schools in Fife are adopting that initiative and are seeing real improvements in behaviour. Schools that have embraced positive behaviour, whether through the rights respecting school model, restorative practice, being cool in school or other methods, are experiencing a calmer, more positive atmosphere, which is more conducive to learning, and, crucially, teachers are reporting that they are much less stressed. There is no denying that there is some way to go. It is much easier to introduce positive behaviour from day one of a child's school life, but the fact that it is being introduced in secondary schools shows that it can be introduced at a later stage. If Inshes primary school in Inverness, which welcomes children with learning difficulties, can manage without any exclusions, other schools can do so, too. We all acknowledge that there will be a very small number of disturbed children who might not respond. Prison governors tell us that as long as there are drugs in our communities, there are likely to be drugs in our prisons. In the same way, as Johann Lamont articulated thoughtfully, as long as children's family members are carrying knives on our streets, there remains the possibility that knives will enter our schools. In such cases, the child concerned must be assessed and treated individually by a number of agencies to determine the best way to deal with their offending behaviour. Nothing should be ruled out. Headteachers can and should use exclusion, but they must consult local authorities, so that children are not just left to roam the streets and create further mayhem during their exclusion. Removal to a different setting might work in some cases, but, often, it leads to even more resentment and frustration when the individual is removed from their family and friends, and it does not lead to long-term behavioural change. Borstal regimes in modern buildings that are provided by private companies that charge the local authority huge sums are not necessarily the panacea for all ills in this area. We must always focus on the child's needs and welfare. I urge the Government not to be blown off course by the motion.

Patrick Harvie is convener of the lead committee  on the bill; I speak as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, which considered parts of the bill. I stress that I joined the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee just as it was finishing its report, so I will highlight the committee's work on certain sections of the bill. I am sure that other members of the committee and the Minister for Environment will go into much more detail than I will. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee specifically requested that it be appointed as a secondary committee to scrutinise the provisions that fall within its remit—the forestry, waste reduction and recycling, and muirburn provisions. On behalf of the committee, I thank all those who provided oral and written evidence and the clerks for their hard work. I will start with muirburn, which was the least contentious issue. Muirburn is important in regenerating hill and moorland habitats, but the issue did not evoke a great number of responses, except on the dates and lengths of periods allowed for burning. I welcome the cabinet secretary's undertaking to consult stakeholders fully on the issue, and we will keep a close eye on the amendments that the Government lodges on the matter at stage 2 On waste, the committee is aware that the bill's provisions on waste reduction and recycling are enabling in nature because the Government does not propose to introduce secondary legislation to enforce them if the same ends can be achieved through voluntary measures. The committee appreciated the logic of that approach but, given the importance of the provisions, we think that any such secondary legislation should be subject to the super-affirmative procedure, which would allow additional time for scrutiny of its contents, including in draft form. Other issues stemmed from the evidence that the committee heard and need to be addressed to progress the central aim of reducing, reusing and recycling waste. They include the urgent need to focus on reducing commercial and industrial waste that is sent to landfill; the need to address the lack of infrastructure that is currently available to implement the policy intentions in the bill; and the need to consider matters that the Environment and Rural Development Committee raised in session 2 to do with the impact, including the environmental impact, of sellers of goods charging for the supply of carrier bags. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee also considered the opportunities that the current international market conditions could present for Scotland to develop waste recycling industries; the need to ensure that measures are undertaken in accordance with both the Government's definition of recycling and the waste hierarchy that is set out  in the waste framework directive; and, in order to inform public decision making, the need for the Government to endorse one method of measuring carbon footprints and to establish criteria that are based on it that reflect which waste reuse and recycling practice is the most sustainable. On the more contentious issue of forestry, we all know—the Minister for Environment in particular—that the submissions that were received on the proposal to lease a percentage of Forestry Commission land either opposed that proposal or raised substantial issues with it. On the basis of the weight of the opposition to the proposal and issues with the adequacy of the consultation process, the committee recommended that the Government should not progress the proposal. As members might appreciate, the committee therefore welcomes the Government's announcement that it will not progress the proposal. Assuming that this is still the Government's intention, the bill will be amended at stage 2 so that the provisions in section 47 are restricted to purely enabling joint ventures. All the written submissions supported the idea of the Forestry Commission entering into joint ventures with private companies for the development of sustainable energy projects, such as wind farms and hydroelectric infrastructure projects. Evidence to the committee suggested that such joint ventures have the potential to generate considerable income, although members are aware that there are practical barriers to generating income quickly because of the time taken to receive planning permission and clearance from environmental regulators for proposals such as wind farm projects. Given the notable support for the joint venture proposal from stakeholders, the committee recommended that the Government should explore the full potential of joint ventures, including whether support should be provided for their establishment. The committee's report notes that, in the response to the Government's consultation on the proposals, there was widespread support for the idea of community leasing. Although provisions on that would not sit easily in the bill, as community leasing would have social benefits that are unrelated to mitigating climate change, the committee recommended "that the Scottish Government incorporates provisions to allow for community leasing in future legislation." That would meet the call from members that we must encourage members of the public to buy into the climate change debate.

Finally, as usual, many organisations have sent in briefings on the issue,  which have highlighted Scotland's position at the forefront of tackling climate change. However, caution should be—

To ask the Scottish Government what steps universities are taking to improve the career prospects of graduates. (S3O-6573)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, the University of Aberdeen recently announced plans to reform its curriculum to bring about increased flexibility and a wider range of educational choices. Does she agree that the reforms will boost the employability of the university's graduates and help to make the north-east of Scotland a more attractive place for economic investment?

Does the cabinet secretary welcome, as I do, the progress that has been made by Aberdeen City Council—since the Scottish National Party took  control in the city and in this Parliament—in redressing its historic spending problems? Will he join me in welcoming the restructuring of Aberdeen City Council's top tier of management as a result of last May's inquiry by the Accounts Commission? The tier now includes a new post of economic development project manager.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on economic recovery. The speeches that have been made so far have been interesting—and some of them have been helpful. I would like to be excused from the final speeches, Presiding Officer, as I have a constituency event that I wish to get to punctually if I can. It is almost unbelievable how we got into this mess, which has turned into a global disaster. Three things spring to mind: seduction, self-indulgence and self-delusion. Those terms can be attributed to UK Government ministers as well as to City bankers. We see the unedifying spectacle of Gordon Brown gallivanting round the globe, trying to find out what other countries are doing to  help their economies. At home, the predictions just go from bad to worse. No one knows how long the economic downturn will last, but it is certain that the pain from it will be felt for a very long time and that many things will never be the same again—nor indeed should they be. To say that this Government is not doing all that it can is just plain wrong, and the fact that some Opposition speakers have just had a moan, offering few constructive suggestions, is galling, to say the least, when the issue is so important. The public are suffering more and more. In a time of crisis, they expect their politicians to pull together rather than to be at one another's throats. The Government is already doing much of what John Park asked for in his speech. The suggestion that we go back to past methods of finance, such as public-private partnerships and the private finance initiative, is breathtaking. Infrastructure investment is going ahead with capital spend and traditional borrowing. Just in the past few days, the UK Government had to spend £2 billion of taxpayers' money to prop up PFI projects. That is a humiliating bailout. During this time of economic crisis, that £2 billion could be well spent on other things, and the bailout just shows—if anything were needed to show it—how little financial credibility is left in the Exchequer. PFI is a millstone round the UK's neck, and it is set to add more weight to the existing millstone of debt.

Andy Kerr knows that we are trying to ensure that the huge amounts of capital spending on PFI and PPP—on things that were not properly bargained and negotiated—will not happen again. Johann Lamont referred to the poorer people in our society. That made me think about projects in many third-world countries—as the western world catches the cold, they get the flu. We will see that effect worldwide. Many social enterprises are excited about their prospects under this Government. For many decades, people such as Rob Gibson and me have championed social enterprises, which are now seeing that there are many opportunities in Scotland. The voluntary sector, too, is upbeat, as it knows that where it really makes a difference to people's lives, it is secure and growing.  As others have said, this Government has taken measures to protect business and individuals, as far as its competence will allow, and to provide a fiscal stimulus where possible. The finances of Scotland are well protected and wisely spent by John Swinney. He never forgets that he is entrusted to spend people's hard-earned taxes wisely and for their benefit, rather than to squander the money because it is only taxpayers' money and there is more where it came from. We all know that it is not true any more that there is more where that money came from, because receipts from income tax and corporation tax are falling dramatically. We do not know whether quantitative easing will work, but early indications show that it is not that popular. I press the cabinet secretary to do all he can to protect the hands that feed from the tax and grab of the Treasury. I am talking, of course, about the oil and gas sector. It is still relatively buoyant, but a long-term low oil price might lead some businesses to pull their operations from the North Sea. Successive Westminster Governments have looked on Scotland's oil as a cash cow rather than as a long-term security, as Norway has done. Norway's sovereign oil fund places its Government in a strong position to enact economic stimulus without increases in Government net debt. I plead with the cabinet secretary not to let the vital infrastructure projects in the north-east slip. The oil and gas sector and the north-east agricultural base, which provides 14 per cent of the UK's food, need easier access to markets. Our citizens will also want to know that part of the recovery will be about having a financial sector that is regulated so that the current situation never happens again. Gordon Brown talks about only limited regulation.

I find it astonishing that, in the face of the deepening economic crisis, the Liberal Democrats have chosen such a subject for their allotted debating time. That is the kind of cry that we have heard from the Liberal Democrats in recent weeks when they have complained about Government business but, as usual, there is one rule for the Liberal Democrats and another for everyone else.

No thank you. I read somewhere over the past few days that the Liberal Democrat leader, Tavish Scott, thinks that a coalition deal with the SNP is likely after the next election. Of course, we are delighted that the Liberal Democrats recognise that the SNP is likely to be the largest party and that they will need to do business with us, but we will not have a coalition on the basis that we park an independence referendum for two parliamentary sessions. Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats claim that the SNP Government has failed to deliver on transport projects in the north-east. Let us look at the facts. As Alex Johnstone pointed out, despite the Liberal Democrats having had two transport ministers during their eight years in government and despite the fact that their current transport spokesman, Alison McInnes, was chair of Nestrans, there was no tangible progress on crossrail. Their legacy was review upon review, plenty of hot air and nae action. In her new role, perhaps Alison McInnes is trying to purge her previous inaction by trying to shift attention away from her party's failures.

No thank you. Members, who is in charge of another suburban transport project? Oh dear, it is the Liberal Democrats. They are in charge of the Edinburgh trams project, which has ground to a halt before a rail has been laid or a tram is in sight. In contrast, we will open Laurencekirk station in the spring and timetabling changes—

Yes, Mike Rumbles, a station in the north-east is being opened under the SNP.  The timetable changes that were introduced in December mean that there are now more trains than ever between Inverurie and Aberdeen. For peak morning services, where there were two trains under the Liberal Democrat-Labour coalition, there are now five under the SNP, as well as an additional evening service. Under the SNP, those services are up and running. Phase 2 of the improvements on the Inverness to Aberdeen line will include consideration of a station at Kintore, on which the minister has said he is in discussion with other members. The STPR contains those improvements among its 29 national priorities, including an at least hourly service and a 20-minute reduction in journey times on the line. Such a service will greatly assist those who commute from Inverurie and Dyce. The STPR also includes improvements between Aberdeen and the central belt. The increased number of express services and stopping services will benefit commuters from Stonehaven, Laurencekirk and Portlethen as well as those who travel longer distances between Aberdeen and Glasgow or Edinburgh. Such benefits for commuters and longer-journey passengers, which were talked about by the Liberals, are happening under an SNP Government. The Liberal Democrats know that their reputation and credibility on transport in the north-east is dire. I can sum it up in four words: Aberdeen western peripheral route. The AWPR shambles has unnecessarily cost millions of pounds because of the Liberal Democrats' lack of decision taking. Trying to turn the spotlight on the SNP and crossrail winna wash with the sensible folk of the north-east. I support the amendment in the name of Stewart Stevenson.

I, too, welcome this debate, which provides me with the opportunity to highlight the Government's commitment to improvement of the school estate. We have made significant progress in improving school infrastructure and are well on track to lifting more than 100,000 pupils out of poor-quality school buildings and classrooms by 2011. In the course of 2008 alone, 71 major school building projects were completed, which benefited more than 30,000 children who moved into new, state-of-the-art classrooms that are fit for delivering the curriculum for excellence. Government is supporting £2 billion-worth of construction in schools. Since May 2007, 150 school projects have been completed under this Administration, which is benefiting more than 50,000 pupils and placing us well on track to meet our target of 250 school projects, serving 100,000 pupils. In addition, three NPD projects are  currently in the pipeline. In total, the SNP Government is directly supporting investment with a capital value of around £1 billion. Under the terms of the concordat that we have signed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, we have increased substantially the capital resources that are available to authorities. Many authorities are making schools an investment priority. The infrastructure investment plan shows a further £1 billion being invested in schools over the next five years, and that is just in large-scale projects. In the wake of the pre-budget report, the Government has offered to allow authorities to accelerate £100 million of capital expenditure from 2010-11 in order to bolster economic recovery and support families and businesses. COSLA is working with authorities to identify how best that £100 million can be targeted. We are confident that schools and communities across the country will benefit from planned expenditure taking place earlier than would otherwise have been the case. Looking to the future, we have established a joint school estate strategy working group with COSLA in response to the Audit Scotland report "Improving the school estate". Discussions regarding future policy, funding and delivery are on-going, with the intention to publish a new school estate strategy by spring 2009. The Scottish Futures Trust is a member of the joint Scottish Government-COSLA school estate strategy working group and is also engaging with individual authorities to discuss how best it can support delivery of the Government's and authorities' aspiration to improve the school estate. The SFT will continue to work with the group and with authorities to assist in identifying appropriate delivery and funding solutions.

I cannot agree more with Mary Scanlon. If we build new schools but they are not maintained, they will quickly fall down the categories again. Local authorities must build care and maintenance into their budgets in order to keep the schools that we are building in decent condition. Otherwise, we will still be paying for them after they have fallen down—we are paying for some schools over 30 years.  As I said, the Scottish Futures Trust is a member of the school estate working group, and it is working with it to improve the strategy. As I have outlined, we are continuing to make substantial investment in capital programmes across Scotland and, as members will be aware, we will be announcing later this year the next part of the schools investment programme. Rhoda Grant and Peter Peacock—who was a deputy finance minister and Minister for Education and Young People—know that PPP has to be paid for over decades. The work will come in on budget, and other mechanisms have to be found. Turning specifically to Highland, I appreciate that there is local concern about the condition of schools in Jamie Stone's constituency. As he and other members rightly identified, it has been an issue for some time. I need to make it quite clear, however, that it is a matter for Highland Council, which is responsible for the provision and maintenance of school buildings in its area. It decides the priority that is to be accorded to work on particular schools.

Jamie Stone and other members have made perfectly clear the condition of that school, and I take their word for it. As I said, it is a matter for the council. Have all Highland councillors been to visit the school? Perhaps if those from other parts of the council area had gone to visit it, it might be higher up their list of priorities. Given the council's responsibility, ministers have to stand back from involvement in discussions on the merits of various options for work on individual school buildings, and cannot intervene in council business to influence which schools might be identified as priorities for replacement or refurbishment. We have substantially increased the capital allocation for local authorities across Scotland, with Highland receiving £86.1 million over this year and next year for investment in infrastructure. That can of course be used for prudential borrowing, or it can be used for capital investment, including investment on schools, according to priorities. In its previous school investment programme, the council apparently had higher priorities than the replacement of Wick high school. That was evidently the case in 2005, when the council decided on the contents of its nearly £200 million PPP schools project, in which replacement of Wick high school did not feature. Education ministers welcomed the statement that was made back in September by Highland  Council leader, Councillor Michael Foxley, who said that he wants to set out an ambitious programme of capital investment in schools for the next 10 years. In the next four years, the council plans to invest £88 million in the region's schools. That will provide five new primary schools and significant improvements to a number of other schools, including £1 million-worth of investment at Wick high school. Of course, the extent to which investment in Wick high school might feature in that more ambitious future programme will be a decision for the council to take and to account for.  I hope that Mr Stone and other Highlands and Islands members will use their influence to ensure that Highland Council is in a state of readiness with school projects to benefit from the accelerated capital and future SFT funding.  Meeting closed at 17:36.

Skills Development Scotland reports monthly on performance against the key performance indicators—KPIs—that are included in its 2008-09 operating plan. At the end of January 2009, SDS reported good progress against all KPIs.

No UK or other legislation prevents people from accessing training until they have been unemployed for six months. Skills are devolved to the Scottish Government and, as such, decisions on skills training offers are its responsibility. From 1 April 2009, training for work will be available to people who have been unemployed for three months or more, and all training interventions will be considered in the light of the economic downturn. On the European social fund, £55 million has been allocated to community planning partnerships to enable them to undertake employability and regeneration projects over the next two years.

Any violence in schools is unacceptable. The Scottish Government is committed to helping schools to create peaceful and positive learning environments for staff and pupils and is working to tackle indiscipline and violence in schools in a variety of ways. We are working with local authorities to support schools in introducing the most effective approaches to promoting positive behaviour and dealing with indiscipline and more  serious incidents. We fund the positive behaviour team at £500,000 per year; it provides free training and promotes good practice throughout Scotland.

Andy Kerr will know that, this month, the Government will start a survey on bad behaviour in schools. I repeat that any violence in schools in unacceptable, and I am concerned by any rise in exclusions because of assaults, which is a very serious problem. Although they account for less than 1 per cent of exclusions, they represent some of the most serious incidents. That is why schools use a wide range of approaches to improve relationships and promote positive behaviour.

Physical education is a key element of the health and wellbeing area of the curriculum. Guidance to support the new three-to-18 curriculum explicitly refers to our commitment that all schools will continue to work towards the provision of two hours of good-quality physical education for each child every week. The health and wellbeing experiences and outcomes are being redrafted to take account of feedback from trialling, and I expect the final version to be published in time for schools to begin introducing the new curriculum from August this year, with full implementation by August 2010.

I assure the member that I am sure that the outcomes for the health and wellbeing part of the curriculum for excellence will include means of measuring the outcomes for children's learning in that area.

I welcome this evening's debate, which gives me an opportunity to emphasise the Government's commitment to prevent the loss or reduction of school playing fields and facilities where no equivalent or improved facilities are provided, and our commitment to protect green spaces for sport and informal activity, particularly in disadvantaged communities. Although I am of course aware of the proposals for Cuiken primary school—indeed, Christine Grahame has already raised this issue in the Parliament—I understand that Midlothian Council is currently considering a planning application for the site in question. As Jeremy Purvis helpfully highlighted, given the council's interest in the land, the application might require to be notified to the Scottish ministers, so it would be inappropriate for me to comment further on this particular proposal. However, I am sure that local MSPs will use their good offices with Midlothian Council on behalf of their constituents. I should also say that I am looking forward to appearing with other ministers before the Health and Sport Committee to give evidence on health and physical activity. Sportscotland, which is already a statutory consultee on developments that are proposed for playing fields, generally resists such proposals unless the playing fields in question are surplus to requirements or adequate replacement facilities are to be provided. As members have pointed out, Scottish planning policy 11, on open space and physical activity, which was issued by this Government in November 2007, extends sportscotland's role as consultee to a greater range of facilities. SPP 11 also introduced a requirement for each local authority to prepare an open space audit and  strategy for its area to help safeguard existing open spaces and to identify priorities for future development. By involving sportscotland more closely and requiring the preparation of open space strategies, SPP 11 delivers better, not more watered down, planning for playing fields. Local authorities should aim to protect and enhance open spaces in their ownership; indeed, SPP 11 applies to school playing fields and to all other publicly owned open spaces. If an open space strategy demonstrates that a playing field is required to meet a continuing need, whether for school or community use, it should be protected in the development plan. Such an approach should ensure that redevelopment does not take place unless open space is shown to be surplus to requirements or replacement facilities are to be provided. Although there is no set list of statutory consultees for development plans, changes that we are making to the planning system mean that planning authorities must prepare participation statements that set out when, how and with whom consultation on their plans will take place. Ministers expect authorities to use participation statements carefully to consider the groups and organisations that need to be involved in their particular plan and the best way to engage with them. Each council's open space audit will provide a valuable source of local information on playing fields and their use. We see no merit in establishing a national database; it is much more important that such information is maintained locally, to inform the local decision-making process, and is accessible to local individuals and community groups. However, sportscotland produces an annual monitoring report on planning applications that affect playing fields. It is encouraging to note that, over the past four years, the number of planning applications that affect playing fields has consistently fallen—from 118 in 2005 to 50 in 2008. As Ken Macintosh most helpfully highlighted, the most recent report shows that, since 1996, there has across the whole of Scotland been a net loss of 126 pitches, mostly the mineral ones on which we used to scrape our knees and which are now considered unsuitable for modern use. Although, since 1996, 267 mineral and 55 grass pitches have been lost, 196 modern synthetic grass pitches have been installed. That type of pitch gives a clean and attractive playing surface which, as it can be used all year round in all weather conditions—which is very important in Scotland—is ideal for both school and community use. To put that figure in context, I point out that the total number of pitches in Scotland is  estimated at 5,900. As Ken Macintosh made clear, the reduction has therefore been very small—and investment in the upgrading of existing pitches and in the provision of new pitches is improving the quality of sports facilities and increasing their playing capacity, particularly in schools. We are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities on the development of a new school estate strategy, which will be published in the spring. I am confident that that strategy will reflect the commitment of the Government and authorities to creating a school estate that supports the needs of the whole community. As Jamie McGrigor said, it is important that communities take ownership—in its widest sense—of the open spaces in their communities.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

During the Christmas period, partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—teams made a huge effort to get out to Woolworths stores throughout the country. Last week in Parliament, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning put on record her thanks for the support that PACE teams have offered in their work with Woolworths staff. Local PACE teams continue to work with many companies, including those in the retail sector such as Zavvi and Adams Kids.

I assure the member that we will have discussions with any relevant organisations to help shop workers and others through this difficult period. PACE teams are being as flexible as possible so that they can cope with the wide variety and spread throughout the country of shop workers and others who face redundancy. By creating a new national helpline from next month and a revamped website for better information resources, as well as by tasking 80 Skills Development Scotland staff to work jointly with Jobcentre Plus, we believe that we will be able to help those who experience redundancy.

As I said in answer to the previous question, PACE teams are reacting as best they can to help workers who face redundancy.

The objective of citizenship education is to develop in young people the capability for thoughtful and responsible action and participation in all aspects of the community, from local to global. Scottish schools engage very positively with citizenship education and have greater opportunity to do so through the curriculum for excellence, which seeks to enable young people to develop as responsible citizens.

I, too, put on record my sadness at the death of Sir Bernard Crick. I met Sir Bernard, and we had correspondence on citizenship. The Government agrees with the late Sir Bernard that the development of the ethos of citizenship, democracy and the individual's place in society is central to the education of our children and young people. Indeed, one of the overall aims of the curriculum for excellence, which we are implementing with energy and vigour, is to enable young people to become responsible citizens, with respect for others and commitment to participate responsibly in political, economic, social and cultural life.

I hope that the member appreciates that I have been keeping her in the picture as much as possible on the work of the group. I am afraid that I cannot give her an exact timescale, but I know that the group is working speedily to come up with some suggestions.

I give a commitment to write to the member with the precise details of what she asks for. The member is right about the importance of the eco-schools programme. Many schools have embedded it as a central part of the curriculum. An example of that is Shawlands academy, which won the BT Scotland greener schools award. My colleague Fiona Hyslop has visited the school, and I visited it to offer support when it won the United Kingdom sustainable school of the year award. By embedding healthy eating and the eco-schools programme in the school curriculum—centrally, and not just as an add-on—we are showing just how committed we are that the curriculum for excellence should promote active citizenship.

The Scottish Government is making available record levels of capital funding for investment in local authority infrastructure, including schools. Of course, it is for local authorities to decide on their own investment priorities. We are committed to continuing the school building programme. We have already indicated that decisions about future resources will be taken not later than the next spending review. The Scottish Futures Trust has started the process of engaging with individual local authorities to identify appropriate delivery and funding solutions.

It is indeed true that Aberdeenshire has a disproportionately large number of schools in poor or bad condition, and that the member's party has been in control of Aberdeenshire Council for 10 years or more. As a result of pressure from opposition in the council, a bigger commitment has been made to the school estate this year. For example, there is a commitment to replace Alford academy. That will begin to tackle the backlog of schools needing to be replaced in Aberdeenshire. Contrary to what the member suggests, the Government has given record levels of capital to local government. Aberdeenshire Council is at last using that funding for schools.

The member knows that, of the 328 schools that were built under the previous two Executives, fewer than half were built using the PPP programme. Many were built using conventional funding. This Government is well on track towards lifting 100,000 pupils out of poor-quality school buildings. Over the past year, 71 major school building projects were completed.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank all the members who have taken part in this interesting debate. I have appreciated the contributions of members from all parties. As the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning stressed, the key aim of curriculum for excellence is to provide a more progressive educational experience, with a greater focus on skills for learning, life and work. That will improve standards, raise achievement and provide appropriate challenge and stretch for each and every individual; and it will be enhanced by the 16+ learning choices, our new model for  supporting the delivery of the senior phase of the curriculum for excellence and improving other learning pathways. Those policies will better prepare our young people for the positive and sustained post-school destinations in further and higher education and employment that we all want them to achieve. The consultation on the next generation of national qualifications gives us a strong platform for taking those policies forward. We held this debate to give the Parliament the chance to contribute to addressing the opportunities and challenges involved in introducing a qualifications system that supports curriculum for excellence—I believe that members have done that. Mary Mulligan, Claire Baker and Ken Macintosh should realise that that was the purpose of the debate. It is insulting to the 1,800 people who responded to the consultation to say that we are not involving people. Many hundreds of people have given us their ideas. We want to ensure that we do not just present the qualifications to Parliament and that all members are involved in the process of formulating them. I thank those members who have taken on that positive role.

As I said, this is a process. The Ipsos MORI report is collating all the responses for the management board so that it does not have to go through all 1,800 responses. Clearly, however, Margaret Smith and others have gone through a number of the responses in order to inform themselves and take part in this debate. There was general agreement about effective assessment, particularly in relation to literacy and numeracy. The debate focused on assessment for qualifications, but members' contributions reinforced our joint aspiration to have effective teaching and assessment of those key skills for pupils between the ages of three and 18. I wish that Karen Whitefield and Rhona Brankin had listened to the cabinet secretary when she said that we will "ensure that literacy and numeracy are embedded at all stages. For the first time under devolution, all teachers of all subjects at all stages will be responsible for literacy and numeracy."

I will finish my point. Hugh O'Donnell made an important point about how teachers are involved in literacy and numeracy and, in a number of schools that I have visited that have been implementing the curriculum for excellence, the English and maths teachers are engaging with teachers in other subject areas to  make sure that they are all involved in the same process.

I want to make progress. We are ensuring that literacy and numeracy are embedded at all stages.

Educationists are best placed to take that forward. As politicians, we are not going to say how that will be done.

I want to make progress. I was also an educationist.

We agree with that. The outcomes and experiences in literacy and numeracy provide the framework for testing, and any assessment will have to ensure that literacy and numeracy are embedded throughout the curriculum. I particularly liked what Margaret Smith said about learning leading assessment rather than the other way around. Coupled with assessment for learning, which we have already, that is very much the way forward. Christina McKelvie made an important point when she said that pupils and young people must be able to see not just how safe it will be to sit particular exams, but how far they can go, so that each individual is stretched. I hope that today's debate has made it clear that the perceived narrowing of the curriculum is not happening. The general education period of S1 to S3 will allow students to broaden and deepen their learning and, as they progress through S3, they will have opportunities for greater specialisation to enable a smooth transition to qualifications. Making subject decisions at the end of S3 will give pupils a much firmer grasp of and greater commitment to the subjects that they want to study instead of making choices when they are more immature in S2. The senior phase of education will then have to enable our young people to take more qualifications during that period.

No; I want to make progress.  David McLetchie does not make the situation clear when he says that there is poor availability of advanced highers. In fact, record numbers of advanced highers were taken in 2008. The figure was up 5.8 per cent on the 2007 figure. The curriculum for excellence should increase collaboration among schools and partnerships with colleges. As Elizabeth Smith said, we must ensure that there are more partnerships between schools and colleges so that pupils get the opportunity to study the subjects that they want. There are already magnificent examples of partnership working through videoconferencing and the glow programme will greatly enhance those opportunities for young people. There was general agreement on the need to ensure that all young people have the opportunity to develop skills through practical learning. We want to continue to develop skills for work. In our skills strategy, we emphasised the importance of parity of esteem for vocational qualifications and of ensuring that such qualifications are available not just to the less able—which immediately pigeonholes people—but to academic pupils as well, so that they can broaden their range of work. As Christopher Harvie said, work experience is extremely important, too.

Ms MacDonald's point is well made, even though she has just come into the chamber. We are engaging fully with the teacher training establishments in that regard. Marilyn Livingstone made an important point about the involvement of colleges in the qualifications debate. The colleges have been fully involved in the process; indeed, two people have been seconded to ensure that they are fully engaged. As the cabinet secretary said, it is about learning from three to 18. The curriculum for excellence management board includes a great number of people, but we recognise that schools are the bodies that are best placed to communicate the curriculum for excellence agenda to parents. I have attended a number of Saturday workshops for parent council members that have sought to ensure that the curriculum for excellence proposals can be communicated to parents. [ Interruption. ]

The debate has shown that we are keen to ensure that ownership of the curriculum for excellence lies primarily with the education community and wider society, not just with Government. It is crucial that Parliament and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee continue to participate in the debate. The importance of education to Scotland's future demands no less. The debate has highlighted where the main challenges and opportunities lie. With the introduction of the curriculum for excellence, Scottish education is at a crossroads. We are at a point at which the curriculum for excellence can take off and make a significant difference to the attainment of all pupils. We must raise the bar as regards the expectations of all our young people so that they are well equipped to deal with not just the challenges of the current economic climate, but whatever life throws at them.

No, thanks. That will require a higher degree of enthusiasm, drive and professionalism from all of us who are involved in education than ever before. Earlier this afternoon, the Rev Sam Torrens wished us all energy and enthusiasm. Together with our partners in education and the wider community, we as a Government are ready to meet all those challenges. Given the importance of qualifications to the nation's future, we will continue to involve Parliament as we firm up our decisions.

Through Skills Development Scotland, we provide support for learning and skills development in small businesses. Sector skills councils also play an active role in assessing skills and training needs and in influencing education and training provision to ensure that those needs are met. We offer support to small businesses as part of the learndirect Scotland for business programme, which acts as a broker in matching the learning needs of businesses to appropriate solutions. In addition, in the Scottish Enterprise area, help and support are available through the Investors in People improvement programme, which is structured to allow businesses to use it in a way that suits them best, with a mix of approaches that is tailored to business needs, such as one-to-one services, workshops or the bespoke IIP interactive online tool.

The Scottish Government intervenes in skills in a number of ways through Skills Development Scotland, which came out of the skills strategy. If Ms Peattie writes to me on her specific point about hauliers and transport firms, I will see what I can do.

The member makes a fair point. The Scottish Government supports the use of web-based training and e-learning where appropriate. We encourage all businesses that face the challenge that the member mentions to contact their respective sector skills councils and Skills Development Scotland to identify innovative  work-based interventions. We realise that small businesses need more bite-sized courses than full-blown programmes.

The Scottish Government supports all those who work directly with children and young people to prevent and tackle bullying effectively. We provide that support in various ways. We wholly fund respectme, Scotland's anti-bullying service, which provides advice, information, resources, support and training to develop, refresh and support the implementation of anti-bullying policies in schools, local authorities and communities, and to build capacity to prevent and deal effectively with bullying. We also provide funding of £160,000 per year for three years to the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children for the ChildLine bullying helpline that helps children who are directly affected by bullying.

All bullying, wherever it happens, is unacceptable and must be tackled. Bullying is not, and should never be seen as, a normal part of growing up. The Government is committed to tackling and preventing bullying. Last Monday, I launched Scotland's anti-bullying week and respectme's awareness-raising campaign, which is called you can make a difference. One of the prize-winners in the special schools category was a severely autistic girl, and the audience was extremely supportive. Where children are made aware of anti-bullying when we raise awareness throughout the school and community, we can deal effectively with bullying of any sort.

I am not aware that any anti-bullying initiatives have been stopped. As my colleague said, funding to local government has increased, so the money is there for it to use. Given that take-up of the anti-bullying resources has been widespread throughout the country, I am  not aware that the issue is not firmly on the agenda of schools and local authorities.

I thank the member for promoting what is being done in East Ayrshire and I hope that he will join me in congratulating Aberdeenshire Council on having a Gaelic teacher in the schools in upper Deeside, where the crofters used to speak the Gaelic not that many decades ago. Does he agree that it is incumbent on us all to highlight the number of job opportunities that there are for people who speak Gaelic fluently, not just in the media industry but in teaching? Pauline McNeill highlighted the fact that we need Gaelic teachers not just in primary schools but increasingly in secondary schools, where they teach their subject specialism in the Gaelic. There are also opportunities for translators and people who work for public agencies. The opportunities are immense.

Although parts of the construction sector, such as house building, are clearly being affected  by the economic downturn, it is important to recognise that employment in the sector remains at the same level as this time last year, which gives the industry a good base upon which to retain and redeploy skills. The sector, led by the Scottish construction forum, has identified the need for a well-trained and skilled workforce to ensure future success. The industry-led development of a new suite of modern apprenticeship frameworks at levels 2, 3, 4 and 5 demonstrates that commitment. The Scottish Government supports the industry's efforts through a range of initiatives. We are accelerating our investment in affordable housing and looking to bring forward capital investment plans. An additional 1,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities have been created in the construction and engineering sectors. Those measures will provide stability in the sector during the economic downturn.

As the member is convener of the cross-party group on construction, I understand her interest in the matter. However, £1 billion-worth of construction work is under way on major projects, including school projects that have started during the past 18 months. As I have already said, we are investing £100 million in affordable housing and are working closely with the construction industry on the skills issue to make sure that we minimise the effects of the economic downturn.

Will the member take an intervention?

Teacher employment is a matter for individual local authorities. We have had no negotiations on the subject with Aberdeen City Council. However, I understand that the council's budget monitoring board recently agreed to the recruitment of 59 additional teachers and a further five to provide maternity cover.

The member seems not to have listened to my reply. Just in the past week, Aberdeen City Council's monitoring board has agreed to the recruitment of 59 additional teachers and a further five to provide maternity cover. Clearly, as we all know, the council is in a difficult financial position, which it inherited. I congratulate it on the speed of its recovery. I think that it will come to realise, as it has done recently, that it will need extra teachers. Richard Baker will no doubt have seen an interesting press article in which a prominent trade union leader states that Aberdeen should have "an honest appraisal of the number of city schools required", which implies that the union agrees that there may need to be more closures.

Ministers and Government officials have met council representatives on a number of occasions. Issues relating to school buildings have been discussed at those meetings.

As they say in the other place, I refer to the answer that my colleague gave earlier. I reiterate that it is up to the City of Edinburgh Council to decide how it spends its money. Almost £3 billion, including an extra £115 million in 2008-09, is available to the 32 local authorities for investment in infrastructure, including schools. Like everyone else, we recognise the impact of the credit crunch but, in the end, decisions about school building rest with the City of Edinburgh Council. I am sure that the extra investment that has been provided and the money that will come from the Scottish Futures Trust will enable the City of Edinburgh Council, along with other councils, to continue investing in schools. As the cabinet secretary said, in the Government's first year, 11 capital projects, to the value of more than £1 billion, have been delivered in collaboration with local authorities. That is a very good start.

I put on record again the Government's welcome for the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's identification of tourism as an important industry for Scotland. That supports the Government's thinking, as set out in our economic strategy, that tourism is a key sector for sustainable economic growth. In holding its inquiry, the committee increased attention on the main tourism issues and on how the industry can work to achieve the shared  ambition of a 50 per cent growth in revenues. The Government was impressed by the inquiry's depth and by the professional way in which it was conducted. We welcome the input from representatives of the industry and the public sector, and the work of the committee, its clerks and its advisers in drawing that together. As members know, the Government's response to the committee's report was published last week. I am sure that many members have studied it, but I will reaffirm its main points. It is pleasing that much of the committee's report was positive about tourism and that the Government agreed with the vast majority of recommendations. I am sure that that is a sign that tourism in Scotland is in generally good shape and that all parties are working well together. I contrast that with the recent equivalent committee report on tourism at Westminster, which contained significant criticism of the United Kingdom Government and its tourism policies. We agreed that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee correctly identified the key issues in its report. We were pleased that the committee concluded that the 50 per cent growth ambition should be retained. That target, which was established after much discussion and was adopted by the industry, is a useful focus for partnership working throughout the industry and between the private and public sectors. However, it would be unrealistic to ignore the prevailing economic circumstances, which differ from those when the ambition was adopted. Many in the industry have questioned the wisdom of having the target when they feel that tourism must run hard to stand still or survive. Achieving the ambition should be a longer-term plan, even though it is clear that short-term growth might be unfeasible in the current climate. It is worth noting that VisitScotland has already upweighted its marketing of Scotland in UK markets by bringing forward some £1.5 million of marketing spend. Many members might recently have seen television adverts encouraging everyone to visit Scotland and its different parts. The work on homecoming Scotland 2009 will help to boost tourism. There is no doubt that we can make 2009 a special year for Scots and for those who love Scotland. The programme of events is growing and the word is spreading. We expect to show the world that we can throw a great party, and we expect many visitors to come to join in. The year will also provide an opportunity to show the world what Scotland is made of. We agree that it is important for the public sector agencies that support tourism to face in the same direction and work together closely. We will consider whether further alignment is necessary,  in the first instance through more effective joint working. I will not repeat everything that the Government said in its response, but I will talk about the skills issues, which Iain Smith correctly identified are important. The committee expressed concern about the volume and relevance of the qualifications that are on offer to the hospitality industry in Scotland. Our skills strategy makes it clear that the skills that individuals learn must be the skills that employers want. Providers of qualifications need to engage employers properly in the development and design of qualifications at all levels, but some qualifications have not benefited from such engagement. It is unfortunate that some evidence to the committee on qualifications was inaccurate. The committee was told that more than 4,000 qualifications are on offer to the tourism industry, but that figure was later revised to 400. That is still incorrect—the figure is likely to be closer to 100, if we are talking about Scottish Qualifications Authority qualifications and higher education courses. People 1 st 's sector qualifications strategy acknowledges that much more progress has been made in Scotland than in England on rationalising qualifications in the industry. It states that the completion rate for apprenticeships in the sector is considerably higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK and that it intends to learn from the Scottish system to improve the performance of apprenticeships in other countries. Employers are in a strong position to influence SQA provision, given that the agency now involves sector skills councils in the design, development and validation of its qualifications.

Skills Development Scotland, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the SQA and People 1 st are working together to consider that. The member may also have noted that level 2 apprenticeships are being introduced in the hospitality and tourism sector.

I must make progress. Of course, the qualifications that are on offer matter little if young people choose not to enter the industry in the first place. The committee acknowledged the real and perceived barriers to people choosing to enter and remain in the hospitality and tourism sector. Fundamentally, that is something that employers in the industry need to address by making the industry attractive to young people. For example, they can offer successful work experience and industry placements, and treat school pupils who have weekend and evening jobs as potential long-term recruits to the industry. There are good examples of schools, colleges and universities working closely with the hospitality industry. For example, not far from here, the HBOS museum on the Mound is working in partnership with the Royal high school on an excellence in education through business links programme. Such partnerships help young people to become more aware of the tourism industry. The Giuliano's on the Shore restaurant has worked with Pilrig Park school to help all first to third-year secondary students to design and make their own pizza—a fun challenge from a real employer and one that relates to the world of work. We need more such examples. Young people in Scotland are positive about their country. Such experiences with employers build on that confidence and often translate into young people entering an industry that they had not previously considered. However, such examples are the exception rather than the norm. More employers need to engage with schools, colleges and universities to bring industry relevance into the education setting. The committee concluded that Scotland should establish a small number of dedicated hotel schools along the lines of those in Switzerland. Leading figures in the industry are developing a proposal for such a centre of excellence. I welcome this excellent example of an employer-led and industry-funded initiative to tackle our skills needs. North Highland College, in partnership with other colleges and the UHI Millennium Institute, is in the process of establishing a hotel training school in Dornoch to provide the half a million people in northern Scotland with access to university-level courses. The proposed centre for hospitality and tourism will be a training facility that will be run as a fully operational hotel, occupying the refurbished Burghfield house hotel. The college will lead a new degree programme in tourism and hospitality management and offer skills-based qualifications in areas such as front of house. Good work is being done in colleges.  I repeat that the Government places importance on supporting the tourism industry in achieving the shared ambition for growth. We welcome the committee's report and its general support for the policies that are already being followed. I look forward to hearing members' views on this important issue.

Yes.

I thank Nanette Milne for her supplementary question. Every year, 6,000 teachers are due to retire, so we obviously need the probationary teachers. A teaching qualification in primary education prepares teachers to teach equally well any child between the ages of three and 12, and all teaching qualifications are designed so that successful students achieve the same standard for initial teacher education, so there is no reason why a new teacher should not be just as able as a more experienced teacher to motivate and inspire children in P1 to P3. In addition, it is up to headteachers to assign teachers to classes as they deem appropriate.

I thank Nigel Don for his question. I am aware that some authorities have difficulty in recruiting teachers to some areas, which is why we asked the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to allocate more teacher training places to the Crichton and Aberdeen teacher training institutions so that we can ensure that perhaps more teachers go into training locally and are therefore likely to take up posts in their own area.

The school building programme continues apace, with the Government and authorities putting £2 billion between them into schools infrastructure. Since May 2007, seven school projects comprising 45 schools have reached financial close and a further four are in the pipeline. Combined, the projects have a capital value of £1  billion and are financially supported by decisions of this Scottish National Party Government. In order to secure investment in schools and other infrastructure we are, under the current local government settlement, providing local authorities with almost £3 billion of capital resources over three years, which represents an increase of £115 million for this and the next two years. Our infrastructure investment plan shows that, over the next five years, £1 billion will be invested in large-scale schools projects alone. As the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has just said, we expect during the life of the Parliament to deliver 250 schools, which will benefit 100,000 pupils. We will also consider the future of the school estate through the development of a new school estate strategy and the Scottish Futures Trust.

I remind the member that local authorities commission and build schools. Anything that has been produced, planned, built or completed since May 2007 has been paid for by this Government.

The full cost of repaying the 19 public-private partnership projects that reached financial close and were approved by the previous Administration up to May 2007 will be £107 million per annum. The previous Administration left only a budget of £100 million for the schools PPP  projects. As a result, even for the projects that that Administration had approved, there was a funding shortfall that this Government has had to make good.

The cabinet secretary did visit schools in Midlothian during the summer—she is, after all, a Lothian regional member. I, too, have visited schools in Midlothian and have had recent correspondence on various issues with Midlothian councillors.

Will the member give way?

In lodging the motion that we are debating today, the Labour Party has sunk to new depths. By initiating a debate on the basis of a newspaper article whose accuracy it has failed to check, it has shown just how lacking in flair and imagination it has become. Labour members' attitude is to say, "Och, if we can't think of anything else, let's have a go at the hoary old chestnuts of class sizes and teacher numbers. We'll get a cheap political headline even in the face of the real picture." They fail to recognise that in June last year the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning put in place funding for an extra 300 teachers; I point out to Mary Mulligan that that money has now been mainstreamed into local government funding. They fail to recognise that in June this year the cabinet secretary set up a working group, to report within four months, on teacher workforce planning and on whether the current policy is fit for purpose.

Mary Mulligan knows that in the concordat local government agreed to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000 in the face of falling rolls. Labour members fail to recognise that, as the cabinet secretary indicated in her speech, class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 are falling in local authority areas throughout the country, regardless of whether that is specified in local outcome agreements, because local authorities know that reducing class sizes is national Government policy.

Will the member never accept responsibility for the fact that the decisions that Aberdeen City Council now faces should have been taken on the Labour Party's watch? Labour members are unable to admit that the vast majority of new teachers know well and  accept that the Government must provide a supply of teachers ready for deployment throughout the year and throughout the country. Directors of education, the GTC, education ministers and others make that perfectly clear whenever they meet probationers and newly qualified teachers. Aileen Campbell quoted Murdo Maciver, who said that most probationers obtain permanent jobs. On 29 August, John Stodter of ADES said in the Times Educational Supplement Scotland : "You want some competition—you don't want a market where everybody gets a job easily. If folk were more willing to move as they were in our day, they might have less of a problem". The Opposition parties would have us think that it is outrageous that some teachers go to work in England or further afield, but it is a well-known fact that for decades Scottish and Welsh teachers were the backbone of the teaching profession south of the border. The speeches of Opposition members have been sadly lacking in practical suggestions, other than throwing some non-existent pot of money at their perceived problem. Spending some time in different schools can be a useful experience for teachers, as it enables them to see different approaches to learning and teaching in different environments. The prospects for newly qualified teachers in Scotland are excellent. They are entering a profession that faces exciting and challenging opportunities in the way in which we deliver education in our schools. They will enjoy a professional autonomy that has not been available to teachers for a generation. Yesterday the Civitas think-tank became the latest body to support smaller class sizes; at the same time, an OECD report noted that we still have some of the largest class sizes, compared with our competitors. Today it is argued in The Scotsman that smaller class sizes are indisputably a good thing. Just imagine the outcry if by next spring there were not enough teachers in the system to cover for illness, retirements and maternity leave—would the Opposition have the brass neck to say that we had underestimated need? The Government is travelling in the right direction, a fact recognised by the Scottish people, even if the Opposition parties in the chamber are slow on the uptake.

Recent discussions with HMIE have covered the normal business of professional advice and updating on key operational matters.

I thank the member for her supplementary question. Of course, I will always keep an open mind on the subject to which she refers. However, HMIE's work is already subject to a significant amount of independent review. It has been reviewed as part of the international Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development study, and as part of the Crerar review. It is also subject to scrutiny by Audit Scotland and the Scottish Parliament. The independent reviews report the important views of parents, pupils and teachers. The figures show that 87 per cent of teachers rated inspections good or very good in terms of helpfulness to their school. Over the same period, 98 per cent of parents found the inspection of their children's schools helpful.

Class configurations in particular schools are matters for individual local authorities. Under the terms of our concordat with local government, we will work towards reducing primary 1 to 3 classes to a maximum of 18 as quickly as possible.

As I said in my initial reply, it is entirely up to local authorities how they configure classes; it is their responsibility. I understand that the council in Hugh Henry's area is refocusing its attention on early years and that all parties in the council supported that proposal. We are glad, as a Government, that that council is in line with the central Government strategy.

Will the member give way on that point?

I offer apologies on behalf of Stewart  Maxwell, who stayed for Jackson Carlaw's speech but was not able to stay longer. I congratulate Jackson Carlaw on securing the debate and on his powerful and thought-provoking speech. A debate on Holocaust education in Scotland provides an opportunity for the Parliament to reflect on the horrors of that period in history and to consider our role in ensuring that, through education, it never happens again. As Jackson Carlaw said, our Jewish communities have lived here for many years—they were one of Scotland's first immigrant communities. Their contribution to our national life has been significant; they are, indeed, one of the threads in the tartan of Scottish society. Scotland's commitment to recognise all people as equals was demonstrated as long ago as 1320, when it was woven into the declaration of Arbroath, which said that, regardless of race or religion, "There is neither weighing nor distinction of Jew and Greek, Scotsman or Englishman". The Scottish Government recognises the distinctive character and history of our Jewish community. We understand the paramount importance for all the people of Scotland of commemorating the Holocaust. Of course it is important to remember the atrocities that Europe's Jewish communities experienced during the terrible period that we now refer to as the Holocaust but, as several members have mentioned, other communities also suffered, and it is important that that, too, is remembered. Disabled people, Gypsies, and members of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities lost their lives in large numbers, and our Holocaust memorial day commemorations in Scotland have always remembered them, too. We also remember other holocausts and genocides of more recent times, such as those in Bosnia and Rwanda. Disturbingly, even the unbelievable horror of the Holocaust was not enough to stop people again trying to eliminate an entire community or ethnic group. There can be no stronger message about why we must remember and why we must educate young people on the need to ensure that such events never happen again. The visits to Auschwitz-Birkenau that are organised by the Holocaust Educational Trust, to which I have been speaking, are one of a number of excellent opportunities that are provided for young people to learn about the Holocaust. I would like to make it clear that this Government has certainly not refused funding for such school visits. On the contrary, we have provided record funding and freed up local authority budgets for  education. As Jackson Carlaw and others have said, the United Kingdom announcement did not generate additional funding for Scotland at the time; the Treasury has confirmed that. Furthermore, the previous Scottish Administration did not provide schools with any funding for visits to Auschwitz-Birkenau. I agree with Liz Smith that schools should be able to make their own judgments on the matter.

We did not receive a Barnett consequential for the Holocaust Educational Trust. Learning about the Holocaust can and does take place on other school visits and in other contexts, such as on visits to the Jewish Museum in Berlin to examine racist behaviour and to the Anne Frank house in Amsterdam, which John Park mentioned, to learn about forced migration. It is schools' prerogative to decide the best way for their pupils to learn about the Holocaust. Many more children and young people visit concentration camps through other means that schools promote. Together with the Holocaust Educational Trust visits, those visits are valuable. As most members have said, such visits are life changing. In addition to supporting Holocaust memorial day every year since 2001 and making a commitment to support a national commemoration day in January 2009, the Scottish Government has provided school resources for Holocaust education and has funded the production of "Testimony"—an exhibition about the Holocaust that provides a powerful and emotive experience and which includes personal testimonies of Scotland's survivors. "Testimony" can be used in schools or in other locations such as community centres and libraries to raise awareness about the Holocaust's reality. The Scottish Government was happy to confirm the previous Administration's commitment to support a permanent Holocaust museum, to which the motion refers. I understand that the Jewish community has reconsidered that proposal and that it intends to suggest an alternative option. We will obviously wish to consider any new proposal carefully. Our work on commemorating the Holocaust is part of our wider work to tackle racism, religious intolerance and all forms of discrimination, as John Park said. The story of the Holocaust provides the most powerful example of the terrible things that can happen when racism and religious intolerance are taken to extremes. However, every day in  Scotland, people experience abuse, discrimination and disadvantage because of their faith, skin colour or ethnic background. Racism, religious intolerance, homophobia and all other forms of discrimination damage individuals, communities and Scotland as a whole. We know the importance of ensuring that our young people understand those issues and we will do all that we can to create a fairer Scotland for them to inherit.   Meeting closed at 17:53.

The draft outcomes for the curriculum for excellence that have been released over the course of this school year contain rich opportunities for schools to use outdoor education and outdoor learning to achieve the outcomes that are sought. Our new framework for learning and teaching—"Building the curriculum 3: A framework for learning and teaching"—which the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will launch on 10 June, will also provide a tremendous opportunity for outdoor education and learning to flourish. The Minister for Community Safety and I led a summit with stakeholders on this issue on 5 March. Building on that, we are setting up a strategic advisory group to explore creative ways of delivering outdoor education, sharing good examples across the country and encouraging schools to provide more outdoor education opportunities.

I assure Robin Harper that the money for the ranger service is still available. We are rationalising the funding streams to local government, not cutting the funding. The funding will come through the local government settlement  instead of from SNH, so countryside rangers will still be available.

I assure Murdo Fraser that I am willing to meet him and his colleague. I have been waiting for a request for such a meeting: I had understood that Robin Harper, Murdo Fraser and other members wanted to meet me about outdoor education. I have not had that request, but I would be delighted to meet Murdo Fraser and his colleague on their own.

The detail of the school building programme in Edinburgh is a matter for the city council. Current information suggests that it will have a further 11 new schools either completed or nearing completion by 2011.

I am not sure whether there was a question in that, but I can help George Foulkes by saying that Mr MacAskill was referring to the nearly £3 billion of capital resources that was  made available to local authorities over three years to secure investment in schools and other infrastructure. In Edinburgh's case, the total over the three years was £2.2 million in the first year and up to £65 million in the final year. [ Interruption. ] Mr MacAskill was saying that Edinburgh has been given the capital and can use it for schools if it wishes.

We are a Government with a strong and real sense of purpose—to increase sustainable economic growth. We are a Government with energy, ideas and vision, and total confidence in Scotland's ability to succeed. That is why we will achieve our goals. Scotland's people have confidence in us, and that is why we are delivering. It is inconceivable that we would seek to impose English solutions to Scottish challenges. I am delighted to have the opportunity in this debate to outline what we achieved in our first year in Government and to reinforce our ambitious and challenging vision for a more vibrant and responsive learning system. We have laid strong foundations and have in place strong policies that will deliver benefits to all individuals in Scotland. We are not alone in thinking that—we have been inundated with support from a cross-section of the business community and stakeholders in the learning system. We are a Government that listens and responds and will not shy away from taking difficult decisions.

Forgive me if I am wrong, but I remember modern apprenticeships being slashed  and training providers going into liquidation across the country because of a crisis in Scottish Enterprise under the Labour Party's watch. We will not play the numbers game, because our young people are far too important for that. Simply providing more apprenticeships, thereby forcing and corralling employers and individuals into the wrong skills programme, will not only dash people's confidence, but bring MAs into disrepute. Lots of interventions are available and it would be wrong to force young people, many of whom could already be disengaged with education, into an MA. We are not in that game. Scotland has a long and proud history of excellence and achievement in education and skills. However, for far too long we have lagged behind the rest of the UK and Europe in economic growth. Now is the time to turn that around and allow Scotland to achieve its full potential. However, that potential will not be realised by importing English solutions or by adopting a target-driven, supply-led skills system. We recognise that we have a key role to play in driving forward our vision to achieve a smarter Scotland. We cannot have a one-size-fits-all approach to the skills intervention menu that Scotland needs. If we are to achieve our vision, we must truly adopt a range of different approaches that reflect our aspiration to have a responsive and relevant learning system. We need to work with all our key partners, delivery agents and employer representatives. To that end, the cabinet secretary and I have met representatives of all the sector skills councils, principals of further education colleges, learners and employers, who all tell us that we are heading in the right direction.

The flexibility that we are providing for learners was welcomed. We are clear about everyone's roles and responsibilities and how we can contribute to upskilling all individuals in Scotland.

I must continue. Government's job is to set the strategic context for the work and that is exactly what we have done. We will not adopt a centralist, target-setting approach, forcing supply-led solutions in order to meet some dreamt-up headline figure. We believe  that it is not enough to focus only on increasing the skills of individuals; we recognise that Scotland already has higher levels of well-qualified individuals—indeed we are ahead of the rest of the UK in that area. As well as maintaining high levels of skills acquisition, we need to improve how we utilise individuals' skills. Making that happen has necessitated change. Standing still was not, and is not, an option. When we launched the skills for Scotland strategy, I described it as a call to action. In the seven months since then, we have made significant progress despite the challenge of a tighter financial settlement from Westminster, which has led us to make tough choices. We have announced changes to the modern apprenticeship programme: we increased the number of individuals undertaking engineering and construction-related MAs by 1,000 and introduced a new life science MA and the opportunity to develop level 2 MAs, which was welcomed by the food and drink industry, among others. In order to provide Skills Development Scotland with the space that it needs to deliver the universally endorsed skills strategy, we are directing all new support for adult MAs to the engineering and construction-related sectors only. We did that to ensure that Skills Development Scotland was not tied into four-year contracts, which would reduce our ability to deliver real change now. Therefore, some MAs that we know did not deliver value for money will not be supported, and we have directed the sector skills councils and Skills Development Scotland to scope out over the next year a fuller and more relevant range of skills interventions that employers actually need. This is a real opportunity, and a first step towards a demand-led system. Setting volume-based targets, enshrining entitlements in legislation and forcing employers and individuals into skills interventions such as modern apprenticeships is not the answer. We believe that we have struck the right balance between responding to the needs of employers and initiating substantial changes to our learning infrastructure to accommodate the dramatic change that has been universally welcomed. I move amendment S3M-1951.3, to leave out from "the Scottish Government's skills strategy" to end and insert: "under the previous administration, Scotland's growth rate and productivity levels lagged behind the United Kingdom and believes that this indicates that a new approach to skills and the economy is necessary; notes the widespread business and industry support for the Scottish Government's skills strategy and believes that government's role is to respond to demand from employers, to improve skills utilisation and support individuals' skills development."

The Scottish Government is committed to the future of advanced highers, as underlined by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in her statement to Parliament on 24 April 2008. The Government considers that advanced highers "will continue to play an important role both in ensuring that our most able learners have an appropriate level of challenge and in securing the status of S6."— [ Official Report , 24 April 2008; c 7866.]

As the member is a former education minister, he will know that it is the responsibility of individual schools and local authorities to determine the delivery of qualifications in response to local circumstances and their students' needs. That is as it has always been. The provision of advanced highers in the Renfrewshire Council area depends on the individual schools. This year's arrangements are exactly the same as they were in the past. The advanced highers on offer will depend on the choices that students make, and that will then determine the consortium arrangements across the Renfrewshire Council area.

Schools use many innovative systems in order to offer increased provision of subjects. For example, the SCHOLAR programme, which was developed by Heriot-Watt University, provides the opportunity for pupils to take advanced highers in several subjects through computer-based learning with support from teachers. With the continuing uptake of the glow project, such arrangements will be rolled out. There are innovative ways in which students can study for a range of advanced highers.

The rate of pupils staying on for secondary 6 has remained broadly consistent in recent years. The uptake of advanced highers has also remained consistent. The Scottish Government has increased the budget to local authorities by 5 per cent, 4.1 per cent and 3.4 per cent in the next three years. As I said in my response to Hugh Henry, it is the responsibility of individual schools and local authorities to determine how they manage and deliver qualifications.

The City of Edinburgh Council has statutory responsibility for the provision and maintenance of school buildings in its area. Questions regarding investment priorities and the allocation of resources for individual schools are matters for the council.

As I said, that is a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council. The city council has been given £202 million in capital funding over the next three years, which is made up of £70 million this year, nearly £67 million in 2009-10 and £65  million the following year. The council can use those capital moneys for school buildings if it so wishes. We said that we would match the previous Administration's plans for school buildings and we must find the money to deliver that. Since May 2007, we have signed off seven projects, delivering 45 schools. Schools are being built throughout Scotland. We know that, by the end of this session, around 250 schools will have been delivered under this Government.

Estimates suggest that there are more than 10,000 grandparents and other relatives who have responsibility for looking after children. For the first time, the Scottish Government has made resources available for local authorities to pay a weekly financial allowance to the kinship carers of more than 2,000 looked-after children. In addition, local authorities have existing powers to provide support to children in need. All kinship carers will benefit from the Scottish Government's funding of a national advice and information service by Citizens Advice Scotland and our work with United Kingdom ministers to improve access to benefits. In addition, we are developing jointly with COSLA an early years framework, which will include support for families.

COSLA and the councils will work with the Scottish Government to deliver the commitments that are set out in the concordat. Obviously, local authorities will implement the commitment as soon as they possibly can. They  have been provided with early guidance on implementation. It is up to local authorities to provide support for kinship carers. Where a looked-after child is already living with a kinship carer and the authority's approval process is in place, local authorities have some discretion on the provision of funding to kinship carers.

The member is correct; those families are being supported. The previous two Executives had eight years in which to help those kinship carers; they have not been helped in the past, but they are receiving help from the Government now.

Local authorities are responsible for the detail of decisions on capital investment in school buildings. As our recently published infrastructure investment plan said, we expect the funding and rebuilding or refurbishment of about 250 schools to be delivered or secured in the current parliamentary session.

I hoped that the member would welcome the number of schools that will be built  under the Government. I leave his reference to the Scottish futures trust to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth.

As I have said, there are methods other than the Scottish futures trust for building schools. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, launched a consultation paper on the Scottish futures trust on 20 December. The aim of the consultation, which ended on 14 March, was to set out the Scottish Government's thinking on the Scottish futures trust, so that we can deliver a better deal for taxpayers than does the costly private finance initiative.

The Scottish Government is matching and funding the previous Administration's school building programme brick for brick. We expect to deliver about 250 new or refurbished schools in this parliamentary session through a range of funding mechanisms. Since May 2007, we have signed off funding for seven local authority projects that involve rebuilding or refurbishing 45 schools, and 14 of the schools are part of projects that are based on the non-profit-distributing model. [ Interruption. ]

Four further projects will take the total to more than 50. The local government settlement provides for significant growth in the capital resources for schools and other forms of local authority infrastructure—almost £3 billion over the next three years, including an additional £115 million in 2008-09.

Forty-five schools in 10 months is fairly good, and we will get 14 schools in the next few months. That does not include the other schools that will be built because of the £3 billion that has been given to local government, which it has warmly welcomed, to refurbish and build schools and other local authority infrastructure.

The previous Administration's contracts were negotiated under the private finance initiative model. We agreed to continue them because many of the projects were too far down the road to get away from that expensive model, but no funding was in place for further projects or schools. We will ensure that the previous Labour Administration's commitment on schools will be not only met but exceeded.

We have agreed an historic concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that enables local authorities to maintain teacher numbers at a time of falling school rolls. Under that concordat, local government has agreed to make year-on-year progress on reducing primary 1 to primary 3 class sizes to a maximum of 18  pupils, which will increase employment opportunities for primary teachers. Local authorities must take account of such factors when they recruit teachers.

As the member will be aware, we inherited a situation in which newly trained teachers were finding it difficult to find employment, which is why we took early action by providing an additional £9 million for 2007-08. Local authority returns show that 245 full-time equivalent teachers were employed as a result of those extra funds. The Government supports Scotland's schools and its education system, which is why, in a tight financial climate, we have increased local government's budget by 5 per cent, 4.1 per cent and 3.4 per cent over the next three years.

Does the member accept that the debate has been one of a series on the curriculum for excellence? Given the sea change that we want the curriculum for excellence to bring about in our education system, it is vital that all of us become ambassadors for the curriculum for excellence, including its international aspect.

Will the member accept that a visit to Auschwitz and other concentration camps by one or two pupils from a school is not the only way in which pupils can learn about the Holocaust, and that through the curriculum for excellence and various strands of the curriculum, more pupils can learn about the Holocaust's consequences? In their activities weeks, many schools provide trips to Germany that include visits to concentration camps, which also allow more pupils to learn about the Holocaust.

I am delighted to be able to introduce this debate on international education. As members know, the Government is ambitious for Scotland's young people. Part of building a smarter Scotland and a thriving economy is giving our next generation the skills for learning, skills for work and skills for life to succeed in the globalised economy in which we now live. I am sure that that is something on which all members can agree. One of our aims within the smarter Scotland objectives is to ensure that all our young people are outward looking and confident about themselves and their nation, and that they have a modern and enterprising world view. In order to achieve that aim, our education system needs to provide them with knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it—which is a thread that runs through the curriculum for excellence for all young people at all stages of their learning. We must ensure that our young people understand, and can respond to, the challenges that are presented by globalisation. If the curriculum is to be excellent, it must incorporate an international perspective; if it does not, our society and economy will be poorer. The Government is, therefore, committed to ensuring that an international education is part of the experience for young people in all our schools. We are taking action on three main fronts. First, we are changing learning and teaching. International education is not an add-on, and the curriculum for excellence is the ideal vehicle to deliver international education in schools and to equip young people with a modern and enterprising Scottish world view. The experiences and outcomes that are currently the subject of engagement and trialling in schools have been written such that they will provide ample opportunity for learning and teaching from an international perspective. For example, one of the draft social studies outcomes is that "Having explored the globalisation of trade," the young person will be able to "explain the interdependence of different parts of the world and assess the impacts for providers, consumers and the environment."  That provides opportunities galore to examine the scientific, ethical and human issues that are connected with global trade and sustainable development.

I am sure that the baby will not be thrown out with the bath water. An understanding of linguistic diversity is an integral part of what we mean by an international education. It is not just about learning modern languages in a traditional sense although, as our commitment to the introduction of a Scottish baccalaureate in languages demonstrates, we want young Scottish people to be ambitious in that regard. If we do not prepare our young people to cope with linguistic diversity, they will be at a disadvantage if they want to make the positive transition to working in the international arena. I hope that the new curriculum will enthuse young people and teachers alike to explore the riches of languages and to use them as a tool to understand the world better. On the reference in the Liberal Democrats' amendment to a national languages strategy, I hope that they see that language learning will be embedded as an outcome of the languages strategy. It will be up to schools to decide how best to develop teaching of languages. Last Friday, I attended the launch of the report on the effective provision of pre-school education project at Walker Road primary school in Torry. The lessons that have been learned from that project will be applied throughout Scotland. Secondly, we are simplifying the institutional and policy landscape. We want to ensure that coherent and concise advice is provided to schools and teachers, instead of schools receiving myriad competing messages from different bodies, which causes confusion. We are making explicit the linkages between international education, education for sustainable development, citizenship and modern languages. Thirdly, we want to see partnership working. Many bodies are involved in education: we want to ensure that they work together in partnership. The Government has charged Learning and Teaching Scotland with taking the lead on that. It has key responsibilities for developing and supporting the curriculum for excellence and it runs the Scottish  continuing international professional development scheme. LTS works in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, the General Teaching Council for Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority, as well as with the British Council and the Scottish Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research, to deliver that vision.

I assure Jack McConnell that we are aware of the concerns that he has raised already with my colleagues and that work is continuing on trying to come to a suitable arrangement. On the Labour Party amendment that has been lodged by Ken Macintosh, I say to him that we are not completely clear that Scotland has received the Barnett consequentials to which he refers in his amendment. He will know that the curriculum in Scotland is not prescribed, as it is down south. It is the responsibility of each and every local authority and school to consider how study opportunities such as a visit to Auschwitz concentration camp—to which the Labour amendment refers—might contribute to meeting the agreed national outcomes. A number of schools have visited Auschwitz; last year, I was invited to join one such trip, but was unfortunately asked too late in the day and had other commitments. However, I have committed to going on any further trip to Auschwitz with school pupils that might be arranged. No one can doubt the importance of China in today's world and I am pleased to say that Learning and Teaching Scotland recently signed an agreement with Hanban, the Office of Chinese Language Council International, which includes the setting up of eight Confucius classrooms or hubs, serving 14 local authorities. Those will enable Scottish pupils to gain a greater appreciation of Chinese heritage, language and culture, thereby enhancing their capacity to become international citizens.  Yester primary school in East Lothian has links with Kuvansin koulu primary school in central Finland. The pupils discuss health, eating, leisure and climate change through a blog and through discussions with their Finnish friends. In one particular case, a Yester pupil who has additional support needs was motivated to write long comments to the Finnish class, something that he would not have attempted before. Grantown grammar school in the Highlands has started joint curriculum projects with Xinying middle school in Kunming, China. They have chosen to concentrate on music, art and English as those are subjects in which both schools have an interest, and it means that they do not rely too heavily on written communication. Fintry primary school in Stirling has established a school link with the Gambia, and uses cross-curricular learning to enrich learning and teaching. When asked the difference between us and the African children, a primary 7 pupil responded that African children were "rich in happiness but poor in money, whereas we are rich in money but poor in happiness." I am sure that members are aware of many other inspiring examples of links and international education in schools in their constituencies. However, it is essential that that happens in all our schools; all young people deserve those opportunities, not just some of them. As Jack McConnell indicated, Scotland has prominent links with Malawi, and many Scottish schools—more than were expected—have taken up the challenge to link with schools in Malawi. The world in which our young people are growing up is very different from the world when we were at school. It is essential that young people have opportunities to develop an international perspective in their education and to develop the cultural insight, confidence and linguistic skills that will help them to understand and respect other peoples, and to seize opportunities in a rapidly changing world. We strongly believe that the curriculum for excellence is the ideal vehicle to enable teachers to use international education to enrich young people's learning. Pupils are inspired and interested in the issues: they are regarded as enjoyable, different, stimulating and cool. If they are engaged, they will be more likely to prosper and become the effective contributors, responsible citizens, confident individuals and successful learners that we want them to be. We need that if we are to achieve a smarter Scotland. However, more important, young people deserve it for themselves in order to improve their self-esteem, life chances and opportunities in this globalised world.  I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of preparing young people for life in today's increasingly globalised society; agrees that all our young people should have an international education with opportunities to develop a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it; congratulates the many schools across Scotland that have made and continue to make links with schools across the world, and agrees that the Curriculum for Excellence is the ideal vehicle to deliver international education in schools and equip young people with an understanding of, and the skills for, the modern world.

The General Teaching Council for Scotland's survey of post-probation teachers in October 2007 showed that 87.8 per cent of respondents had gained employment as a teacher. The GTC will carry out a further survey next month, which will show the position closer to the end of the school year.

I will answer the second part of the member's question first. Renfrewshire Council has allocated £1 million for class-size reduction in early years and £0.5 million to increase the hours of nursery education for every three to four-year-old. That is not counting the efficiency savings that the council can recoup and reinvest, which it could not do in the past. We knew that there would be a problem—inherited from the previous Executive—with the employment rate among post-probation teachers this year, which is why we took early action to provide an additional £9 million to local authorities so that they could employ the equivalent of 245 full-time teachers. The situation would have been much worse if the Government had not acted.

That is precisely what we believe and know that we will be able to achieve with the concordat and the single outcome agreements that we have with local authorities. It will now be much easier to have a better knowledge of local authorities' requirements for teacher employment.

Any proposal to alter the catchment area of a school requires statutory consultation with parents and others. That applies whether only one, or more than one, authority is involved.

I am aware of the specific issue in the St Ninian's catchment area. School admissions policies are a matter for local authorities and ministers have no role in them. It is not for minister to adjudicate in such matters. Ministers might have a role if there is a formal proposal to change the school's catchment area, and the school concerned is more than 80 per cent full, which is the case at St Ninian's. It is not for ministers to advise, and parents can, of course, take legal advice if they wish.

School placements are a matter for local authorities. Parents have a right to appeal  the authority's decision in the local appeals committee.

One of the four key capacities of the curriculum for excellence is educating all our young people to be responsible citizens.

We will not introduce citizenship ceremonies for young people in Scotland. There is no support for such a ceremony among the vast majority of our parents and young people. I totally agree that the responsible citizenship capacity in the curriculum for excellence is the way that we should go. In terms of diversity, I had great pleasure in attending yesterday's graduation ceremony for new Scots who, instead of having to take an oath of allegiance, were congratulated on completing a Skillnet course that will help them to  play their full role in Scotland. That is the way that we want to go.

Will the member accept that schools of ambition get extra financial resources and support from central Government? We provide that support not just to failing schools that have gone onto the schools of ambition programme but to other schools in the same situation.

The debate has been interesting. It strikes me that we have reached a consensus. We all agree that the schools of ambition programme is achieving exactly what it set out to do, which was to raise ambition, instil self-belief and confidence, improve life chances for pupils and lead the way for all schools to do the same. When we took office, we promised to bring a new consensus approach to government. In that context, when we were making decisions on the current spending round, continuous support for the schools of ambition programme was not questioned. Funding is still ring fenced and directly available to the schools concerned.

Absolutely. Our policy is to complete the programme.  What concerns exist about the programme? Are members concerned that the Scottish Government is scrapping it? We are not. Are they concerned that we do not value it? We do. Are they concerned that we will not spread the learning? We are doing exactly that, and we will continue to do so. All members have at least one school of ambition in their constituency. I hope that all members have visited those schools. I hope that when you visited Newbattle community high school yesterday, Ms Brankin, you apologised for the unnecessary uncertainty that you had caused. I also hope that Ken Macintosh apologised when he wrote to every school of ambition.

Fiona Hyslop wrote to every school of ambition after the erroneous article that has been mentioned was published, and assured them that funding was continuing in this spending round. Recently, I visited Braeview academy in Dundee, which is a school of ambition. I was impressed by the transformation that had taken place there. I have also visited Queensferry high school, and the cabinet secretary has visited Cardinal Newman high school in Karen Whitefield's constituency.

I say to Karen Whitefield, Robert Brown and other Labour members that I am surprised that they think that it is good for Scottish education as a whole to concentrate spending on 52 schools and not to have any ambition for the others. [ Interruption. ]

I will take no lectures on social justice from Cathy Jamieson. We want early intervention in our schools and we want to reduce class sizes in P1 to P3 so that pupils are not allowed to fail and money does not have be spent on picking up the pieces.  Hugh O'Donnell took part in yesterday's debate on the curriculum for excellence, which was more than the Labour Party's education spokesman did. He knows that the curriculum for excellence is designed to raise opportunities for every school, so that every school raises the bar in respect of pupil attainment. Record funding is being made available to local authorities to support that. In the debate we are losing sight of the schools that are involved in the schools of ambition programme and of the people—teachers, staff, parents and business partners—who are working incredibly hard to achieve transformation.

I have already taken interventions. In the debate we are losing sight of the pupils who are contributing and who stand to benefit, and of the communities that are flourishing. I commend every school, teacher, staff member, pupil, parent and community for supporting the schools of ambition programme. They have accepted the gauntlet that has been thrown down and have been willing to take risks and share their experiences with their colleagues. I commend them for transforming things. They know that they are innovating and sharing with others the best practices of schools of ambition, and I am sure that they are dismayed, as I am, that they are being used as pawns in a purely political game and that they are the latest target of a Labour Party scaremongering campaign. Representatives of one school of ambition—St Paul's high school in Glasgow—listened to part of the debate. I know that many more people who are involved in schools of ambition are watching our debate on the Scottish Parliament's website. We can combine as a united Parliament to applaud schools of ambition for their hard work, wish them well with their transformational journey, and ensure that what is learned from them is shared with all schools in Scotland.

I am amazed that Labour initiated a debate on the back of a press article whose accuracy it did not even check. Rhona Brankin was wrong when she spoke on the radio this morning about school buildings, and she was wrong when she spoke about St Ninian's in her speech. The St Ninian's that got the excellent school report is St Ninian's in East Renfrewshire. The school of ambition is St Ninian's in East Dunbartonshire. We can take everything that she says with a pinch of salt. It is important for me to set the record straight with a few facts about the Government's support for the schools of ambition programme. There has never been a question about the Government's support to continue the funding of schools of ambition for the lifetime of the comprehensive spending review. We have increased the commitment to £11.5 million from the previous Administration's spend of £10.6 million. Each of the 52 schools of ambition will still receive at least £100,000 a year for three years. Now is an opportune time to reflect on the origins of the schools of ambition programme, including the reasons why it was set up and the intended outcomes. It was intended to support fast-track transformation in selected secondary schools, which would transform educational outcomes, increase ambition in the schools, instil belief and ambition in pupils and improve life chances. The schools involved would act as  flagships for innovation in their local areas and nationally.

No, thank you. Even at the inception of the schools of ambition programme, it was not universally welcomed. David Eaglesham said that it struck him as a cosmetic exercise and that it was meaningless to target just 20 schools. He said that the proposal was against the traditions of Scottish education and would not be effective. The programme provided a means of testing Scottish schools' capacity to innovate. Supporting them to realise their ambitions and enabling them to do what they always wanted to do has provided a rich source of learning that applies to all schools. I expect that that learning will enable all schools to become schools of ambition. We cannot underestimate the power of peer-to-peer learning in effecting change. We aim to make that the focus of our sharing strategy and to raise awareness of the learning opportunities that are available through schools of ambition in a variety of ways to reach as many different audiences as possible. We are supported in that aim by the Hunter Foundation, which has pledged its help.

You did not take one from me. I am not taking one from you. We have distributed widely the first annual research report on schools of ambition, which outlines the emerging learning. We have redeveloped the schools of ambition website and relocated it within Learning and Teaching Scotland to share practice. We will hold conferences in June to demonstrate the wide range of approaches that the schools of ambition are taking and their relevance to every school. The conferences will be open to local authority management staff and teachers. We are also bringing together pupils from schools of ambition to host their own conferences, where they will share their views on the impact of the programme. The first conference has just taken place in Shetland, and pupils from 18 schools of ambition shared their experiences. The next conference will be held in Edinburgh on 17 June. Each school of ambition will produce a resource that tells the story of their transformation. It will comprise a mixture of statistical evidence, an analysis of the impact of transformation and some personal testimony. A magazine on schools of ambition will be produced and distributed to every school staffroom.  We intend that every teacher will know about schools of ambition and every school will be able to share in the learning and use it. We want every school to become a school of ambition. I move amendment S3M-1601.2, to leave out from "deplores" to end and insert: "recognises that the Scottish Government has increased funding to Schools of Ambition in the Comprehensive Spending Review period 2008 to 2011 from £10.6 million to £11.5 million, and notes that two conferences will be held this summer which will share emerging lessons and demonstrate the variety of approaches taken by schools of ambition in order to embed these across the system which can help all local authorities and all schools to develop their own ambitious programmes for transformational change."

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate has been interesting. We appreciated the speeches of members from all parties. I have pleasure in summing up on behalf of the Scottish Government. Fiona Hyslop said that the curriculum for excellence is about far more than just schools or teaching, or young people and teachers; it is about equipping our people with the skills and knowledge that will enable them to maximise their talents, ingenuity and creativity. That is how we  will succeed in the 21 st century, when the mark of a successful country is not just the productivity of its labour but the capacity of its people to use and build on their skills for learning, life and work. As members said, we debated matters that are close to the heart of the curriculum for excellence in the Parliament when we discussed the OECD review of Scottish education and the teaching of history. The purpose of today's debate was not to repeat what was said in other debates or to rehearse the detail that was provided during discussions in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; it was to consider and discuss some of the challenges that are associated with bringing an aspirational programme of reform to fruition. I thank the members who highlighted some of those challenges. We reflected on our ambitions for Scottish education and for Scotland as a learning nation that is confident, productive and visibly successful. I am grateful to all members for their constructive contributions to the debate. I agree with Ken Macintosh that the pace of implementation of the curriculum for excellence was slower in the run-up to the election. I assure him that Fiona Hyslop and I have picked up the baton and are running with it. We have a campaigning role in engaging as many stakeholders as possible in the curriculum for excellence. Teachers are best placed to engage pupils and parents and have an important role in that regard. As the cabinet secretary said, by involving stakeholders, politicians of all parties can have a campaigning role. We will take on board Mary Mulligan's point about NGOs perhaps not feeling included in the process. However, the voluntary sector has been involved through the pupil inclusion network Scotland, so it has had a stake in the development of the framework for the curriculum for excellence. It is a shame that David Whitton was not in the chamber for the whole debate. If he had been, he would have noted that we have certainly upped the pace in implementing the curriculum for excellence. Yesterday, I was at a conference at which Professor Katherine Weare said that it is important that change is not implemented too quickly because we must keep all the stakeholders on board—especially parents, who are perhaps not as up to speed as the rest of us. I thank Elizabeth Smith for her positive speech. I assure her that the baccalaureate is not an extra exam but a batch of advanced highers. I was pleased to see a recent SQA report that shows an increased number of entries for advanced highers this year.

That is the precisely the tension that we face. On the one hand, people want the pace of change and implementation to be stepped up, but on the other hand, they are aware that we have to take everybody with us. I return to my point about advanced highers and the baccalaureate. By the time pupils reach S5 and S6, they are at the stage in their learning when they must be more aware of the need for personalised study and learning. With tools such as the glow project, videoconferencing and more innovative ways of studying, pupils should be able to access the range of subjects that they require for further education. Hugh O'Donnell and others mentioned parity of esteem. Last Friday, I launched the evaluation of the skills for work programme. It is clear from that evaluation that we cannot have a one-size-fits-all approach. Skills for work should be delivered in a range of places and ways and not just in schools and colleges. I agree with the concerns about assessment that were expressed by Karen Whitefield—who was speaking in a personal capacity—and others. We must get that right, which is why we all await with interest the announcement on assessment that the cabinet secretary will make in the next few weeks. Robin Harper might have been a bit more gracious when he talked about outdoor education. I have kept him informed of the fact that, as Michael Matheson said, I am chairing a committee on reversing somewhat the decimation of outdoor education by respective Governments in the 1970s and 1980s. I have said that I will meet Robin Harper, Elizabeth Smith and Jeremy Purvis to update them on progress. I note that Hugh Henry is no longer in the chamber. It is unfortunate that he, as a former minister, did not take the opportunity to say where he saw the curriculum for excellence going and where he thinks that we have gone wrong. I note that he berated local authorities for taking decisions at a local level with regard to their education provision. I assure Marlyn Glen that the cabinet secretary and I meet the unions regularly. Indeed, Larry Flanagan of the EIS was supportive of the curriculum for excellence in his evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.  I take Jeremy Purvis's point about the challenges of implementation. I have the general impression that all members in the chamber are prepared to be advocates for the curriculum for excellence, and I welcome that. Murdo Fraser was right to highlight sixth year and the bottom 20 per cent of achievers as areas of concern. I hope that I have addressed his concerns about sixth year. The OECD report said that it was not the school that someone attends, but who they are that presents the challenges that we face as we drive forward education in Scotland. That is why our early intervention strategy and the more choices, more chances agenda, which we have made key planks of the Government's policy, are so important.

Timetabling trials are being carried out in a number of schools, as are trials on the curriculum for excellence as a whole. Just last week, at a school in Moray where trialling is being carried out in a physics class, the S1 pupils were given draft outcomes and tasked with researching what they already knew and what more they needed to learn. That is precisely what the trialling throughout the country seeks to establish. The curriculum for excellence is a way of getting away from the culture of prescription. Robin Harper mentioned hours of study. Input is required in the current education system, but we are much more interested in measuring outcomes and that is what the curriculum for excellence is about. We need every young person to develop to their full potential. If we are to achieve that, we need to extend the partnership approach that has underpinned the development of the curriculum for excellence in the wider community. Our programme of improvement and reform must be owned and advanced not just by central and local government, but by children and young people and every professional. That is why this Government is wholly committed to ambitious curriculum reform and why we welcome today's debate as an opportunity to reflect on and discuss some of the significant challenges that it brings.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member accept that that is why the outcomes are currently in draft form, and why all teachers and other education professionals are being encouraged to—indeed, should—feed into the draft outcomes, to show where there are glitches and where improvements can be made, before the draft outcomes are finally published?

Individual schools and local authorities are responsible for determining which subjects and qualifications to offer and for matching opportunities to their students' needs and local circumstances. It is clear that, in some areas, offering a wide choice involves practical challenges. The Scottish Government is keen to promote good practice in the use of information technology and the development of collaborative arrangements between schools, colleges, universities, training providers and local authorities so that the widest possible range of subjects is delivered.

The uptake of advanced highers has remained broadly level in recent years. There was a small drop in uptake in 2007, but that was in line with the overall fall in S6 rolls. Staying-on rates in S6 have remained fairly constant. Schools are aware of the innovative systems that they can use to increase the provision of subjects. For example, the SCHOLAR programme, which was developed by Heriot-Watt University, provides opportunities for pupils to take advanced highers in several subjects through computer-based learning with support from teachers. That well-established programme is used by local authorities throughout Scotland to supplement learning provision. More than 3,000 teachers are trained in supporting pupils through the programme. The Government is keen to maintain the broad range of advanced highers that is available to pupils throughout Scotland.

We have to ensure that we get a balance in our schools and that all pupils get from our school system the choices and chances that they deserve. We are considering the qualifications system in relation to the curriculum for excellence so that the system matches the outcomes that we are trying to achieve.

I thank the member for his question, but he should have directed it to his Liberal Democrat council in the Borders. The Government has given strong support to Scotland's schools, which is why, from the tight financial settlement that we received from Westminster, local government budgets will increase by 5 per cent, 4.1 per cent and 3.4 per cent over the next three years. Local authorities can also recoup and reinvest efficiency savings, so it is up to them to put that money into education, if they so wish, and we strongly urge them to do so.

The Scottish Government supports community use of school facilities to deliver additional opportunities for young people. The fact that many schools already operate as centres of learning for their local communities means that they have a positive impact that extends beyond the traditional school day. Opening up facilities to local youth projects is one way in which schools can promote wider learning opportunities, but it is for local authorities to decide how best to use those facilities according to local need and demand.

We are aware that school facilities are under pressure. In areas where there are new and refurbished schools, the attraction of their facilities has led to increased demand from the community. As a result, in 2007-08, £5 million has been provided through the youth work facilities improvement fund to allow youth groups and organisations to bid for capital grants that will enable them to enhance directly opportunities for the young people who use their facilities.

The member will know that, in the local government settlement and new concordat, local authorities have had a 15 per cent increase in capital—which is substantial—so that they can decide where their priorities on school building lie, and go ahead.

We have signed with local government an historic concordat that provides authorities with a record financial settlement of £34.9 billion. Although there are no longer specific allocations for education in the underlying funding calculations, indicators such as the rural settlement pattern, population dispersion and the percentage of pupils in small schools are included, to address financial pressures that rural local authorities face. The indicators form part of the allocation formulae for councils that have been agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The concordat also commits local authorities to improve the learning experience for children and young people by improving the fabric of schools and nurseries and developing and delivering the curriculum for excellence. We expect local authorities to meet those commitments, irrespective of where children stay or the size of school they attend.

The member is a former councillor, so he knows that staffing and other resources that are allocated to schools are a  matter for local authorities. I understand that, as part of the budget process, Highland Council considered reducing staffing at Elgol primary school but that the proposal was rejected at a council meeting, which is good news for parents, pupils and teachers at the school. I am sure that Highland Council will take that into account next year. I am sure that the council realises that the services that we provide nationally, such as the national schools intranet—glow—will help small rural schools.

The Highland Council has statutory responsibility for the provision and maintenance of school buildings in its area. Questions regarding investment priorities for individual schools within the estate are matters for the council.

I am aware of Highland Council's capital programme for secondary school refurbishments. Wick high school was on the council's original list of schools requiring refurbishment but was not included in the final list of 11. I understand that the highest priority is Thurso high school, followed by the unit for students with special needs at Nairn academy, and that joint third were Plockton high school and Nairn academy, with Wick high school next on the programme. The member will be aware of the increased capital that has been given to Highland Council—£132.234 million from 2008 to 2011, including its share of the extra £115 million for 2008-09. Highland Council, like other councils, has been given a massive increase in its capital. It is up to Highland Council to decide how that is allocated.

Officials are constantly in touch with all local authorities regarding their school building programmes. The member well knows that, as is the case with other councils, it is for the Highland Council to determine its priorities. It is not for the Scottish Government to intervene to decide on the council's priorities.

The member will be aware that the state of school buildings is a matter for councils to address, according to certain criteria. If the member wishes more detail on when a school is deemed to be unfit for purpose, I will write to her about that.

Various options are open to councils for accessing funding to rebuild their estate. As members know, the Government plans to introduce a Scottish futures trust, on which consultation ended last year.

I thank Cathy Jamieson for initiating this important debate and thank all members who have spoken this evening. I, too, welcome those in the public gallery who have come to hear me emphasise the Government's support for rural schools and our commitment to safeguard them and the communities that they serve. I should declare an interest. At one time, I was a school board chair. The neighbouring school was due to close, with the support of parents, who wanted their children to come to the school whose board I chaired. Although the other school was closed as a primary school, it was retained as a nursery school. Both schools are now outstanding successes. The case demonstrates that, when the local authority consults and engages with the community, as Jamie Stone described, lateral thinking can produce good solutions. We whole-heartedly agree with the assertion in the motion that rural schools can provide educational and social benefits to pupils. We also believe that there is no reason why small schools cannot deliver the curriculum for excellence, which will help children and young people to develop as successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. We want to provide a rich and full curriculum that draws on best practice from across the country and, indeed, across the world. The issue is not the size or location of a school or how it is organised. We also recognise how important a rural school can be as a hub for community activities. There is no doubt that rural schools can play a key role in ensuring that small communities remain viable. Access to local services is vital for all, but for many small, fragile, rural communities the school may be the key to their thriving and being sustainable. I agree with John Farquhar Munro that the closure of schools is an emotional issue. On the motion's reference to East Ayrshire Council's proposals, Ms Jamieson knows that it would be inappropriate for me to comment, given the potential for cases to be referred to ministers. The same applies to the case that Mr Gibson mentioned. However, I am aware that East Ayrshire Council's consultation is now closed and that the council will consider its decision on the future of the schools very soon. I understand that the council will make its decision on 9 March rather than on the earlier date that was proposed. The council has lengthened the time so that it can consider carefully the volume of responses that it has received. As Willie Coffey reminded us, the closure proposals were initiated under the previous Labour council. In addition, the council is acting under  guidance that was introduced by the then Minister for Education and Young People, Peter Peacock. As Mr Gibson said, that guidance has been reinforced by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. On the general point, I welcome the support for rural schools that members have expressed but I find it surprising to hear such support coming from some quarters, given the previous Government's record. For example, in the course of the previous two parliamentary sessions, the number of primary schools in Scotland dropped by 125. More than 50 primary schools were closed in rural areas, and of the 19 cases that were referred to ministers, consent was granted in every case. By contrast, in the short life of this Government, we have taken action to protect rural schools and to improve the process for all closures. As I said, when the cabinet secretary wrote to all authorities in October, she reminded them of good practice and stressed the importance of genuine consultation and of explaining the reasons for proposing a school's closure.

That is precisely what I said. As ministers, we have dealt with three cases that have been referred to us since we took office. In each case, after close examination, we concluded that consent should be refused. For two of the proposals, that was because we considered that the processes were flawed. In the other case, it was primarily because HMIE did not support the council's educational case for closure. It is worth pausing to note that those were the first-ever cases in which ministers had refused consent. That is not to say that there will not be cases in future in which closure is the correct decision. In all the recent cases, a consideration that shaped our thinking was how to meet our commitment to introduce a presumption against the closure of rural schools and to tighten the regulations on all school closures. We intend to publish proposals for consultation at the end of March. Although I cannot comment on the specifics of the proposals, I can say that they will be detailed, comprehensive and the result of much deliberation and consideration. I welcome the support that Cathy Jamieson is now expressing for safeguarding rural schools. In October, she observed in the Carrick Gazette : "Rural primary schools are a vital part of any thriving community and we must be imaginative about the way we work in order to secure their future." I agree with that and hope that when the time  comes, she will support our proposals. I also welcome Murdo Fraser's support for rural schools following the launch of his consultation. As he said, he has met the cabinet secretary, and I hope that we can work with him and his party to deliver for our rural schools and communities. I welcome the support for rural schools and encourage everyone to examine and respond to our proposals, which will be published next month.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting vulnerable and disadvantaged families. That is clearly highlighted in the national outcomes  in the concordat agreement with local authorities, which, in tandem with recent guidance on single outcome agreements, makes it clear that we expect local authorities and community planning partners to work together to improve outcomes for such families.

I can certainly meet the member to see what is happening on the ground. I assure her that all the £59.9 million that was flagged as SS money remains available to local authorities to support vulnerable and disadvantaged families. As has been the case since the inception of the programme in 1999, local authorities have the discretion to deploy those resources in a way that they think best meets identified local need. Local authorities have always had control over the distribution of resources under sure start. Nothing has changed in that regard. We believe that local authorities are best placed to identify local need.

The member has identified an important point. That is precisely why ring fencing is being taken away—to achieve flexibility so that local authorities, working with all their partners and agencies, can develop the best way forward to support vulnerable families.

I will first address some of the comments from members, whom I thank for their contributions. I agree totally with John Park that employers should see training not as a cost but as an investment. By gathering these statistics, we will be able to share with employers information on rising employment rates, wage rates and cost-effective investment in their businesses. John Park also made points about taking forward the skills strategy, literacy and numeracy. I really do not think that the debate on this LCM is the time to debate such issues. However, I say to him that Scotland is not lagging behind in terms of the number of modern apprenticeships per population. Liz Smith raised issues of data security. This Government takes data security extremely seriously. Although there is absolutely no guarantee that there will be no data security problems, various precautions are taken to minimise the risk of them. The data will not identify any individual and will be confined to people working in this area of data collection and statistical analysis. Liz Smith and Jeremy Purvis mentioned loopholes. As I said in committee, civil servants are having discussions with officials in England about that. If a young person is resident in England but attends school in Scotland, the proposed duty will affect them, irrespective of where they go to school—it is all about the country of residence. If a young person is resident in Scotland but their parents live in England, the young person, as a resident of Scotland, will not be covered by the legislation. If they are employed in England but resident in Scotland, they will not be covered by the legislation, but their employer may be covered. Given that the legislation is not due to come into force until 2013 and 2015, the Government will continue to have discussions about such issues with our counterparts.

I can confirm that this Government is doing the job that it has been elected to do. I also confirm that as long as Scotland does not have all the legislative competence that we in this Government require, we will govern cost-effectively for the taxpayers of this country.

I hope that the whole Parliament will agree to the LCM.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in support of this legislative consent motion on the Education and Skills Bill. The main focus of the bill is the proposal to raise to 18 the age at which young people in England can leave education or training. The Scottish Government is committed to encouraging young people to stay in education and training after the age of 16, but we do not consider that raising the compulsory leaving age in Scotland would be the best way of bringing about that change. However, we are not debating the merits of raising the leaving age today. The LCM deals only with the data-sharing aspects of the bill. Those data-sharing aspects will allow information on further education qualifications to be matched to Department for Work and Pensions information and to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs information. Such information will allow those organisations to monitor the labour market outcomes—including earnings and employment rates—for those taking part in further education courses. Such analysis is not currently possible in Scotland. One of the aims of the Scottish Government's skills strategy is to ensure that investment in the skills of people living in Scotland allows those people to contribute as much as possible to sustainable economic growth. We therefore believe that it would be helpful to extend the bill's data-sharing provisions to Scotland. That would allow Scottish ministers, if they so wished, to share information on further education qualifications and to allow analysis to be carried out. The data would be shared for research purposes only and would not be used to identify individuals for any reason. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee supports the Scottish Government's approach. I trust that Parliament will do so too. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Education and Skills Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 28 November 2007, to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter the executive competence of Scottish Ministers in respect of using and sharing information in relation to skills and  training of people in Scotland, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Recent discussions with Glasgow City Council education services have covered a number of important issues, including the welfare rights of asylum seeker children in Scotland and the rising number of pupils with English as an additional language.

My colleague Adam Ingram and the First Minister met parents of disabled children recently to discuss those matters. Discussions on those issues, including after-school care, continue.

Organisations such as Fèis Rois are good at engaging with schools throughout Scotland. We welcome the input of outside organisations that enhance the curriculum for children.

The Scottish futures trust is our alternative funding mechanism to the standard private finance initiative; it will deliver better, more efficient infrastructure for taxpayers. A consultation paper was launched in December, with responses due by 14 March. Decisions will be taken thereafter.

Our manifesto commitment was to match the then Executive's planned building programme brick for brick. We have agreed to do that, have taken the programme forward and provided the finance for it, which was not in place prior to the election. There is a genuine consultation under way on the Scottish futures trust and we are not predicting its results. The trust is our alternative funding mechanism and it will deliver better, more efficient infrastructure for the taxpayer. I remind the member that when voters were consulted prior to the election they most favoured a policy to ensure that all state schools and hospitals were built and run by public bodies rather than private companies.

I remind the member that the school building programme is a matter for the local authorities. This Government has provided £3 billion extra in capital for investment in schools and other infrastructure.

The Scottish Government is committed to promoting positive relationships and developing harmonious learning environments in which pupils can learn and teachers can teach without disruption. We are funding a positive behaviour team that helps schools to introduce and embed a wide range of approaches that are aimed at improving discipline in our schools, such as restorative practices and the cool in school programme. In partnership with local government, we will also develop new guidance on promoting positive behaviour and dealing with indiscipline. Our priorities include early intervention, pre-school entitlement, identification of children at risk and the curriculum for excellence, all of which will contribute to ensuring that our children get the best start in life and are included, engaged and involved throughout their school careers.

The Government is absolutely committed to ensuring that we reduce the number of those dreadful incidents—we want a zero tolerance approach. We will continue to work with local government to develop the best strategies that provide teachers with the support, training and confidence that they need to deal with all levels of indiscipline in schools. Our national surveys tell us that that is what teachers want. We will do that through the development of the new guidance with our partners in local government and through the positive behaviour team. That team works with local authorities in schools to introduce and embed approaches that create calm learning environments and promote positive behaviour. That works—we have seen the impressive results of improved behaviour and a reduction in exclusions in schools such as Tulliallan primary school, which I visited last week.

I thank Elizabeth Smith for securing this important debate and I thank all the members who have taken part in it. This Government agrees that outdoor learning has an important role to play in the development of our children and young people. As a former teacher, I remember my time under canvas in the peak district. Like Jim Hume, I had the benefit of a rural, farming background. As Elizabeth Smith knows, one of the outcomes in the concordat with local authorities is that our young people should be successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens. Achieving that outcome is important in its own right and it will make a major contribution to the other outcomes. We need every young person to have those qualities and to develop them to their full potential. As Robin Harper made plain, outdoor learning in its widest sense has a clear contribution to make to that national outcome in helping to engage young people at risk of negative outcomes and harnessing Scotland's natural resources to broaden their horizons. As Elizabeth Smith said, there are examples of good work in Perth and Kinross. She mentioned Crieff high school and Roseanna Cunningham mentioned Perth high school, which has developed a successful programme of outdoor activities, on which it is to be congratulated. As a parent, I too have seen at first hand the benefits of taking young people out of their normal environment for a residential experience. They come back walking that bit taller, having expanded their horizons, developed their confidence and formed more positive relationships with not only their fellow pupils but their teachers, which can only be a good thing when they get back into the classroom. Outdoor learning in which pupils experience enjoyment, support and challenge, with clear links to the curriculum, is beneficial in helping young people to learn about the environment and promotes cross-curricular learning and physical activity. The vital element for pupils is to link the outdoor experience to their school work, so that they can take back the new skills they have discovered and apply them in their learning. Outdoor learning is not just something that is done in five special days of schooling; it should be part of where and how children and young people  learn on a day-to-day basis. That view is supported by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which has emphasised the value of well-planned outdoor education experiences. It has noted that the best examples are a combination of school-based and residential programmes that progressively develop pupils' experience. The Scottish Government is providing leadership and direction. Our curriculum for excellence guidance makes it clear that the outdoor learning environment offers motivating, exciting, different and relevant activities from pre-school years, to which Mary Mulligan and Robert Brown referred, through to college. Local authorities and teachers are best placed to decide how to deliver the benefits of outdoor learning in ways that meet their local circumstances and which contribute to our national outcomes. For example, in my constituency of North East Scotland, Banff and Buchan College works with local schools to develop a range of children's skills in the local wooded environment, which is much like what happens in Mr Hume's constituency. Primary 7s use band-saws, which shows that Health and Safety Executive concerns can be addressed. Teachers and headteachers have to be more focused on transitions, of which vocational and outdoor education forms a part. We know that there is wide variety in the duration and type of outdoor learning opportunities that are provided by schools and that a number of barriers can contribute to the problem. Those include timetabling, staff competence and confidence and differing views on the benefits of outdoor learning. The curriculum for excellence sends a clear signal about the value of outdoor learning, but there is work to be done to develop teachers' skills and encourage them to use the outdoors as an extension of the classroom. The flipside of that is that outdoor education specialists must understand the demands of our new curriculum, including the development of the four capacities and the focus on skills, and ensure that they tailor experiences to meet those demands. As many members have said, Scotland has a wealth of outdoor education providers. We need to explore ways of supporting them to form better partnerships at national, local authority, community planning and school community level, for the benefit of our children and young people. Margo Macdonald made interesting points about how community planning and community partnerships could do much more in that area. Already, the money that is being made available as a result of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is being used to provide opportunities for young  people who are in need of more choices and chances.

I agree that it requires the leadership that we all talk about.  On Robert Brown's points, officials are currently developing proposals on how we might build on best practice and strengthen the opportunities for young people to participate in a range of outdoor education opportunities. I look forward to sharing those proposals with members in the coming months.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

The Government places great importance on people learning languages so that they can extend their horizons and widen their opportunities in later life. The draft outcomes and experiences for modern languages in the curriculum for excellence programme will raise the bar in respect of our expectations of what young people can achieve with their modern languages learning.  Language learning in schools has a key role to play in ensuring that our young people are successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens.

I reassure the member that there is absolutely no reason why such innovative and good projects should not continue and be extended throughout Scotland as good practice.

As I said in my earlier reply, we are keen to ensure that good practice in the development and teaching of languages—whether Gaelic or any foreign language—is rolled out across Scotland. It is important that our youngsters can speak a second language. Employers will be keen to take them on, as they can train them in whichever language they want for their business. It is important that we show that our young learners are competent in foreign languages.

It is up to local authorities, in dialogue with schools, to decide what range of languages will be offered in schools to reflect local needs and priorities. Ministers are aware that some education authorities are under pressure to accommodate the needs of children who have English as an additional language. Officials have had meetings at senior level with representatives of the Educational Institute of Scotland and the Scottish English as an additional language co-ordinating council to discuss those issues. The recently announced funding and delivery partnerships between the Scottish Government and local government contain measures to address additional support needs in education, including those arising from EAL.

Yes. As I said in reply to a previous question, learning more languages will help to strengthen economic and political benefits. As many people are coming to Scotland from the eastern European accession states, it is right that schools embrace the languages of those cultures. In some schools, the children themselves are asking to learn the languages of the new pupils. That is great because in the long term it will secure economic and political benefits for Scotland and help business growth in Scotland, which is precisely what the Government wants.

It is still there.

Does the member accept that we have given £3 billion to local authorities precisely so that they can go ahead and build those schools?

As the Parliament knows, the SNP Government has a manifesto commitment to match the previous Executive's school building programme brick for brick. We are doing that. We have signed off seven school projects, including PPP projects in East Dunbartonshire Council, West Lothian Council, Perth and Kinross Council, Dumfries and Galloway Council and, most recently, West Dunbartonshire Council, as well as projects involving non-profit-distributing organisations in Falkirk Council and Aberdeen City Council.

I will not, as I have only four minutes. Those projects will deliver 45 new and refurbished schools in eight months. We will also support the remaining four projects that are at various stages. PPP schemes are a costly way in which to provide public infrastructure, but we took a pragmatic approach to allow those projects to continue, rather than disadvantage the children, young people and communities whose expectations had been raised.

I ask the member to let me finish this point. Labour had no plans in train for any further projects. The initial working up of plans takes at least a year in local authorities. Negotiations take at least 18 months, and a school takes 18 months to build. There is no evidence that any of that work was going on under the previous Executive so that the work could have been continued had that Executive been returned to power.

I will give way.

Mike Rumbles.

Aberdeenshire Council has been asked to submit any plans that it has. We have not seen them yet.

No thank you—I have only four minutes. We have provided an extra £40 million of capital funds for the 2007-08 period, to help towards the introduction of measures related to our commitments on class sizes.

No thank you. Our budgets will deliver record investment in Scotland's future and investment in growing opportunity and prosperity for our nation.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I know that every member in the chamber could stand up and ask about particular issues in their areas, but they can raise those issues through parliamentary questions and they will get an answer. As I was saying, our budgets will deliver record investment in Scotland's future, and will deliver investment in growing opportunity and prosperity for our nation. We are committed to improving the  learning experience of children and young people by improving the fabric of schools. We have a new and constructive relationship with local government in Scotland—one that gives greater flexibility and responsibility to local authorities to allow them to deliver their local priorities while working with us to deliver our shared and agreed commitments.

We have reduced ring fencing of funds, bureaucracy and monitoring. There is an extra £115 million of capital for local authorities in 2008-09, and around £3 billion over three years is being provided to secure investment in local government infrastructure, including schools. Many local authorities—including North Lanarkshire Council, South Lanarkshire Council and Glasgow City Council—are embarking on modernisation programmes or are in the process of doing so.

The Presiding Officer has said that I am in my final minute.

All in all, significant work is going on as part of the school building programme. Local authorities are working by themselves and for themselves, using resources provided by this Government. As everyone knows, we have launched a consultation paper on the Scottish futures trust. We want our schools to contribute to the delivery of this Government's strategic objectives. We want low-carbon and sustainable schools.

I will. We care that schools should be of high quality, and—Ms Brankin should listen to this—

We care that we should have schools in which pupils and communities have a say. We will continue to work with bodies such as Architecture and Design Scotland—

Does the member accept that, like me, young people might have given up history precisely because it is not relevant to their situation or their country? If they are required to learn about William the Conqueror for the umpteenth time, they really will be put off history.

I am delighted to introduce this timely and important debate on ensuring that young people in Scotland develop a proper understanding of Scotland's and their own place in the world, in relation both to what is happening today and to what has happened historically. I begin with some very recent history. Just two weeks ago, the Parliament debated the expert analysis of Scottish education that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development published recently. The OECD's report commended the on-going reform and modernisation of the Scottish curriculum, through the curriculum for excellence. That is the context of the motion that we have brought to the Parliament. I will say a few words about the curriculum for excellence, because we are here not only to discuss the teaching of history—and social studies more broadly—in our schools, but to give some thought to what it is about education that can make this country and its people confident, skilled and successful. People are Scotland's powerhouse. For Scotland to be all that it can be, all our people need to develop skills in the widest sense, so that they can fulfil their potential. By increasing sustainable economic growth, we can create a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish. We need a smarter Scotland to support the Government's overarching purpose of achieving sustainable economic growth and its other strategic objectives: a wealthier and fairer, healthier, safer and stronger, and greener Scotland. Our concordat with local government includes 15 outcomes that characterise the kind of country that we want to build. One of those outcomes is: "Our young people are successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens." That is the language of the curriculum for excellence. It is a mark of the Government's support and respect for the ambitions of that programme of reform that its key goals are incorporated within the concordat. Achieving the outcome that I have mentioned is  important in its own right, but doing so will also be a major contributing factor to achieving the other outcomes. Through the national indicator relating to increasing the proportion of school leavers in sustained and positive destinations, we are sending a strong message about what we think is important. The focus is therefore rightly on the outcome and what happens to young people beyond school. To achieve what we want, we need every young person to develop the four capacities to their full potential. There is, of course, much in Scottish education that we can be proud of, as the OECD found, but it is unacceptable that our well-resourced and well-regarded education system does not make the difference for all our children, particularly those from low socioeconomic backgrounds. As a country, we must maximise the economic potential of all our citizens. As a caring society, we must ensure that we get things right for every child. As the OECD report noted, with our modern economy, we must recognise the importance of higher-order cognitive, organisational and communication skills in our young people. Our aim is to ensure that young people have skills for learning, skills for work and skills for life. That means that there must be a coherent curriculum from three to 18; a focus on outcomes; more vocational opportunities; a focus on literacy and numeracy at every stage; appropriate stretching and pacing for every child; and teachers working together to make coherent sense of what each child is being taught. The Government is fully committed to the curriculum for excellence programme as the means of achieving those aims; indeed, the Scottish National Party was the only party that made a specific commitment to the curriculum for excellence in its manifesto. The curriculum for excellence encourages and challenges teachers to think about and develop their teaching, so that it is as good as it can be. That is for teachers and schools to do; we are not talking about a centralised or top-down initiative. To do such things effectively, teachers need support and challenges from everybody concerned, including parents, employers, people in further and higher education, local authorities, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and the Scottish Government. We want every school and teacher to examine critically their teaching and planning, explicitly for the purpose of developing and improving. The role of local and national Government is to create the conditions that will allow that to happen. The Scottish Government and local authorities can provide tools to help. We are revising the guidance on the framework within which the curriculum can be organised to allow space for innovation and a  focus on all four capacities. We are producing curriculum guidance to update content, focus on outcomes and emphasise the need for every teacher to contribute to the development of skills, particularly literacy and numeracy skills. We are providing guidance on and examples of interdisciplinary projects and studies so that teachers can work together on outcomes and make connections between different areas of young people's learning.

I am coming to that. If the member reads the motion, he will see that it focuses on other matters, too. We are looking at how assessment can best be used to support real learning and are consulting on proposals for qualifications at standard grade credit and general and at intermediate 1 and 2 levels, which correspond to Scottish credit and qualifications framework levels 4 and 5. Curriculum for excellence should be and is being implemented already. Government-provided materials are not necessary for teachers to build on and improve their existing practice. Our children need the best possible teaching now. Forthcoming guidance will give a stronger impetus to continuous improvement. Learning and Teaching Scotland has already published, for discussion with and within the profession, a significant quantity of draft guidance in the form of draft curriculum outcomes and experiences. The remainder will be released during the rest of the present academic session and will be finalised in the next session. Guidance on the framework within which the experiences and outcomes can be used will be drafted alongside them. We expect that the guidance will be phased in after 2008-09, to replace the present five-to-14 curriculum and to provide an integrated curriculum from three to 18.

We certainly have, by ensuring that outcomes over a wider range of areas will have a Scottish spine. We have sought to integrate Scottish history, culture and language into the new outcomes for the curriculum.

No. We know that it is possible for pupils who have taken the current higher and advanced higher courses to leave school with a greater knowledge of aspects of history outwith Scotland than of Scottish history. That situation is being addressed by the decision to introduce a compulsory Scottish element in the higher examination, which has been well received by the profession. I, too, warmly welcome it. Last week, as part of the on-going schedule of releasing draft guidance on different areas of the curriculum, Learning and Teaching Scotland published, for engagement with the profession, draft outcomes in social studies. Social studies includes the study of experiences and outcomes in historical, geographical, social, political, economic and business contexts. It is important that children and young people understand where they live and the heritage of their families and communities. Teaching our young people about the history and current context of Scotland is not about brainwashing them into adopting a single set of political beliefs. It is about ensuring that they have enough good-quality information and understanding to make their own informed decisions and judgments. Nature abhors a vacuum. If we do not properly teach all our young people about the history and current context of their country and society, the vacuum will be filled with the often misguided imagery of Hollywood, and that will do none of us any good at all. The future well-being of our country and, indeed, the future quality of political debate require a good foundation of cultural understanding and knowledge.

It certainly created an interest in Scottish history and Scotland, and focused people's minds on the period of history in question. I am sure that, after watching the film, they went away to discover more about the real picture. Let us be clear: we are not talking about some sort of public relations exercise to glorify Scotland's past, in the way that "Braveheart" might have done. We are talking about encouraging young people to reach personal conclusions on different aspects of social studies, such as human and ethical issues in the past, the land use and ecological dilemmas that face us, and political, economic and social issues. Lessons need to be  learned from the mistakes of the past as well as the glories and successes. When it is taught well, history has significant potential to contribute to the curriculum for excellence's four capacities and to our objective of a smarter Scotland. Studies of Scottish history are already found in almost all primary and secondary schools. However, we cannot be sure that pupils' engagement with history enables them to understand how Scotland has developed. Our goal with the curriculum for excellence is to ensure that all our young people benefit from the best possible teaching across the whole spectrum of curriculum areas. Social studies, as described in the draft guidance issued by Learning and Teaching Scotland last week, offers excellent opportunities for children and young people to focus on the historical, social, geographic, economic and political changes that have shaped Scotland. With greater understanding of such issues comes the opportunity to influence events by exercising informed and responsible citizenship. The Government wants a progressive, successful, confident Scotland for the 21 st century. As a people, we will not know where we are going—or whether we have got there—if we do not know where we have been. Our ambitions for education and for Scotland are high. The on-going reform of our curriculum, evidenced by the recent publication of draft outcomes in social studies, is a welcome indicator of our confident, progressive approach. For those reasons, I am pleased to move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of ensuring that young people understand Scotland's and their place in the world, both currently and in a historical context, and in pursuit of this aim welcomes the opportunities for more exciting, engaging and relevant teaching presented by the Curriculum for Excellence and, in particular, the publication of the draft social studies outcomes and experiences by Learning and Teaching Scotland, along with the recent decision by the Scottish Qualifications Authority to include questions on Scottish history as a compulsory component of the Higher History examination.

Responsibility for meeting the support needs of our pupils rests with local authorities. The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, which came into force in November 2005, aims to ensure that the additional support needs of all children and young people, including gifted and talented children, are addressed. Our six national centres of excellence make specialist provision for gifted and talented children.

I think that in Scotland we take a different approach, rather than take children out of their environment. It is important that schools are seen to cater for the whole range of abilities. To ensure that that happens, for example through the curriculum for excellence, there are individualised learning plans, and we hope that we can provide the appropriate stretch and pace for every child through personalisation and choice. Teachers are supported through the Scottish needs assessment programme—the SNAP programme—which is based at the University of Glasgow, to ensure that they have the skills and knowledge to enable them to provide an extra push for able and talented children.

I start by dealing with the assurances for which members have asked. Gavin Brown asked about consultation taking place across the country, and that will be the case. Funds will also be distributed across the country. On Dave Thompson's point, the money is exempt from the London cash grab. An agreed condition of the arrangement with the banking sector is that the funds will be additional to public expenditure, so there will be a separate set of books and separate accounting by the Big Lottery Fund. On David Whitton's points, the consultations will begin as soon as possible and we will publicise them as widely as possible. I have been heartened to hear the positive responses to what is a good opportunity for Scotland's third sector. My colleague, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, referred to our support for the youth sector and I reiterate our commitment to supporting that work. This year, through YouthLink Scotland, the Scottish Government has invested £8 million in a year of action, made up of £5 million for the youth work facilities improvement fund, £2.5 million for the youth opportunities fund and £0.5 million for the voluntary organisation support fund. Those funds have had a big impact on the youth work sector by increasing capacity, improving facilities and funding more activities. The youth work facilities improvement fund has provided a massive, one-off, £5 million investment in  equipment and building repairs to youth work facilities across Scotland. We will continue to support youth work directly through the voluntary organisation support fund. That will help national organisations to provide better training and strengthen their capacity. From 2008-09, we will transfer the £2.5 million annual funding for the youth opportunities fund to local authorities so that they can decide how best to meet local needs. That is not all. The Scottish Government will also provide approximately £5 million to 34 national voluntary youth organisations through the unified voluntary sector fund for 2007-10, including funding for youth work provision. We are also using funds recovered under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to increase opportunities and support a three-year initiative in conjunction with the Scottish Football Association to deliver national networks of three, four and five-a-side football activity, involving up to 9,600 young people per year, and expansion of the soccer one programme to S2 and S3 pupils, which will create up to 1,300 new school-based football teams involving up to 19,500 girls and boys. There will be much more. I assure Iain Gray that we will ensure that real emphasis and focus are placed on youth work in the consultation process and the distribution of the funds. As Minister for Schools and Skills, I know full well the needs of young people, and I believe, as Iain Gray does, that investment in positive activity for young people as early as possible, as detailed by Malcolm Chisholm, will reduce the numbers that subsequently require more choices and chances. I give the member that guarantee. It is simply not right for the Liberal Democrats to say that we do not support and value youth work—we do. However, we also recognise, support and value the sector's work on the environment and on supporting vulnerable people, with older people and in countless other areas. I totally agree with Robert Brown that young people will certainly be helped by any early intervention projects that the Big Lottery Fund can support. By agreeing to this motion, members will not only allow the UK Government to confer additional powers and responsibilities on Scottish ministers but give the Parliament a further opportunity to consider how such powers will be exercised and to influence expenditure priorities through the affirmative resolution procedure. The Government is grateful to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for its unanimous support for the motion. I hope that members will agree that when the time comes to consider the amendments, giving the whole sector the chance  to influence our priorities will prove the best and fairest approach. Today's motion represents a good opportunity. I urge members to support it and the Labour amendment, which signals a change of approach.

The member is wrong to think that we will not have a handle on what is happening locally. With single outcome agreements, we will have more of a handle on performance at the local level. Indeed, we had a meeting earlier today with representatives from Aberdeen City Council with responsibility for children, families and education to find out precisely what is going on locally. We can find examples of best practice from throughout the country and put people in touch with each other.

I am delighted to introduce this important debate on the OECD report into Scottish education, "Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland", which was published on 11 December 2007. As a measure of the importance that the Scottish Government places on this extremely insightful external analysis of our school education system, we alerted all members of the Scottish Parliament to the report prior to the Christmas recess—knowing that they would of course wish to read the review from cover to cover during their Christmas and new year holiday. I say at the outset that we are grateful to the previous Executive, in particular to the former ministers Peter Peacock and Hugh Henry, for their involvement with the OECD review. Peter Peacock had the insight and good sense to commission the review in the first place, and I acknowledge that it takes some courage to commission such a review. It shows his confidence in the Scottish education system, but I am sure that the Danish experience lay at the back of his mind. The Danes commissioned an OECD review following disappointing results under the programme for international student assessment and that might have given Peter Peacock a bit of worry, but he need not have worried. I thank Hugh Henry for supporting the work and for meeting the OECD review team when they visited Scotland in March. Such an expert analysis is consistent with our overall wish to challenge Scotland's education ambitions against the achievements of other countries as a basis for improving performance. I am sure that all of us here aim to uphold Scottish traditions of being open to outside opinion and constructive in our response, and of trying "To see oursels as others see us!" The OECD's seminal report helps us to do just that. The OECD team presented their report to ministers at a special session of the OECD education policy committee in Edinburgh on 11 December. It was a pity that the BBC broke the OECD's embargo and, as a result of not having  the full report, ran a rather unbalanced story—but there we go. The special session meeting was a unique event, in that senior education representatives from 14 countries discussed the report and its findings with ministers for the whole day. I am pleased to say that there is much in the review team's report that aligns with this Government's strategic priorities, such as our commitment to tackling education inequalities from the earliest stages, our new relationship with local government, the skills and vocational learning agenda and the reform and modernisation of the curriculum through the curriculum for excellence. I also welcome the positive things that the review says about some of the key strengths of our system. For example, "Scotland is a well-schooled nation by international standards." I attended a seminar in London last week with education ministers from 60 countries and 180 senior policy advisers. Seventy-two countries were represented, covering 67 per cent of the world's population. As well as coming away with a better understanding of the digital divide, which the seminar was about, I came away knowing that many countries wish to know more about our education system. Many participants told me that we do not shout loudly enough about our good system here in Scotland. We should not be surprised, therefore, that the report commended our consistently high standard in the OECD's programme for international student assessment, or PISA; the quality of head teachers in Scotland; our impressive system of near universal, high-quality pre-school education; the 2001 teachers agreement, with its impact on morale and on interest in the profession through improved salary and working conditions and continuous professional development; the renovation of our schools; and our approach to teacher induction, which was described as "world class" in the review. In Scotland, we are in the vanguard of leading education nations. We are a learning nation—and it is reassuring to be told by external, impartial examiners from such an august body as the OECD that that is indeed the case.

I will come on to the matter that the member raises later in my speech. As Professor Richard Teese, rapporteur for the review, said to us, the key question for the team was, "How do you improve a system that is already very good?" However, the review throws up some key challenges, such as the need to reduce the achievement gap that opens up at about primary 5 and continues to widen throughout the lower secondary years; the fact that young people from poorer communities and low socioeconomic status homes are more likely than others to achieve less; the need to build on our strong platform of basic education through socially broader and more successful participation in upper secondary education and greater equity in Scottish higher education. The OECD review states: "In Scotland, who you are is far more important than what school you attend, and at present Scottish schools are not strong enough to ensure that "who you are" does not count." Inequalities in staying-on rates, participation at different academic levels of national courses and pass rates in those courses are a major concern of this Government, as they are in many countries in the world. The review also highlights the number of young people who leave school with minimal qualifications and the comparatively high proportion who find themselves in precarious transition. Those problems are by no means unique to our nation. As Mrs MacDonald said, there are adults in Scotland today who have not had the basics in education to enable them to cope. We are addressing that issue.

The member makes an excellent point. The fact that our early years strategy and our early intervention strategy use the whole family to raise aspirations is in line with what she mentions. In essence, the review makes it clear that our key challenge is how we improve a successful system to make it more equitable and to ensure that the benefits of a Scottish education are more widely shared, particularly at the latter end of school education and through the important transition period.  To help us address those challenges, the review makes a series of recommendations in five broadly-framed areas: "National priorities funding through local government compacts ... Greater school autonomy in a local government framework ... A comprehensive, structured and accessible curriculum ... Continuous review of curriculum and teaching" and monitoring of student destinations. We will, of course, look carefully at the specific recommendations in all five areas and consider how they might help us to deliver our strategic objectives, particularly in relation to our smarter and our wealthier and fairer objectives, in partnership with local authorities and other key education community agencies and stakeholders. We look forward to engaging with the Scottish education community, particularly within our new outcomes-focused landscape following the signing of our historic concordat with local government leaders on 14 November 2007, so that we can work together as partners in an atmosphere of mutual respect to consider what we can do to respond in a positive and constructive manner to the OECD's findings and recommendations. The question is not so much, "What is the Government going to do in response to the review?" but rather, "What does the review mean for everyone in the Scottish education community and what are our shared responsibilities to engage with its findings?" I welcome this opportunity for a mature debate that forms part of a continuing reflection on what we are doing and why, within the context of the review and other sources of evidence, both national and international, which are at our disposal. I had hoped that we could focus the debate on the merits of the review itself and address the issues raised, rather than debate amendments. I am sure that that is what most members will want to do this afternoon, but we should be mindful that the review team and other countries are interested in what we say about their report, rather than in party political points that speakers might score. We can all be proud of the success of Scottish education and what we have achieved. However, as the OECD points out, it is not a success for all children. That is the challenge that we need to face up to collectively if Scotland and its education system are to be the best that they can be in the 21 st century. We need children and young people who are effective contributors, responsible citizens and confident individuals, as well as successful learners, if we are to achieve a smarter Scotland. More importantly, people deserve that for  themselves, to improve their own life chances and opportunities. Our ambitions for Scotland are challenging—and rightly so. In our first eight months in Government, we have taken important first steps toward shaping tomorrow's Scotland and making Scotland smarter. The challenge is to ensure that Scotland's reputation as a smart, learning nation is maintained and enhanced and that Scotland becomes a country that can build on firm foundations, harness the talents of our people and create opportunities for all to flourish and excel. We want Scotland to be everything that it can be. Good teaching and learning lie at the heart of that. A love of learning is a liberator for learners of all ages—which relates to what Margo MacDonald said—and that is what we want to see throughout the system. We welcome the review and today's debate because we believe that Scotland should be in the vanguard of educational thinking on the international stage. Our ambitions are high. We should be engaged with, and leading, cutting-edge thinking in education across the world and we should be reflecting, on an on-going basis, on how the evidence that we have from both national and international sources, including this important external review, can help us to achieve a smarter, wealthier and fairer Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's (OECD) Reviews of Policies for National Education: Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland and its findings; notes the many positive aspects of our school education system highlighted by the OECD, and agrees that this report is an invaluable international evidence base on which to debate and develop Scotland's educational policies for the future, recognising the significant challenges identified by the OECD.

Education authorities have statutory responsibility for school transport. The Scottish Government's guidance on school transport was supplemented in March 2007 by "School Transport: Survey of Good Practice". The survey of good practice contains examples of initiatives from, or appropriate to, rural areas.

Coming, as I do, from rural Aberdeenshire, I understand completely my colleague's concerns. The current guidance does not distinguish between urban and rural areas but expects authorities to keep their eligibility criteria for school transport under review and to take account of a range of factors, such as increased traffic volumes and the availability of footpaths and pavements. However, my officials are currently considering whether an update of the 2003 guidance may be necessary.

Under the terms of the concordat that was signed with the Convention of Scottish Local  Authorities on 14 November, we will provide local authorities with almost £3 billion of capital resources over three years to secure investment in schools and other infrastructure. That will enable them to deploy resources increasingly flexibly, according to their own local needs and priorities.

I congratulate South Lanarkshire Council on the ambitious and extensive school building programme that it is taking forward and on the work that it has already completed as part of the programme. As I said, under the concordat with COSLA we will provide local authorities with extra resources. South Lanarkshire Council's share of those resources will be £32 million in 2008-09, £33.437 million in 2009-10 and £33.366 million in 2010-11. It is up to the council to allocate that funding as it sees fit according to its priorities and circumstances. South Lanarkshire Council may also choose to make use of the prudential borrowing framework that is available to it.

I share Robin Harper's concern about the disruption that was caused by the very high winds the other night. Clearly, we are in constant discussion with local authorities to ensure that the school building programme and the schools that are built thereunder are fit for purpose and take into account climate change matters.

I am aware that in some areas community groups find the cost of using facilities in new schools prohibitive. That is probably why the electorate put the cost of public-private  partnership and private finance initiative schools high on the list of its concerns in the run-up to the previous election. The Government is rightly pursuing the cheaper option of building schools through the Scottish futures trust. There is no doubt that there has been commercialisation of charges for use of premises, which is against the ethos of community schools. In some cases, there has been an increased desire to use the facilities in new schools, which has probably led to commercialisation of prices.

The Scottish Government advocates the inclusion of Scots in the school curriculum where appropriate and deplores any form of discrimination, whether conscious or unconscious. Awareness of the Scots language will be part and parcel of the emerging curriculum for excellence and teachers will develop this awareness through initial teacher education and continuous professional development.

As I said to Bill Wilson initially, we deplore any form of discrimination—conscious or unconscious. It is absolutely unacceptable. In many schools, as in Letham, teachers are using children's knowledge of Scots to build on their literacy competence. I agree that it is unfortunate that previous Governments have not recognised the importance of Scots in Scotland's linguistic, cultural and artistic heritage. As she was born in Alloway, my Cabinet colleague Fiona Hyslop is determined to ensure that the 250 th anniversary of Robert Burns's birth will be an occasion to remember.

We have made it clear that building to higher standards of environmental performance is important across the board. We continue to work with local authorities to create sustainable schools, and we provide funding for renewable technologies and energy efficiency measures.

Like Cathy Peattie, I find visiting schools one of the best parts of my job. The eco-schools programme has been extremely successful in Scotland, more than 500 schools now having achieved green flag status. The enthusiasm with which the children in those schools embark on the eco-schools programme is an absolute delight. The programme is very much part of the curriculum for excellence in promoting sustainable development education. The First Minister recently opened Windygoul primary school, which is a single-storey ecofriendly building that is designed to minimise energy use by using sustainable products—external breathing walls and so on. I will take on board what the member has said in relation to the building of schools. Local authorities and the schools themselves should be in line for rewards.

Further to the debate on woodlands that we had earlier in the week, that is something that I would be prepared to take forward with the Minister for Environment.

The SNP will match, brick for brick, the previous Executive's commitment to building schools. The point that the member makes about the school in her constituency is a matter for the local authority. We are constantly in touch with the local authority on that matter.

Details are given in chapters 22 and 27 of the "Scottish Budget Spending Review 2007". Direct investment by the Government in schools policy will be £409 million in total from 2008-09 to 2010-11. Most public sector expenditure on school education is channelled through local authorities. As such, it is important to recognise our partnership with local government and the increased resources and flexibility that it has been given to enhance education in schools throughout Scotland.

In taking forward the concordat with local government, the Scottish Government will engage with every local authority on single-outcome agreements. I have no doubt that the issue will arise when we discuss the matter with Glasgow City Council.

The member will be aware of the good work that is being done by all local authorities to increase attainment in literacy and numeracy. That is a matter of continued discussion with local authorities.

The member fails to recognise how matters have moved on since September. We now have the historic concordat with local government and ring fencing has been removed from many areas. Local authorities can decide how best to spend the money in their areas.

Significant extra funding has been placed with local authorities. An increase of £40 million has already been allocated this year for school capital programmes. There is £115 million of extra capital in the first year for local government, which can be invested in schools. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will make an announcement on the work of the Scottish futures trust when the information is available.

I thank members for making this a constructive and helpful debate. We share a common vision and commitment to provide all children with the best possible care. I welcome Robert Brown's endorsement of the kinship and foster care strategy. He might recall that when we were discussing the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Bill I said that I thought that the fostering strategy should have been part of it and that we should have been considering adoption and fostering together. I am pleased that my colleague Adam Ingram has managed quickly to get the strategy in place and has married the two aspects. We have agreed absolutely that families should be supported to stay together where that is in the best interests of the child, and our forthcoming early years strategy will be crucial in achieving that. When a child needs to be placed away from his or her home, care within the family circle should be the first option, unless there are clear reasons why that cannot happen. Most members have recognised the potential value of family group conferencing. We need to have in place processes that draw on the strengths of the wider family if that is in the child's best interests. Family group conferencing seems to be a way of supporting that because it puts children at the heart of questions of care and focuses primarily on their needs. When we consider whether kinship carers are in a position to look after the children, we will take a light-touch approach to ensuring that children are  in the best place for care. Kinship carers will not have to go through all the hoops that foster carers have to go through; we will try to apply as light a touch as possible in that process. The reference group that we are setting up will be chaired by Anne Black, an eminent child professional who has been listening to our debate in the gallery. The group will take forward specific proposals on effective recruitment and retention of foster carers so that we can increase the pool of carers and ensure that they have good-quality support, and it will recommend an approval process for kinship carers that will, as I said, apply a light touch.

We will leave it to Anne Black and her team to come up with specific proposals on that. Many members are concerned about the support that is available to kinship carers. A great number of such carers neither want nor need daily involvement from the state. We have all come across the sort of situation that Rhoda Grant described, in which grandparents take on the care of children. A retired social worker to whom I spoke last night welcomed our strategy and payments and said that if they had been in place when she was a social worker, the situation would have been so much better, because she had seen so many families and grandparents put themselves in poverty in order to ensure that children were kept and looked after within the wider family group.

That is not going to be a statutory duty on local government; it will be up to local authorities to work with the kinship carers to decide the best way forward for the children in such situations. We said that we want to ensure that support is in place when it is needed, which is why the advice that is to be provided nationally by Citizens Advice Scotland for the programme will be important—

I would like to make progress. It will be important that a helpline is in place for the benefit of people who do not live in close proximity to a Citizens Advice Scotland office.  We should also acknowledge the discretionary financial help that will be provided to many kinship carers across Scotland.

I welcome Robin Harper's intervention. The issue that he raises is the reason why our early intervention strategy is important. We need to ensure that the children who fall into the category that he mentioned, and who need more choices and chances, are identified early so that we can help them with that transition. Local authorities, which have a duty of care to such children, can use the resources that are available to them to ensure that those young people do not fall into the category of young people who need more choices and chances. As I said, early intervention is important in that regard. We are grateful for Parliament's support for our proposals to achieve equity of support for all looked-after children, whether they live with a foster carer or a kinship carer, including the payments of allowances. We are also grateful to COSLA for its support for our prioritisation of the commitment. It is significant that COSLA has agreed with us and is satisfied with the funding, which is the first agreement that has resulted from the concordat.

Rhona Brankin and other members including Mary Mulligan, Karen Whitefield and Ken Macintosh clearly do not get it: £4 million has already been given this year. With regard to the concordat and the settlement with local government—Liz Smith identified the reduction in central Government funding for this matter—the money has been moved to local government. It is new money and it is in the new concordat. We will not be shifting responsibility solely to local authorities; we will be working with local authorities to ensure that the strategy is in place throughout Scotland. The commitment will, over the coming years, build on the best practice that exists in some local authorities for supporting kinship carers.  We know that there are concerns that more children might be brought into the system. We are not convinced that that is necessarily the case, but we will keep the situation under review. Decisions about whether children need to be looked after are not taken lightly. It might be that, for some who are affected, becoming looked after will be a positive first step towards the development of a planned approach to their care and nurture. The Government fully recognises the concerns that have been expressed in the debate and by the Fostering Network that foster carers should be paid the TFN's recommended rate of allowance. Over the past two years, the number of authorities that are paying it has increased. I am sure that COSLA will encourage the remaining local authorities—as we will—to consider increasing the rate of allowance as part of their efforts to improve recruitment and retention. We want to ensure that they step up to the plate on that.

Ken Macintosh mentioned keeping families together: we totally agree. We want to ensure that foster carers and kinship carers get short-term breaks. That will also help with recruitment and retention. We acknowledge the challenges that are faced by foster and kinship carers; the strategy marks the start of our work. We have a long way to go before we can be satisfied that we have the right range and sufficient numbers of carers in place to meet the range of challenging needs that are presented by vulnerable children, but I hope that all members agree that the strategy is an excellent start.

Learning and Teaching Scotland will produce draft outcomes and experiences for English language and literacy, which will include references to Scots. That will build on the guidance that has already been issued on the curriculum for excellence, which makes it clear that the languages and literature of Scotland provide a valuable source for learning about culture, identity and language.

Yes, I absolutely agree with Aileen Campbell. I think that I have mentioned the delightful time that I spent on the reading bus in and around Aberdeen taking part in the same kind of activity. Much good work is going on in local authorities throughout Scotland. Matthew Fitt and James Robertson of Itchy Coo do a fantastic job in helping teachers and officials to show how the language that children hear in the playground and in their families can be built on in their learning of English and other languages. This morning, I had a delightful time judging the 2007 Itchy Coo competition. It was a delight to read all the entries and to see how well children write in their own language.

I acknowledge the member's long-standing interest in the matter and I agree that learning Latin helps in the learning of other languages—it helped in my case. I understand that her letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on the subject will be answered in due course.

The concordat that we have signed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is founded on improving educational outcomes for all children and young people. We will focus on improving the learning experience for children and young people by improving the fabric of schools and nurseries; developing and delivering the curriculum for excellence; and, as quickly as possible, reducing class sizes to a maximum of 18 in primary 1 to primary 3 and improving early years provision with access to a teacher for every pre-school child. In addition, our skills strategy describes our ambitions for developing skills in a lifelong learning context, from cradle to grave. We are committed to working with local government and other partners in the education community to build on the new relationship. Our aim is to develop young people who are successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens, and so raise educational attainment in Scotland.

I realise that Ms Brankin and other members of her party are finding it difficult to get their heads round the new settlement with local government. All the money that is in education is contained in the local government  settlement. That is why we are looking for the outcomes with local government.

The concordat between the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities proposes that the funding for the centres of excellence be rolled up into the local government settlement from 2008-09.

I am aware of the proposal to establish a fèis academy. Early this year, Fèisean nan Gàidheal commenced discussions with the RSAMD, the UHI Millennium Institute and Sabhal Mòr Ostaig to explore jointly the options for establishing and operating a new body. Representatives from those four institutions have formed a working party, which will report its recommendations for the establishment and funding of the new body later this year. As indicated in answers to previous questions, the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture is willing to meet Arthur Cormack and other representatives of the working group and looks forward to receiving their proposals.

I cannot without discussions with COSLA ensure that that money will be ring fenced—that is not the idea of the concordat—but I cannot possibly imagine that the centres of excellence would be under threat.

As Ted Brocklebank's question falls within the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture's portfolio, I will ensure that he gets an answer from her.

As the new concordat with local government outlines, specific budget lines have, in many cases, been taken away. Those matters will be taken forward in discussions with COSLA.

West Dunbartonshire Council had an offer of financial support from the former Scottish Executive for a schools public-private partnership project that included the replacement of Dumbarton academy, an offer that remains open. It is, though, entirely a matter for the council to decide on the components of the project.

The member is disingenuous in saying that the SNP removed that project. The member, if she was telling the truth, would of course have said that the decision was to refuse planning permission. [ Interruption. ] The decision was taken unanimously by the whole council and has turned the entire PPP project into a complete and utter mess. The previous Administration took the project to the planning stage but the application was unanimously rejected by the whole council As a result of political issues in the administration of the previous West Dunbartonshire Council, the project is well behind other PPP projects. As a result of the planning decision, the SNP Administration is left having to decide whether to continue with the rest of the PPP project, or to abandon it.

I apologise sincerely for that, Presiding Officer.

How the PPP project in West Dunbartonshire Council proceeds is a matter for that council. As I said, the offer of financial support for a PPP project remains. It is up to the council to decide on any proposals that it presents to the Government in relation to the project. It is the council's decision that has put the project into disarray.

The opportunities for children and young people to access traditional music and song in schools across Scotland are generally healthy. Of the 32 local authorities, 30 and Jordanhill school offer some form of Scottish traditional music as part of their primary 6 target provision under the youth music initiative. Provision is also made at the school of traditional music in Plockton. The curriculum in Scottish schools is not based on statute. Arrangements for determining the curriculum are for schools and education authorities to decide. The curriculum for excellence will establish a new framework for those decisions, which will include a Scottish perspective on the expressive arts.

I am disturbed to hear of that hostility among conventional music staff and I would like to hear about examples of it from the member. I am aware of good work that is being done through the fèisean movement, which my colleague Linda Fabiani mentioned in reply to an earlier question. In the north-east, many talented musicians give master classes; for example, Paul Anderson, with fiddle music. As Linda Fabiani mentioned, we are awaiting Fèisean nan Gàidheal's proposals for a skills academy in the traditional arts. We will make progress from there.

Our ambition is for all young people to stay in learning post-16 so that they develop the skills that will enable them to succeed in life. A concerted national effort is under way through the curriculum for excellence and skills for Scotland, which is designed to achieve transformational change in learning, teaching and leadership in the Scottish education system. We recognise that significant changes to the system are required to help young people who need more choices and chances. To that end, we have built considerable momentum in local authorities, schools, Careers Scotland, training providers, colleges, employers, the third sector and the many other partners that are necessary if we are to make real progress on the agenda. All local authorities have established robust partnerships to transform the learning and support that are on offer to that group of young people. My ministerial colleagues and I have already visited areas that have a higher than average number of young people who are not currently in education, employment or training. We intend to work in close partnership and on an on-going  basis with those areas to produce real improvement in them.

The JET programme is a year-long work-based learning programme run by the South Edinburgh Partnership. As Mr Pringle said, it combines school education with vocational training and work experience in the City of Edinburgh Council. The one-year programme is currently aimed at secondary 4 pupils, who study for their standard grades at school and undertake a work-experience placement one day a week. The young people study for a level 2 Scottish vocational qualification in business and administration or customer services. Additionally, the young people will develop core skills and the abilities that they need to become active, enterprising and responsible members of society. They will also learn key skills and attitudes for employability, particularly those that employers are looking for in the workplace. There was a recent review meeting with the City of Edinburgh Council to discuss the progress towards introducing more choices and more chances. The council highlighted the JET programme as being particularly successful. It currently operates in eight schools in the city.

The strategy was published and sets out what we want to achieve. We are now in the process of discussing how it can be achieved. I am well aware of the particular needs of disabled people who fall into the NEET category. Clearly, they require extra care and support and we will  ensure that that issue is part of our deliberations when we take the skills strategy document "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy" to the next stage.

My officials have had several constructive meetings with the former Equal Opportunities Commission about the recommendations made in its report. The Scottish Government has already confirmed that it will be represented and participate fully in meetings of the national action group that will be facilitated by the Equality and Human Rights Commission. The first meeting is due to take place on 20 November 2007.

As Cathie Craigie rightly points out, the terms and conditions of service for classroom assistants are a matter for local authorities as employers. On the day of its publication, the EOC report received quite a dusty response from Pat Watters, a member of Cathie Craigie's party—she will correct me if I am wrong—and president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, who described it as "emotive" and said that there was no need for an action group, which was one of the EOC's recommendations. I regret that response. As I said, the matter is the responsibility of local authorities. I have said that we are prepared to work with them in that regard. There have been changes in the roles and responsibilities of classroom assistants in various authorities. However, I am determined to ensure  that classroom assistants have a career path. Many classroom assistants have degrees, and many want to see whether they like the classroom environment and whether they will want to go on and take a teaching qualification. I am exploring the possible career paths for classroom assistants. I want to ensure, in discussion with colleges and universities, that assistants are given such opportunities.

There has been no change in the statutory framework and requirements relating to school closures, inner-city or other. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning reissued the 2004 guidance as it was, but with a covering letter to education conveners emphasising certain aspects of its application.

The member will be aware that the current administration in Aberdeen City Council has said that it is reviewing its estate. It has not earmarked any schools for closure. The only people who are talking about school closures in Aberdeen are people in the Labour Party, and the only people who are putting fear into pupils and parents in Aberdeen are people in the Labour Party. Perhaps the member will speak to his Labour colleagues on Aberdeen City Council. They approved the budget to take our measures forward.

The Scottish Government carries out an  annual teacher workforce planning exercise to maintain a broad balance, at national level, between supply and demand. However, the filling of vacant teaching posts is a matter for individual authorities.

I can help in so far as the additional funding of £1.5 million for the Crichton campus, which the member will recall was announced by the Scottish Government on 20 August, includes support for the expansion of initial teacher education in the south-west to meet current and future local needs. Some 80 new undergraduate places for ITE are to be funded and phased in over the next three years. I accept that that will not alleviate the immediate problem that the member highlights, but it will help in the long term. Along with local MSPs, I urge Dumfries and Galloway Council and other local agencies to promote the area as a great place to live. More teachers and health professionals need to be encouraged to enjoy the delights of Dumfries and Galloway, which the member and I both know about.

Does the member believe that Unison and the 80,000 people who submitted a petition on reduction of class sizes are wrong?

Will the member give way?

The performance gap between boys and girls in secondary schools has a long history. We have seen a slight narrowing of the gap in examination results recently, but the challenge is to sustain that trend. We have issued a gender equality toolkit to all primary, secondary and special schools to help them meet their duties under the Equality Act 2006. That covers promoting equality between boys and girls in all areas of activity, including achievement and attainment.

We welcome the fact that attainment in Glasgow is improving more quickly than it is in Scotland as a whole, even though it starts from a lower base. We are committed to enabling every child to achieve his or her potential and we will focus on the poorest-performing children with increased early intervention and support. Of the additional £9 million that we have announced, Glasgow City Council will get £652,200 this year and £326,100 next year.

Yes. Learning and Teaching Scotland will produce draft outcomes and experiences for Gaelic learners and native speakers in the current school year, along with draft outcomes and experiences for English language and literacy, which will include references to Scots. That will build on the guidance that has already been issued on the curriculum for excellence that makes it clear that the languages and literature of Scotland provide a valuable source for learning about culture, identity and language.

I will certainly check the website and make sure that Scots is on the resource finder. A range of groups and people support the use of Scots in public life—not least me, as I took my oath in Doric—including the Scots Language Society, the Scots Language Resource Centre, the Scots Language Dictionary's dictionary of the older Scottish tongue and others. I know that excellent work is being done in various schools throughout the country to promote the Scots language and we must ensure that such good practice is disseminated.

Aye, fairly. We recognise that there are different Scots dialects throughout Scotland. Those of Shetland and Orkney are just as important as those of elsewhere.

Scotland's colleges have a key role in the delivery of a wide range of the Scottish Government's priorities. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will shortly publish the Government's response to the review of Scotland's colleges.

I agree totally with Andrew Welsh on the tremendous work that colleges do. I know that Andrew Welsh is a strong supporter of Scotland's colleges, just as I am, having in a previous life lectured at Aberdeen College. Andrew Welsh is fortunate in that Angus College in his constituency is one of Scotland's most highly regarded colleges. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will address the issues that Andrew Welsh raises in the Government's response to the review of Scotland's colleges. I do not wish to pre-empt the announcement on the new skills body, but I anticipate and hope that we can eradicate any duplication or inefficiencies that may exist.

The direct issue is reserved and falls under the Business Names Act 1985 and the Companies Act 2006. However, my officials have  been working with a range of Scottish and United Kingdom authorities to highlight the activities of bogus colleges wherever they come to light.

Mr Purvis will know that colleges are only one of the agencies that deliver skills training. At this time, it would be irresponsible for any Government to commit significant spending plans without knowing the outcome of the spending review.

As I said, we are well aware of the tremendous work that colleges do in providing courses and of their need to modernise for all the work that they do. However, again, I cannot make a commitment on spending until we get word from Westminster.

We plan to build on the success of existing modern languages learning and teaching in our primary schools. More than 99 per cent of primary 6 and primary 7 pupils are currently learning a modern language—indeed, many begin earlier, for example in pre-school. We know that there is good practice in schools throughout the country. The forthcoming curriculum for excellence draft outcomes on modern languages will take account of that good practice and set out expectations clearly. Glow, the national intranet for Scottish schools, will also support better sharing of good practice in modern languages and more cross-curricular collaboration, ensuring that primary pupils will be able to extend their horizons and enjoy wider opportunities in secondary education and later in life.

I think that parliamentary protocol precludes me from answering questions in French, German, Doric or even tentative Italian. Mr Rumbles could testify that my Italian would be tentative: not that long ago we both started learning Italian at a local secondary school. The member will be aware that modern languages are at the heart of SNP education policy, as I have outlined. Through a curriculum for excellence, we hope to embed modern languages  in the curriculum. We are much heartened by the good practice that exists. For example, children can learn home economics with recipes in French, and in citizenship and other subjects foreign languages are already embedded in the curriculum. We hope to extend that. I cannot say how highly I value people being able to speak at least one modern language. Employers recognise that if someone knows one language well, they can learn others too. Modern languages are therefore at the heart of opening up career opportunities for young people.

The 2006 teacher census showed that there were 51,659 class-based teachers in primary, secondary and special schools, 1,666 pre-school teachers and another 1,160 visiting specialist teachers. Figures for the 2007 census will be collected this month and will be published in March.

As was mentioned during this morning's education debate, we will give those answers once the comprehensive spending review has told us how much money is available. Clearly, the fact that we have already introduced another 300 teachers and 250 training posts into the system will ensure that we go some way to meeting that commitment.

Of course we have made a bid to meet those commitments. We will wait to find out what resources are available from the comprehensive spending review.

I thank the member for pointing out that Fife Council, like a number of other councils, is happy with the extra commitment that we have given on teacher numbers. Over the summer, I visited 11 local authorities, all of which, to a man and a woman, were highly supportive of our work in adding teachers to the system and in concentrating on primary 1 to primary 3.

The member can be assured that we will continue to work with local authorities. No Government trains teachers for the dole queue. Members of the 2007 cohort of about 3,350 probationers are able to apply for posts, and around 3,000 of them are already in post. Over the past month or so, more than 600 posts have been advertised. Given that we know that we must train teachers for the whole of the year, we believe that almost all those teachers will be in post. There are many jobs out there, including supply posts. We do not want teachers to have the worry that other graduates have of not finding a post as soon as they finish their courses, but we believe that, in the light of the additional posts that we have announced, there will be a balance between the number of people who are trained and the number of posts that are available.

As I said, we are in on-going discussions with local authorities on that matter. We are also in discussions with the higher education establishments that provide teacher training to ensure that there are sufficient teachers to fill the posts that must be filled throughout Scotland.

The Scottish Government recognises the vital role that Gaelic education plays in creating a sustainable future for Gaelic in Scotland. All issues regarding the allocation of resources are being considered as part of overall considerations for the next spending review period.

Like John Farquhar Munro, I am pleased at the number of primary school children who are educated by the Gaelic-medium method. My colleague Fiona Hyslop visited first-year students in Inverness high school recently. We know that a new Gaelic-medium primary school opened in Inverness this term. All questions relating to additional resources are being addressed in the context of our awaiting the outcome of the spending review. As the member will know, the funding of Gaelic-medium education does not always come completely from central Government; other bodies provide funding for teaching in Gaelic.

I congratulate the member, who is not a native Gaelic speaker, on his Gaelic. It shows how the various methods can make one extremely fluent in Gaelic. We will of course consider what the member said, but I am aware that Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, for example, offers total immersion courses in Gaelic. As we know from the Welsh experience, that is a key way of learning a new language.

The Scottish Government is keen to ensure that the number of Gaelic-speaking teachers matches the desire for Gaelic-medium education. The member will know that we must ensure that more secondary school teachers can teach their subject in Gaelic. They must be given the chance to improve their Gaelic in order to meet the requirements of teaching their subject in Gaelic. That is an on-going project for the Government.

Does the member realise that parents and children have told us that children would rather be taught in smaller classes? Parents take that into account when they place their children. Parents would much prefer their children to be taught in decent schools that have smaller class sizes, nearest to where they live.

I welcome the opportunity to close this debate on the Government's plans for skills. The Government has set out its strategy—what we want to achieve. How we will do it will come during engagement with all those who are involved with skills. At the education debate in June, there was a call for the Government to build on the common agenda that clearly exists in Parliament. We were reminded that this is no time to stall on progress—firm decision making rather than more pilot projects or tinkering around the edges was called for. Today we have announced some bold firm decisions on the way ahead—not tinkering around the edges. I am pleased that the strategy has been broadly welcomed by some members from all parties. Iain Gray said that he could not find fault with it, Murdo Fraser gave it a pass and Jeremy Purvis recognised the importance of working with colleges to deliver locally. We can build a Scotland that is wealthier and fairer only if our people are equipped with the skills, expertise and knowledge for success. The strategy was welcomed across the board at its launch on Monday. We used the consultation that was undertaken previously when drawing it up.

Not at the moment. People made it clear to us that they had had enough consultation on what should happen—they want action, which is why they have broadly welcomed the document. This Government is building a self-confident and outward-looking Scotland. We want an ambitious nation in which there are opportunities for everyone to benefit and to make positive contributions to Scotland's prosperity. We do not want a Scotland that is just bumbling along: investing in our people's skills and ensuring that skills contribute as much as possible to sustained economic growth is central to that.

That is not what I read in the strategy document, and it is not what the people outside Parliament have read in it. In "Skills for Scotland", we acknowledge the central role of Scotland's colleges in economic development because of the diversity of individuals they serve, the range of opportunities that they provide and their breadth of partnership working. What is the point in building new skills academies—secondary moderns by any other name—when existing school, college and university links are willing to meet the skills challenge? We recognise the importance to our knowledge economy of a steady supply of workers who are skilled to the highest levels. Reports for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development show science and engineering to be among the UK's top skills shortages—that shortage is mirrored in Scotland. A steady flow of graduates and technicians is vital, so that industries in which we punch above our weight can continue to compete favourably. Our life sciences, creative industries, financial services and the energy sector, including renewables, all need smart, skilled Scots. Scotland must continue to increase technology transfer from our world-class research base into viable products and processes. Skills development is needed here, too. Encouraging technology start-ups and assisting scientists and technologists in developing entrepreneurial and business skills—helping them to create and grow into our large companies of the future—will prove to be an ever-increasing priority.

Christina McKelvie and Aileen Campbell pointed out the faults in a target-driven proposal. Ms McKelvie was right to say that targets are the wrong way to go about it. Do members of other parties really believe that voluntary organisations—such as the one in Aberdeen that Brian Adam and I came across, which tries hard to give employability skills to some of our most vulnerable youngsters—should have the funding cut from underneath them if they do not meet targets? The priority of this Government is not to meet targets but to ensure that every young person has the skills to get into a meaningful job. Lots of  money has been wasted in the past on churn, and on getting people get into jobs that are not meaningful to them. We recognise the importance of our knowledge economy for a steady supply of skilled workers for our public services as well as our private ones. Our ambitions for public services demand that we will continue to look to our colleges and universities to provide the next generation of the highest-skilled public sector workers, such as teachers, doctors and lawyers. However, our strategy recognises that employer demand for skills needs to take place at all levels, and we will work with all those who are trying to achieve that aim: the unions that are committed to supporting the learning of their members, which is highlighted in the document; sector skills councils, which are working to raise the level of skills in their sectors; and employers, who must be more demanding with regard to skills development. We will continue to challenge the public services to make better use of their employees and to ensure that public services are improved for everyone. We also acknowledge the voluntary sector's contribution in providing skills, which is why we have not been prescriptive about the new body that has been announced today. We are determined to engage in conversation with all those who provide skills advice. Our strategy also recognises that individuals move into the world of work from various starting points. In Scotland, we are fortunate to have invested heavily over the years in learning and training providers, who go a long way towards acknowledging the variety of needs that must be met. We also have excellent colleges and universities, as well as a strong third sector, community learning and development base, and private training provision. However, we are ambitious to use such assets better. We have outlined our plans to establish a task group to advise on how we can ensure that resources that are allocated for learning outwith institutions support the strategic direction that is set down by Government for community learning and development. We also believe that the best way in which to ensure long-term employability is to inspire—not compel—children to stay in education or training after the age of 16.

Not at the moment. Good options and clear pathways out of school are essential for ensuring continuity and progression in learning and achievement. As I have pointed out already—and as Elizabeth Smith made clear in her speech—even primary 7 schoolchildren are making links with colleges and finding out the importance of their learning to the  world of work. The point is that we must address the needs of lower-achieving young people who are at risk of disengagement.

I have already answered that question. Target-driven approaches have not provided many young people with meaningful employment or courses. If they had succeeded, the member's party might be sitting on the Government benches—which is not the case. Learning is a powerful good in its own right and a necessary driver for self-development. However, learning and training are powerful enablers for much of what the Government wants to achieve with regard to developing our workforce, increasing demand for skills and increasing productivity. Through learning and skills development, workers, families and communities can prosper and the inequality that so blights Scotland can be reduced. As a result, this strategy acknowledges that a greater national effort is required—it is a call for action. Although we have set out the strategy, we are not taking a top-down approach towards how it should be implemented. Instead, we are working with all our partners in the skills development and training agenda to ensure that we step up to the mark on skills for Scotland.

Does the member recognise that the curriculum for excellence agenda addresses precisely the aspects that he has just highlighted? Does he recognise that all the things that he has mentioned, including skills, are embedded in the curriculum for excellence and the school agenda?

I thank Ms Alexander for her question. From now on, it is likely that her questions will be to the First Minister only, so I will take the opportunity to congratulate her on her position-elect and to wish her a long and happy time leading the Labour Party in Scotland—in opposition. The precise number of probationary teachers who completed their probationary year in June 2007 but have been unable to find full-time employment will be known once the annual teacher census has been conducted on 19 September and once the General Teaching Council for Scotland's probationer survey has been conducted in October.

I reassure Ms Alexander that the situation for newly qualified teachers this year is no different from that in previous years. Indeed, the situation is better as a result of our injection of 300 extra teaching posts into the system. With respect to the 3,350 newly qualified teachers, local authorities have told us that 3,000 posts have been advertised since Easter.

We have a clear manifesto commitment to match the school building investment plans that were in place prior to the election. Beyond that, we wish to consider with authorities in the context of the spending review the feasible scale and timescale of the next stages of the school building programme.

As we have said, both during the election and since, we intend to match the previous Executive's school building programme brick for brick—we are committed to doing so. As Ken Macintosh knows, local authorities are responsible for the management of their school estate and the decision to refurbish or replace schools lies entirely with them. When local authorities present their proposals, we will look at them in the context of matching the previous Executive's proposals brick for brick.

Is it not true that we in the SNP have done precisely what the member suggested? Four SNP councillors on Aberdeen City Council are under 26. We involved them in the democratic process, they stood for election, they won and they are playing their full part. We act rather than just talk.

I thank Karen Whitefield for bringing this extremely important and worthwhile initiative to the Parliament's attention. As a minister, it takes a bit of getting used to not being allowed to sign motions, but I and my colleagues would, I am sure, sign up to the motion that we are debating. Not only is the Government committed to a fairer and more equal society in Scotland, but we richer nations of the world have an obligation to ensure that the world becomes a fairer and more equal place. That includes the fundamental right to an education that everyone has. It is clear that we have not managed to come anywhere near to achieving that goal. Debates such as this one will help to raise the profile of continuing inequalities and ensure that that agenda remains high in our conscience and priorities. Children are crucial to the debate. All children deserve an equal chance to have a happy and safe childhood and to realise their full potential. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of  the Child sets out the rights and protections that every child should enjoy, wherever they live. This Government fully supports the provisions of the convention and I welcome the fact that almost every country in the world has signed up to it. The Scottish Government's strategy on international development helps to promote those rights in developing countries by supporting a range of projects that tackle infant and maternal mortality and ensure that children get the education that they have a right to, for example. We congratulate the former Executive on the Malawi exchange programme and on the work that has been done. We are committed to carrying on that work. Nelson Mandela said that "there can be no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way in which it treats its children." Leaving so many of them without an education is no way to treat children. As Robert Brown said, children may know poverty, hard labour, ill health and HIV-AIDS, but they may never know the inside of a classroom. More and more Governments are responding to popular pressure by announcing an end to primary school fees. As a result, millions of children have flooded into schools. It is great to see the co-operation between our schools in Scotland and schools in, for example, Malawi. As far as we know, 80 schools in Scotland are involved with schools in Malawi—the initiative has taken off throughout the country. Karen Whitefield should be proud that, like schools throughout the country, Clarkston primary school, which is in her constituency, has joined the programme. However, without a consequent increase in teaching resources, most children drop out of school long before the end of their viable schooling. As Robert Brown said, some teachers who die of AIDS are not replaced. Scotland has a long history of helping countries to develop their education systems. As I said, education plays a strong role in our Scotland-Malawi co-operation agreement. The education strand of our joint action plan stresses the importance of education for all children and aims to increase access to education and to improve retention levels, especially for girls. Christine Grahame highlighted how important it is to educate women and gave the striking example of the young woman from northern Nigeria. I think that it was last night that I witnessed on TV the beating in another part of the world of a young woman who had clearly gone against Sharia law. It is clear that we need more women like the woman whom Christine Grahame mentioned: women who stand up for equality, justice and human rights.  I recall that three adults and three school-leavers from one of my own local churches went to Malawi two years ago to help. They found themselves teaching the children arts and crafts. The young girls were astonished by the enthusiasm and good behaviour of the children. As Karen Whitefield said, unfortunately some of our children take education for granted and treat it accordingly—no doubt, that is something that we will have to work on. Another example of how Scotland is helping to get children in Malawi into education is the enterprising global citizen project, which is jointly funded by the Executive and the United Nations Children's Fund as part of the UN rights of the child programme. As Karen Whitefield said, voluntary organisations such as Oxfam and Save the Children add value to such work. All Scottish local authorities have been offered the opportunity to participate in the enterprising global citizen course. Through the Scottish Executive's international development fund, the EGC course has also been introduced in Malawi. Working through the EGC course shows each child how to create and develop their own child-led enterprises—in other words, how to educate themselves out of poverty. Malawian children do not want handouts: they want an education that will lead them to make their own way in the world, give themselves a good standard of living and ensure that their own children receive the education that their parents—whom they will be better able to support—were denied. We in Scotland cannot be complacent. Research indicates that 23 per cent of Scottish adults have low numeracy and literacy skills. We must strive to make that a statistic of the past. I note that some of the participants at the event that Karen Whitefield mentioned were from the Gypsy Traveller community. Cathy Peattie is no longer in the chamber, but she and others will know of my commitment to that community when my party was in opposition. We must ensure that the Gypsy Traveller community has equal access to an education that takes into account their itinerant lifestyle. We should also not forget children with special needs, both here and in the developing world. Every child has the right to full access to an education system that develops them to their full potential. All of us present today have a duty to ensure that we do not fail them in that goal.  Through education, we can directly influence the thinking and approach of future generations in dealing with health issues and the prevention of disease. We can also provide a broader understanding of sustainable economic development and can help to establish sustainable, thriving and healthier communities. What can we do in Scottish classrooms to raise the profile of global issues in general and the global campaign for education initiative in particular? We can raise awareness and, through awareness, understanding—so that the children involved, as the voters of tomorrow, can continue to put pressure on Governments to increase meaningful aid. None of us who took part in the make poverty history march can forget how meaningful the campaign was—not only to the participants but to all the G8 members who came to Scotland for the summit. It is imperative that our education system ensures that all our young people acquire a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it. Young people must learn about the increasingly interconnected world that they live in and about the major challenges that we face, including globalisation, climate change and world poverty. If we fail in that, not only do we fail our young people, but our society as a whole will be poorer. With that in mind, I confirm that this Government is committed to ensuring that an international education is taken seriously in all our schools. That will provide opportunities for all young people to become responsible and knowledgeable citizens as well as successful learners, confident individuals and effective contributors. The schools involved in the global campaign for education event that Karen Whitefield mentioned should be congratulated by all of us on the fantastic work that they are doing in educating their children about the world and the challenges that we all face. I hope that many more schools will follow their lead. By raising the profile of the aims of the global campaign for education, we can assist those aims. I urge members to do all that they can to help; we will do all that we can.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

I thank Hugh Henry for bringing the debate to Parliament. I also thank members from around the chamber who expressed their good wishes to Fiona Hyslop, Adam Ingram and me. I support the points that were made by my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop. I look forward to the work ahead in developing the skills strategy for Scotland. We are committed to building on the existing strengths of the Scottish education system and to making changes only when they will enhance the learning experience of individuals, regardless of their stage of life. As members have said, to grow our economy we must strengthen our skills. Scotland is below the UK level in GDP per head and output per hour—that must be remedied. The conundrum is that although our workforce is better educated than that in many other countries, the strength of our economy does not reflect that. The Government is determined to remedy that situation, which is why we must develop a skills strategy to release the workforce's potential, for the benefit of all. I agree with Elizabeth Smith that the job-for-life era is long gone. We need a workforce with a high level of general education that is capable and flexible and which can meet the demand for multiskilled workers, whether in the offshore industries or the medical profession. We must develop a culture in Scotland in which learning and continuous professional development are an integral part of a person's career. Training courses should result in universally recognised qualifications and develop transferable skills. On my first visit to Germany as a 15-year-old, I was mightily impressed that a hairdresser whom I met had many qualifications that showed what she had done in her training. On later visits, I worked in hotels and restaurants and saw how everyone, from waiters to cleaning staff, had their skills recognised. In that context, I welcome the contribution that was made by Christopher Harvie  in his maiden speech. We would all do well to remember its content. People must be so equipped that they do not fear changing jobs, but accept that as a challenge with which they can cope. We must rekindle in people the excitement of learning, whether that means someone becoming competent in a new language as their company expands its markets overseas or a joiner adding wood-turning to his list of skills. We must ensure that those who re-enter the job market, full time or part time, after leaving their main employment feel that they have access to relevant training courses. I come from the same constituency area as Mike Rumbles and I agree that we must be mindful of the needs of rural Scotland. Members will be aware that, in the previous parliamentary session, Stewart Stevenson and his Westminster colleague at the time, Alex Salmond, had to ensure that courses for the fishing industry were retained at Banff and Buchan College of Further Education in Fraserburgh. We must not get into a situation in which rural industries are at a disadvantage because local colleges do not run certain courses. As Mike Rumbles knows, there are many educational opportunities in his constituency. For example, the secondary schools there access the skills of professionals from Aberdeen colleges, who go out to the schools. Such initiatives must be enhanced to ensure that education in urban and rural areas does not develop into a two-tier system.

Perhaps there has been a mix-up in the debate about what skills academies and centres of excellence are. Their different aspects will be taken into account when we put together our skills strategy. We must ensure that we do not return to the old secondary modern model. However, such a system is exactly what many Labour members have suggested is about to happen. They want to return to having secondary moderns, but the last thing that we should do is to pigeonhole and categorise children at a young age. I remind members that the SNP does not reject Labour's proposals. However, I feel that the electorate rejected them at the election. We will look at the proposals and take them on board when we develop our skills strategy. We believe that we must increase the opportunities for work-related education and strengthen links between schools and colleges, universities and businesses. We must create new  chances for everyone to flourish personally in education and employment. We will involve the trade unions, because we recognise their vital role in driving the development of the workforce's skills and encouraging employers to utilise the potential of their workforce. We want better management of the workforce, in industry and the public sector, to ensure that job satisfaction is increased. The stakeholders to whom we have spoken would be appalled at the prospect of the SNP amendment being voted down, because that would mean a vote against a skills strategy for Scotland. Is that really the message that the Parliament wants to send out?

Does the minister agree that Aberdeen City Council is far ahead of other local authorities on fair trade and that its best practice could be followed elsewhere?

I, too, thank my colleague Tricia Marwick for securing the debate and for highlighting the anomalies in the treatment of MS. MS is a hugely debilitating condition for which there is, as yet, no cure. However, I hope that, with the cracking of MS's genetic code and with medical advances taking place at a significant pace, a cure will be found soon. In the meantime, the pharmaceutical industry continues to make significant advances in the treatment of debilitating illnesses and  conditions such as MS, and Tysabri is a real addition in that respect. As Tricia Marwick pointed out, almost 10,000 people in Scotland have MS. The UK Multiple Sclerosis Society estimates that if the Association of British Neurologists' criteria for receiving treatment were properly implemented, somewhere between 28,000 and 40,000 people with MS—or 32 to 47 per cent of the UK's MS population—would be eligible for disease-modifying therapies. However, in the UK, only 9,000 to 10,000—or 11 per cent—of people with MS are on DMTs. That figure compares poorly with other countries in Europe and beyond. In the Netherlands, 24.7 per cent of the MS population is on DMTs; in France, 30.4 per cent; in Italy, 32.9 per cent; in Ireland, 36.1 per cent; in Germany, 37.1 per cent; in Spain, 40.6 per cent; in the United States, 47.1 per cent; and in Portugal, a massive 61 per cent. As Eleanor Scott indicated, one important factor is the cost-effectiveness of MS treatments, and the figure for the relapses avoided by treatment is much better for Tysabri than for any of the other drugs that are available. Obviously, the number of relapses in a non-treated population will be much higher than that in a treated population; however, under a model developed in the US, the cost per relapse per year avoided was between $12,000 and $23,000 lower for Tysabri than for the other DMTs. As Nanette Milne made clear, Tysabri helps people to avoid relapses, which means that they avoid having to take days off work; it helps them to avoid treatments that worsen the condition and debilitate them further; and it helps them to avoid having to employ carers. Surely, in deciding whether Tysabri should be available to MS sufferers, the Minister for Health and Community Care should weigh all those factors and costs against the cost of prescribing Tysabri. I look forward to hearing the deputy minister's views on the matter.

We need to remember that the bill has been introduced from the perspective of helping communities that are blighted by those who loiter on the street or kerb crawl in a vehicle. The Scottish Parliament information centre briefing stated: "The aim of the Bill is to make it an offence to cause 'alarm, offence or nuisance' through soliciting or loitering to  sell or buy sexual services. The purpose of the Bill is to deal with the negative consequences of street prostitution for communities."

Let me get started. As others have said, although the bill was introduced by the Executive, it has ended up as a committee bill. Initially, the bill did not do what it was intended to do, and only as a result of significant amendments and recommendations by the Local Government and Transport Committee has it got to the stage where it will help communities such as those in Calton and Leith. Leslie Brown, a community safety strategist from Aberdeen City Council, said in evidence to the Local Government and Transport Committee: "Unless we witness the sea change that Fergus Ewing talked about and make a quantum leap to the criminalisation of the purchase of sex, so that we can tackle demand, we must be realistic about the situation on the ground."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 31 October 2006; c 4182.] The bill is the start of that sea change. I echo what Fergus Ewing said: my huge disappointment about the bill is that it is not broader and more encompassing, and it does not cover sex parlours, international sex trafficking and, more pressingly, the abuse of women by their so-called partners, who are better known as pimps. The harrowing story of a young woman who moved to Aberdeen from Elgin drug-free and met a drug dealer who befriended her, offered her accommodation and, having hooked her on drugs, put her on the streets shows just what the situation can be like. The story was told as a result of said man being found murdered in his house. That area of crime is hugely underreported, not only by sellers of sex but by purchasers who experience theft and violence at the hands of the sex workers' minders. In my view, the minders exploit women as much as if not more than the purchasers. I hope that the bill is seen only as an important first step that shows a sea change in attitudes, as Frances Curran and others have said. There should be more legislation in this area. David McLetchie is quite wrong about management zones: they work because women look out for other women. It is important that more women come forward and use the management zones.

I can take both positions. I said that we cannot just tackle street prostitution; we have to see the problem in the round and tackle other violence against women. Mike Rumbles might not see the purchasing of sex as violence against women, but I do.

By passing the bill, we will send out a strong signal that we in Scotland do not tolerate the use of women by others as sex objects. The bill is an important first step. I am glad that the minister has promised extra funding. I hope that it will reach out to more women and perhaps even provide safe houses for women who are experiencing sexual exploitation by their partners, including drug-addict partners. I hope that the bill will be passed.

It is the two Maureens. Thank you, Presiding Officer. As this Blair Government thankfully nears its end, it will be remembered in a negative and discredited way for a few things, not least taking Britain into an illegal war. It will also be surrounded by the suspicion of cash for peerages. The decision by Mr Justice Sullivan just last week must also rank among those scars on our democracy. As others have said, Greenpeace is to be congratulated in pursuing its legal action and in highlighting the Government's failure to disclose key information on the new generation of nuclear power stations, mostly to do with the disposal of nuclear waste and the financial costs. Alex  Johnstone should be reminded that nuclear power meets only 3.6 per cent of our total energy demand. Under any nuclear new-build programme, the first reactor would not come online until 2018 at the earliest, with the main delivery of the programme not happening until around 2025 to 2030. That is not in this generation. If there was no further delay on the Peterhead carbon capture project, that could be up and running by 2009, at a projected cost of $1 billion. If the minister wants to know, the money for that could come from stopping sending our troops to Iraq, and perhaps also from the nuclear weapons programme. A 4 per cent saving could also be achieved by insisting on energy conservation measures on the part of housebuilders and businesses, which should make it a priority for their workplaces. It is a relief that the Executive has at last managed to decide to support the wave and tidal industries and to take Scotland another step on the way to becoming a renewable energy powerhouse, confirming the huge potential for carbon-free energy generation that exists around Scotland, rather than allowing projects to go to Portugal. Perhaps Scottish ministers could now turn their attention to chivvying Gordon Brown into supporting carbon capture technology and to getting behind the Peterhead project. The project will convert natural gas to hydrogen and carbon dioxide. The hydrogen will be used as clean fuel for a 350MW power station, and the carbon dioxide will be pumped into the North sea oil reservoirs for the purposes of increased oil recovery and, ultimately, storage. It is disingenuous for the Chancellor of the Exchequer to say that he has to compare Peterhead with other projects, which are nowhere near as far down the road. Carbon capture and storage clearly have the potential to add to the growth strategy of Scotland and to reduce our CO 2 footprint. Aberdeen, the north and the north-east are clearly ready and willing to be the global energy hub, with the development of the Aberdeen science and energy park, an energy academy and an energy technologies institute all in the pipeline or ready to go. That is exciting news for Scotland, and we do not need nuclear power.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to act on the recommendations of the McClelland review of public procurement and the  subsequently established advisory group. (S2O-12006)

The McClelland report estimates the value of public procurement in Scotland at £8 billion. Westminster's estimate of the value of public procurement is £125 billion for the UK as a whole, which would mean that Scotland's share is roughly £10.5 billion although, given that the public sector is larger in Scotland than it is in England, the figure is likely to be higher than that. Will the minister admit that he has no idea how public sector spending helps or hinders Scottish businesses? Is it not time that the Scottish Executive followed the lead of the Irish and Norwegian Governments in using e-tendering for public procurement, which has resulted in a significant boost to their indigenous small and medium-sized enterprises?

I, too, thank Margo MacDonald for bringing the issue of coeliac disease to the attention of the Parliament today. I apologise for not being able to  attend the breakfast briefing this morning—I had a late engagement in my constituency last night. Like many members attending the debate, I had heard of coeliac disease and know some sufferers, but the extra information that we have learned today has been invaluable. I would be pleased to be involved in highlighting this auto-immune disease. The fact that one in a hundred people have coeliac disease is alarming; the fact that four out of five people do not know that they have it is very worrying indeed. On average, coeliacs will suffer the symptoms for 13 years before diagnosis. Coupled with the fact that they will have visited their doctors twice a year with the symptoms, that must be extremely distressing for those involved. It is that lack of awareness of the disease that the minister and Health Department officials must address with GPs, nurses and others. The number of days lost through misdiagnosis or non-diagnosis must be costing the country millions of pounds. The drop in the number of days lost by people who have been diagnosed, from 21 days per annum pre-diagnosis to three days per annum post-diagnosis, is startling, and it shows, as Euan Robson said, how much better their lives must be after they have been diagnosed. I congratulate Coeliac UK on its work and on its raising awareness here today and among the public in general. I hope that, with that raised awareness, the price difference between gluten-free products and the products that we usually buy is decreased. Few sufferers can get the right products on prescription unless they are getting free prescriptions for some other reason. The fact that diagnosis of coeliac disease can prevent other conditions, such as cancer, osteoporosis and infertility, must make it beneficial to the health service and save it costs in the long run. It is important that awareness of coeliac disease and the measures that need to be taken become common knowledge, just like schoolchildren and their parents being made aware of the problems of fellow pupils with nut allergies. Similarly, people must be made aware of the products that those with coeliac disease can and cannot eat. As others have mentioned, we should not forget the gravies and other sauces that go with food. Like other members, I hope that the test for coeliac disease becomes more widely available. It seems a good idea to be able to take it in pharmacies, which could offer a long-term saving for the health service. I look forward to hearing the minister's views and to taking the test with a kit myself.

In my speech, I said that in an effort to change the administration's mind, the SNP group on Aberdeenshire Council put forward a motion before the matter was discussed by the education and recreation committee. It was obviously defeated in its attempt.

I begin by thanking all members who have signed my motion. The lack of seat belts in school vehicles taking children to and from school is an issue in which I have been involved for many years. My children attended a rural primary school, and although they were not directly affected, as they were initially transported in school transport with seat belts—a people carrier—and then they walked or cycled, children from more outlying areas were carried to school in vehicles without seat belts. As a school board member and subsequently the chair, I remember that the issue was raised at nearly every meeting as we battled with Aberdeenshire Council to insist on seat belts. Subsequent boards at that school and, according to my mailbag, many other schools and individual parents are still battling. My decision to try to do something was prompted by a letter from a constituent who was distraught that her five-year-old, on her first day at school, was going to school on a bus without a seat belt. Then, just a few weeks later, a school bus crashed on its way to Netherley primary school. Several pupils were injured in the crash but, thankfully, none of the injuries was serious. Current legislation seems to have too many loopholes that allow councils the leeway not to insist on seat belts in every vehicle that transports children. That is particularly ironic in light of other, recently introduced legislation, which requires that children under a certain height must, regardless of their age, be restrained in a child's seat or booster  seat. The new requirement must cause great consternation to some parents whose children think that they are old enough to do without a booster seat. The terms of the current legislation require all cars, minibuses and coaches to be fitted with seat belts, but the mandatory requirement for the fitting of seat belts does not apply to buses unless the bus was first used on or after 1 October 2001. Buses that are designed for urban use, with standing passengers, are exempt from the legislation. An arbitrary distinction seems to have been drawn between coaches and buses. Since 1991, coaches and minibuses have been required to be fitted with seat belts and coaches have been required to have a speed limiter that must be set at 62mph. However, buses—defined as vehicles that weigh more than 7.5 tonnes—that are not capable of more than 60mph are not required to have a speed limiter and are not required to have seat belts unless they are new and came into service on or after 1 October 2001. As I recall, when that legislation was introduced, many small rural bus operators feared that they would lose school contracts and be put out of business. Indeed, that happened to some operators. However, it is interesting to note that the bus involved in the Netherley crash was operated by one of Scotland's two main bus companies, which earns profits that run into millions and millions of pounds. In my view, the use of an older bus without seat belts was inexcusable.

I knew that Mike Rumbles would want to intervene.

That is interesting, given that the bus did not have seat belts. There is something wrong with the legislation if that is allowed. I suspect that the vehicle involved was an urban bus that was doing a school run. In my view, that should not be allowed. Aberdeenshire Council has not lacked an opportunity to implement the legislation. The council's school bus contracts have been up for tender but, in spite of a Scottish National Party motion, the current administration has not insisted on the provision of seat belts as part of that tender.  In preparing for tonight's debate, I tried to contact all 32 local authorities to find out their policies. That is not as easy as one might think. It is interesting to note that the councils next door to Aberdeenshire—Angus Council, Moray Council and Aberdeen City Council—ensure that seat belts are provided on dedicated school buses. However, the situation across the country is patchy. I hope that the minister will agree that the current situation is unacceptable. I ask him to enter into dialogue with the Department for Transport to see what can be done to enforce the legislation. I also ask him to chivvy local authorities in Scotland to require all contractors who transport children to school to provide seat belts. The concern of parents is very real. The chair of Netherley primary school's school board recently wrote to me saying: "I am acutely aware that I am still sending my son to school everyday on a bus which is not safe. If it is involved in an accident in which it turns over, children will die."

Will the member take an intervention?

Phil Gallie is about to leave the Parliament, but he paid it a great compliment. The private bills that it has considered were long and sometimes tedious, but they were obviously a hell of a lot better than those at the House of Commons.

As the minister said, the bill is quite technical and is not one to set the electorate, the media or even the heather, on fire. The people who will welcome it most are those who have sat through consideration of the Edinburgh tram bills, the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill, the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill and so on. However, we welcome the fact that, because of the so-called front-loading of the process, members of the public who are interested in a particular major project will be able to get involved at a very early stage. We also welcome the onus that is being put on developers to involve many people and at an early stage. I thank the committee clerks and all those who were involved in the bill. The SNP will vote for the bill at decision time.

I do not recall it being suggested to the Local Government and Transport Committee that scrutiny of projects under the bill would be as strong as the minister's comments today suggest that it will be. If such scrutiny is to take place, and given what my colleagues have said to other committees, I seek leave to withdraw amendment 16.

Does not the minister agree that existing environmental assessments do not take into account the effects on our environment of factors such as climate change and global warming? If we are serious about dealing with climatic matters, we have the opportunity today to put our money where our mouth is and to put in place legislation to address them.

If, as he says, the minister will use subordinate legislation to ensure that climate change factors are taken into account in environmental assessments, I seek leave to withdraw amendment 1.  Amendment 1, by agreement, withdrawn.

Although there was general agreement that the existing system of dealing with major projects by means of a private act of the Scottish Parliament is not a satisfactory way of doing things, there is concern among those who have followed the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill that so little involvement of the Parliament is expected as a result of the bill. With amendment 16, I am not trying to reintroduce the arguments that were advanced by Donald Gorrie at stage 2. If all the front-loading of the process of major projects takes place and all interested parties are involved from the start, that will be welcome. However, there is concern that  although local members might be able to have a say, Parliament as a body will not have a say on major strategic developments. That is remiss. Shortly after the announcement of a project, time should be given for elected members to give their views so that ministers know at the outset the views of members and their constituents. I offer an example that looks back to what happened earlier today. If proposals were developed for a new Forth crossing, from whichever party, surely the Government of the day should lead an early debate on the subject—for example, on whether the crossing should be a bridge or a tunnel. That debate should not be left to an individual member to introduce; the Government should lead the debate so that members may have a say on the project. I move amendment 16.

Events that have occurred since stage 2 proceedings on the bill have precipitated the need for amendments 1 to 3. Recently, Aberdeen City Council was asked to consider an application from the British Airports Authority to extend the runway at Aberdeen airport so that it can accommodate long-haul flights. When some councillors raised environmental and climatic change concerns, council officials advised them that those were not material considerations when a decision was being made and that even under the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, which was passed recently by the Parliament, they still would not be considered as such. This is a case of legislation not reflecting the concerns that have been expressed on all sides of the chamber regarding the environment. If my amendments are agreed to, we will have the chance to allow environmental factors to be taken into account, along with other factors, when major projects are considered under the bill. It seems odd that projects of national significance do not include airport developments, especially since so much is said here about climate change, global warming and the effects of carbon emissions. I am not saying that there should not be a runway extension at Aberdeen airport. On the contrary, if long-haul planes can be filled in areas  other than London, that is all the better because many carbon emissions result from planes being stacked for landing at the hugely overcrowded London airports. I do not suggest that environmental change factors should be the overriding ones, but surely they should be considered and taken into account in the planning of major infrastructure projects. I move amendment 1.

Members who were elected in 1999 may recall that one of the Parliament's first debates was on the report of the commission that was set up to examine the relationship between the new Scottish Parliament and local government, which was greeted with much support from throughout the parties. The McIntosh report stressed the importance of parity of esteem for the new Parliament and local authorities and the importance of engaging the electorate through subsidiarity and local decision making. It is to the shame of the Liberal-Labour Government that the optimism of the new beginning and the new  optimism for local government have vanished. Instead, the Government has reduced local authorities to bodies that do its bidding. The room for manoeuvre for local authorities to do anything innovative and new has disappeared as their budgets have been reduced. Local government is charged with delivering the services that matter most to citizens and which impact most on their daily lives, including education, social work and environmental services. No local authority argues with the contention that not enough money follows new legislation, which is demonstrated most graphically by the free personal care policy, although the same applies to other matters. According to a report by Professor Arthur Midwinter, Aberdeen City Council's grant-aided expenditure for children's services is £10 million per annum, which is 113 per cent less than the amount that is spent. It is likely that £8 million will be slashed from Aberdeen City Council's social work budget in 2007-08, and that will lead to cuts in services for the most vulnerable people in society. Because of cuts in its funding, the voluntary sector is under pressure too. Many groups will have to dip into whatever reserves they have. That situation is unsustainable. As Mike Rumbles said, Aberdeenshire Council has the fourth-lowest AEF per head of population—its figure is more than 10 per cent lower than the Scottish average. I am glad that Mr McCabe wants a review of the needs-based assessment of grant, and I am sure that that will be welcome in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. However, it will come too late for the disabled in Aberdeenshire, because the council, looking for cuts, is forcing people to choose between concessionary taxi charges or exemption from parking restrictions.

I will leave that question for Mr Swinney. He is the finance man and he has all the figures to hand. Council tax payers have been hammered by this Lib-Lab Government since it came to power; the increase announced today is an admission of that. It is time for a new era, as the minister said. It is a time for partnership between local government and this Parliament, rather than a time for the councils to do what the Executive tells them to do. COSLA has been silenced and councillors have had their heads down. No councillor finds the work satisfying any more.  The new era, minister, will come with an SNP Government and many more SNP-led councils. It will not come with this Labour Government.

Are any programmes specifically designed for women from ethnic minorities? I know that they find it particularly difficult.

I will be brief, because most of what I wanted to say has already been said. I, too, thank Ken Macintosh for bringing the debate to the chamber. As others have said, it is timely, because a decision on the vaccine will be made soon. It is great that advances in medical science have detected the reasons for cervical cancer and genital warts. The cause seems to be viral, and given that at least one vaccine has been found to prevent cervical cancer, we should take forward the advances in medical science and put them to good use. As others have said, in the UK three people die from cervical cancer each day. One in three of those who are identified with the disease die from it. If that were the case with flu, an epidemic would be declared and Government ministers would do something about it. Screening will still be necessary if the vaccine is successful, but we hope that it will be done at longer intervals. Last week, Nanette Milne and I were in talks with Grampian NHS Board, which confirmed that there has been a decline in the take-up of cervical screening. It is not difficult to identify the reasons for that. Someone may make an appointment and then find out that it is not convenient, so they cancel it and make another appointment at another time. The matter slips off the agenda of busy women's lives. I, too, recently met representatives of Jo's Trust, including a young woman who had recently been diagnosed with and treated for cervical cancer. She spoke movingly about the trauma caused by being told that she had an abnormal smear, the examinations, the invasive surgery and the disruption to her life and that of her wider family. If there is a way of preventing that, surely we should introduce it. I, too, take on the people who say that the introduction of the vaccine is likely to lead to an increase in sexual activity. I do not believe that that is the case. As part of the sexual health programme, we have to make clear the possibility of picking up STDs. Education on sexual health  will still be necessary. My 14-year-old daughter, who is involved in the peer education programme, has been talking to me about this issue and about the talks that she is giving to others. It would be remiss of us not to take up the innovation and research that has been done in this area. As others have said, the vaccine is being introduced in other places. In New Hampshire, nine to 26-year-olds are getting it. It should not be left to the well-off, many hundreds of whom are now paying £450 for three doses of the vaccine. The people who need the vaccine most must get access to it. I hope that the minister will give us good news.

I thank the committee clerks for their work in keeping track of the changes that the committee wanted to make. I also thank the many people who gave evidence in helping the committee to make its response to the bill as introduced. The debate has been a good one that has not been conducted along party lines. I welcome the changes that the minister announced. The key purpose of the bill is to tackle the problems that street prostitution cause to communities. As Fergus Ewing said, the women from the Calton area of Glasgow gave the committee powerful evidence in that regard. The committee soon came to realise that the bill would not achieve its stated intention. Right up to our last meeting on it, there was a great chance that we would recommend that the bill be thrown out. I am delighted that we managed to extort the significant changes that the Executive has made to the bill. In my speech, I want to highlight three key areas, all of which have come to the fore in the debate today. First, as so many members have stated clearly, any buying of sexual services is violence. As Elaine Smith so powerfully said, those who are involved—predominantly women—are the subject of violence, sexual exploitation and abuse. Parliament is out to change such attitudes. People who buy sexual services are the perpetrators of violence that will no longer be tolerated in Scotland. It is anathema that women who solicit on our streets are prosecuted and end up in overcrowded prisons for fine defaulting—and are subsequently stigmatised, as Pauline McNeill rightly said—while the buyers of sexual services are not even identified. The bill's focus is narrow. I regret that the Scottish Executive chose to tackle prostitution in such a piecemeal way, so I have sympathy with Margo MacDonald, Mark Ballard and other members in that regard. We owe it to the Scottish  public to make it clear that violence against women in so-called saunas and massage parlours and in other places is equally unacceptable. Of course, we need action to tackle the drug habits and sexual health of the women on our streets and to address the lack of ways out of prostitution, so that sex workers can secure alternative sources of income. We also need to tackle sex trafficking and we need to deal with people who procure the services of sex workers for others. However, like David Davidson, I have come to the conclusion that we should be thankful that the bill makes a start on the issue. I am a member for North East Scotland, so I was particularly interested in the minister's views on the management zone in Aberdeen. I was recently out with the police in Aberdeen all night and paid particular attention to the policing of the zone. Our patrol visited the zone several times during the evening, as well as dealing with all the drunkenness and attacks that go on in Aberdeen of a Saturday night—I am sure that other patrols also visited the zone several times. The area is well covered by closed-circuit television cameras. The minister seemed to indicate that it is for local authorities and the police to work out how to deal with street prostitution. I welcome that approach, which in no way condones prostitution but offers a way of dealing with the problem. When the trial of the person who has been charged with the Ipswich murders takes place, we might well find that the fact that the town has an identifiable red-light district, in which the women look out for one another, helped to ensure that the perpetrator was quickly caught.

I am pleased that the Executive has made a commitment to seeking an order at Westminster, after the bill has been passed, to give the courts the power to disqualify from driving people who are convicted of kerb crawling, if appropriate. I hope that the message that Parliament sends today is that violence towards, and degradation of, women by men who want to purchase sexual services is unacceptable in present-day Scotland. As Margaret Smith said, the balance of criminality is shifting to the purchasers of sex. A person who loiters in a car will not just have their card marked; they will have their car marked. I welcome the bill and hope that its general principles are agreed to, so that we can move forward and produce a bill that will achieve the aims.

Does the minister agree that it would help the oil and gas industry in the recruitment and retention of its workforce if Labour politicians stopped saying that oil was running out? Saying that is a vain attempt to scare Scottish voters into thinking that Scotland is too poor to look after itself. If those politicians said that there was still much oil to come out of the North sea and that the skills and technology learned in the North sea were exportable worldwide, it would be much easier for the industry to retain its workforce.

As someone who, until now, has listened to the annual fisheries debate from the outside, I have always been fascinated by the annual fishing round talks in December. I have wondered who on earth set up the talks at this time of year—it was obviously men, who do not face the frenzy of Christmas preparation—and whether the minister is so well organised that he does his Christmas shopping at the summer sales, although he might visit the Belgian Christmas markets en route. Perhaps he can tell me later. My first foray into the political arena as a candidate in the mid-70s was to support the fishermen during their blockade of ports and to tackle the EU fisheries minister, who at the time was the Finnish member, Mr Gundelach. I asked him whether he was happy that, as a result of his proposals, in his retirement he would be looking across the North sea at desolate fishing villages and towns. Unfortunately, as Mr Gundelach died of an asthma attack at work in Brussels, he did not see his retirement. However, over the past 30 years, those same towns and villages in the north-east of Scotland have struggled for survival. As I said, the Scottish fishing industry has had to fight for its survival, not because of the elements, lack of fish or lack of the ability to invest in the industry but because it has had to battle with unsympathetic Governments at all levels and an EU bureaucracy that does not have the will to see our industry survive.

I am grateful to the minister for giving me the percentage of cod that is caught. I will deal with the question later in my speech. As I said, the fishing industry has had to battle against the unfavourable terms that various Governments have set. The industry is asking for the right to life. Throughout all the turmoil of decommissioning, quotas and cuts in days at sea, it has complied with every regulation. For that, the industry was promised that things would get better, but they have not. The industry has complied with habitat directives, hygiene regulations and whatever other directive has been thrown at it. However, because of a lack of ability  to plan ahead—which every industry should expect to be able to do—it faces having to crisis manage, every single day. On behalf of the Scottish fishing sector, I say to the minister that he needs to strike out on his own at the talks. The fish processors, some of whom are with us in the gallery, are trying to do exactly what the Executive wants of Scottish industry: they are growing their markets, going for niche markets, and promoting the quality and Scottishness of their products. However, EU regulation prevents them from doing that, even within the TAC. As other members have said, this year, boats will be able to take only about 80 per cent of their quota. The remaining 20 per cent, which represents about £30 million, has not yet been caught as a result of the tight regulations on days at sea. There is concern that no frozen fish is being stored to meet market demand over the winter. Other sectors have three-year budgeting arrangements and the fishing industry needs a similar ability to carry over days at sea and quotas. Doing so would ensure continuity of supply for markets. The fish processors can find a market for the quota of fish that is caught. However, if the full quota cannot be caught, there will be a downward spiral that could lead to no market and no need for fishermen to go out to sea, the result of which would be crisis in the industry. The minister must press for multi-annual quotas, not only for the reason that I have set out but on the ground of safety. Skippers must never feel pressurised to go to sea, whatever the weather, because they have not met their quota. There is no doubt that we are experiencing climate change and that the gales at this time of year are getting worse. In light of the changing circumstances, instead of going for days at sea, will the minister press Brussels to change the rules? I ask the minister to consider annualised trawling times. Given that skippers keep detailed log books, it should be possible to do that. The times could be calculated from the time of the pick-up of the dhan in the winches to the time that the nets—full or otherwise—are drawn on board. Why should fishermen's working time include travel to work, and time spent seeking work, when that is not the case for anyone else? The minister must be more challenging of the scientific research. Science still does not seem to have shifted with the current. As fishermen have detected, the cod seem to be moving to colder waters. I also want the minister to ask about the availability of sand eels as food for other species. It is interesting to know the percentage of cod that is caught by Scottish boats, because the fact  that cod is much more important in England is my final reason for asking the minister to go it alone. Cod—mainly imported—is the mainstay of the fishing industry in Grimsby and Hull and we all know why that is important to Ben Bradshaw and his colleagues. The minister's forthcoming visit to the talks in Brussels might be his last. I ask him to bring back a big Christmas present for the Scottish fishing industry.

Will the minister tell us what percentage of the white-fish catch over the past year has been cod?

I am delighted to be taking part in the debate because, as the Tories have recognised, council tax will be a major issue at the election next year. People know that since 1997 the council tax for those who live in a band D house has increased by 50 per cent. The current system of council tax is now perceived as so unfair and such a huge burden on those least able to pay it that it will undoubtedly be high on voters' list of priorities when they decide how to cast their vote. The SNP's view is that changing council tax bands, replacing council tax with a property tax or offering rebates here and there in the run-up to the election would only be tinkering at the edges of local government finance and that it would fail, like the Burt review, to address the real issues of local government finance and its relation to national taxation. Like George Lyon, I look forward to having a real and meaningful debate on the Burt review. I hope that he will not still be reading his ministerial brief with his tongue firmly in his cheek. We must not forget that council tax is a small part of local government finance and that any  shortfall in the money provided by central Government to local government has to be made up through a much larger increase in council tax as a result of the so-called gearing effect. That is why the SNP believes that any national Government initiative that is foisted on local government must be accompanied by sufficient funding. However, there is a much more fundamental issue of which council tax problems are only one symptom and which the Burt report skimmed over. The McIntosh commission recognised that to achieve a meaningful role for local government and what it called "parity of esteem" between local government and the Scottish Parliament, the financial arrangements between the two were paramount. It is unfortunate that the Burt report did not take that as its starting point. It is no accident that local income tax forms the basis of the taxation systems of small social democratic countries in the arc of prosperity. Contrary to Mr Brownlee's remarks, we would not be inventing the wheel if we had a local income tax. Other countries have managed to implement it and raise funds quite well. Indeed, this morning Bruce Crawford and I had a meeting with the Nordic Green Left Alliance. Its representatives believe that raising taxation and spending the money raised at a local level increases people's level of interest in Government affairs and has made a significant contribution to much higher turnouts at their elections. Many in this Parliament now realise that raising revenue in Scotland as well as spending it is important to the credibility and legitimacy of the Parliament. In establishing subsidiarity in communities, it is important to reorganise local government finance. By raising finance locally in a fair and progressive manner, the local income tax is a win-win situation. I ask members to support the SNP amendment.

Does the minister agree that the building regulations should provide for adequate sanctions and penalties for builders who do not install the required insulation, pipe lagging and energy efficient boilers, for example? Does he agree that there should be recompense for house owners, such as the owners of the homes in the north-east that were included in the study, who find that their houses breach the regulations?

I confess that my initial reaction to the bill was one of opposition, given that it will give powers to ministers. Powers should rest as far as possible with the people of Scotland and not with the Executive. We should devolve power further rather than give more of it to the centre. Indeed, I have heard the bill being described as the Westminster Transport and Works Act 1992 with knobs and bells on. However, having listened to the evidence that was presented to the Local Government and Transport Committee, and given that the bill is concerned only with projects of national significance, my views have mellowed somewhat, and I now see some merit in the proposals. The Scottish National Party will support the motion at decision time. I hope that the public will not see the bill as the result of members being unwilling to take on the heavy responsibility of considering bills such as the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill, which we had to consider; rather, I hope that the public will realise that there is a more efficient way of running the Parliament and using members' time— especially as, after the election in May, there will be more substantial and substantive bills to be dealt with under a new and innovative Government that is led by the Scottish National Party. I hope that the savings that will be made for each project as a result of the bill will be in the order of £85,000 in staff costs and 280 hours of members' time, as identified in the financial memorandum and the stage 1 report on the bill. I was slightly perplexed that objectors to some rail projects that the Parliament has considered thought that it would be less intimidating to give evidence to a reporter than to a committee of members of the Scottish Parliament. I take it that they thought that the surroundings in the Parliament and the television cameras were intimidating rather than colleagues such as my dear friend Tricia Marwick. My experience is that planning inquiries with reporters can be more like proceedings in a court of law and can be scarier than appearing before a parliamentary committee.

Yes, but planning inquiries under the current system can be quite intimidating for people who are not used to them. One problem that the Local Government and Transport Committee encountered was trying to find out the definition of "projects of national significance". At times, we thought that we were boring around in the dark and that the phrase meant different things to different witnesses. We hope that the minister will define the term as soon as possible. As with the front-loading in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, in many ways the success of the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill will be up to the promoters of key projects and will depend on how open and co-operative they are with all parties from the beginning of the process. We share objectors' concerns about their need to get information as early as possible and about how they can tease out the main concerns about specific projects. Although I agree that it would be difficult for the public to finance objectors, some of us quite like what happens in the United States, where volunteer planners—perhaps students and lawyers—help objectors to tease out the information. In general terms, we must see how the front-loading works. I am glad that the minister has agreed to include harbours in the bill. A particular case in his constituency was brought to the attention of the Local Government and Transport Committee. I share Nora Radcliffe's concerns about heritage railways, but we have been given an assurance that an application will cost no more under the  future system than it costs at present. I know that those who are involved in promoting the Deeside railway have had huge difficulties in dealing with local authorities. There will be other matters to tease out at stage 2, and I have no doubt that we will lodge some amendments to improve the bill but, at the moment, we concur with the bill's sentiments.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive will take to ensure that new immigrants to Scotland have the necessary access to English language courses. (S2F-2525)

I broadly agree with the sentiments expressed by the First Minister in The Press and Journal on Saturday. A recent survey showed that 106 different languages are spoken in Scotland's schools; in Aberdeen alone, 60 different languages are spoken. Does the First Minister agree that, to ensure a stable multicultural society, it is vital to have more teachers of English as an additional language? Can we expect the report to recommend that steps be taken to fast-track more people into becoming EAL teachers, so that not only children but women do not feel isolated in their new home country and can play a full part in the life of Scotland?

Does the present devolution settlement accord with the Liberal Democrat idea of fiscal federalism? If it does not, what other powers should the Parliament have to meet the criteria that the Liberals have set down?

I, too, welcome the debate, in which I wanted to take part because I know how much the proposed changes are exercising the minds of councillors. I will highlight the problems that are faced by Aberdeenshire Council and my colleague Brian Adam will concentrate on Aberdeen City Council. First, I will address some remarks to the report. The reduction in EU funds to the UK, which is due  to EU enlargement, is recognised by all, but how the Scottish Executive deals with the transition will be crucial. The reduction in programme management executives from five to two must not result in centralisation and top-down management. We must not spend much-needed time and money on dismantling five bureaucracies to create new ones. We must use dispersed teams and identify the most effective leaders in structural funds teams to ensure that their skills continue to be used. The ethos of subsidiarity must not be lost. There is a feeling in the country that the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive has been sucking up powers from local councils. Although that situation will be reversed by the people on the SNP benches after next May, it is a problem that is exercising the minds of people out there. I ask that the Scottish Executive be up front with councils and voluntary organisations on how they will be affected, so that they can plan for change. It is vital that the Executive engages with all the recipients of EU funds to discuss what changes they will have to make and plan for. Aberdeenshire Council regrets that although it has been able to meet officials from the EU and the Department of Trade and Industry, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has so far refused its requests to meet him. I hope that that will change. Given that rural development and environmental sustainability are no longer priorities for Scottish Enterprise, which is now focused on city regions to obtain growth, structural funds could provide much needed additionality in rural areas. Aberdeenshire Council in particular is concerned to ensure that although Aberdeenshire does not meet the convergence criteria, it will still meet the competitiveness and co-operation criteria. I know that many members from other parts of Scotland believe that the north-east is all wealthy, but it is not. The spatial targeting criteria hide pockets of deprivation and Aberdeenshire now has two data zones in the worst 5 per cent and six zones in the worst 20 per cent. That is largely due to the decline in the fishing quota for the Scottish fleet and the subsequent scrapping of boats, which has had a disastrous effect on the economy of Fraserburgh and Peterhead in particular. The recent report on small towns also highlights the problems that much of the rural north-east faces. Aberdeenshire Council is concerned about the distribution of funds to urban and rural projects. It hopes that money will be targeted to obtain the maximum impact. I am not asking for special pleading, nor is Aberdeenshire Council. Indeed, the council should be congratulated on shifting the emphasis to take account of the Lisbon and Gothenburg agendas.  All that we in north-east are asking for is a level playing field on which to compete for funding. That is why measuring outcomes is so important, as Linda Fabiani said. I do not think that there is ever enough scrutiny of the effectiveness of funds used. If there were, I know that we canny north-easters would not be found lacking. We know how to get more bang for our buck, or euro.

Although I am a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee, I joined it some two months into its evidence gathering on freight transport, so I do not feel as knowledgeable about the subject as some of my committee colleagues. I am glad that committee undertook the inquiry. The public perception is that there are too many lorries on our roads. As Fergus Ewing rightly pointed out, the movement of freight is vital to our economy, but the public are right to think that not enough is being done to move freight on to rail. Some sectors of our economy, such as the coal industry, have always preferred to move their goods by rail—indeed, coal accounts for three quarters of rail freight—and others are trying to move in that direction. That notably applies to the  supermarkets, a move that has undoubtedly been helped by the freight facilities grant. It is a matter of regret to me and others that, to help them to make a quick fix and a quick switch, supermarket owners get those grants while still making huge profits, whereas I am sure that many smaller companies that need to transport their freight ought to be targeted, as that would allow more goods to be moved by rail. As Mark Ballard pointed out, during the committee's evidence taking there seemed to be some confusion about who may access freight facilities grants. That needs to be clarified and the grants better publicised.

I will just carry on for a minute. That is only one side of the coin. Often, transporting freight by rail is hampered by antiquated rail infrastructure. The Executive must work more closely with Network Rail to improve the infrastructure of our railways. We are often told that such improvements cannot be made because the height of bridges, for example, means that the bridges would need to be replaced. However, as Network Rail has pointed out, such problems can often be resolved by lowering the rail track. Dualling track is hugely expensive, but a few strategically placed loops can make a huge difference to freight and passenger volumes on our railways. In evidence to the committee, Network Rail said that such work need not cost a huge amount of money. I refer to the paragraphs on sea transport in the committee report. As Kenny MacAskill said, people are increasingly recognising the natural transport highway that surrounds Scotland, which is a grossly underutilised resource. In an age when our whole planet is threatened by climate change, not to use ships to transport goods is a nonsense. Why do electronic goods need to be flown between the far east and Europe? In cases in which that mode of freight transport is necessary, we should ensure the use of Scottish airports where they are closest to the export and import market destinations, which would avoid hauling goods to airports further south. We need a total shift in our current thinking that we need everything yesterday. Scotland is a natural strategic hub for transport between Europe, Scandinavia and North America. Scotland must be exploited as a break-bulk centre, with our smaller ports able to handle more freight. Short-termism prevails, however, and in Aberdeen, which is a major port serving the oil industry, the former Labour administration made the ludicrous decision that the rail track to the harbour should be lifted to make way for a new shopping centre—a decision that has not been reversed by the current Lib Dem-Tory  administration. There has been no long-term strategic thinking there from any of the unionist parties. Although the impact of canals on the movement of freight is limited overall, some of them can undoubtedly be used for short hauls of timber or quarry stone. Those goods can be taken to ports via the Caledonian canal, for example, and some limited use could be made of the Forth and Clyde canal. Undoubtedly, as is evident from the debate so far, any discussion of freight transport is still heavily focused on road transport, on short-haul journeys and on our local Scottish hauliers. The debate has focused on whether our hauliers compete on a level playing field and whether the Scottish Executive is doing everything that is in its power to support them. I agree with the committee's convener: we must ensure that Westminster and Brussels confirm that directives such as the working time directive are adhered to fairly throughout Europe. The Scottish Executive can do much more to relieve pinchpoints in our road infrastructure. We all know where they are—most notably in the north-east around Aberdeen, as David Davidson said, because of the lack of the western peripheral route. All the hauliers in agriculture, timber, agricultural engineering, oil, agricultural feedstuffs, food and drink—notably whisky—and more are totally frustrated and angry about the lack of progress on that. The Scottish Executive could make the greatest impact on the road and rail infrastructure if it had the will to do so, so I ask the minister to act on the recommendations in the report.

Is the minister aware that The Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen recently stopped offering chemistry degree courses, and that the  number of chemistry graduates has declined in Scotland? What is the minister doing to promote chemistry in particular as a degree course, given its relevance to the energy sector and the life sciences sector in the north-east?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many nuclear waste storage facilities are expected to be built in Scotland in the next 20 years and where these will be sited. (S2O-10645)

Will the minister confirm that spent fuel that is now transported to Sellafield is unlikely to be reprocessed, given the proposed closure date for the thermal oxide reprocessing plant—THORP—of March 2011? Will on-site storage of such material now be considered?

I welcome the debate. The subject may be a reserved matter, but the vote at the end of the day will clearly show Scottish voters where the current crop of MSPs stands on the issue. Jackie Baillie's amendment is a typical fudge. Her hypocrisy beggars belief. Her speech was full of nice, soppy words, but nobody was fooled. Labour here and in the other place is morally bankrupt. After hearing Jackie Baillie's speech, I doubt whether she would recognise a moral or an ethic if it hit her in the face.

The outcome of the debate will be of particular interest to people who participated in the long walk for peace, whom I had the privilege of joining for part of the way. Those people were from all walks of life and backgrounds and were of all ages. They will watch the vote at 5 pm carefully. The motion is clear and unequivocal: people are either for or agin Trident, now and in the future. There will be no hiding place, particularly for members who displayed a big flurry of support in front of the TV cameras outside the Parliament last Tuesday, one of whom hinted that she had been sent there by the First Minister.

Where are Margaret Curran and Cathy Peattie today? All those—except the Greens—who vote for any amendment will be seen as worms wriggling to get off the hook.

No, thank you. Few dispute that the nature of world security has changed from the situation half a century ago. We have gone from superpowers and cold wars to intrastate rather than interstate conflict and from cross-border disputes to no-borders terrorism. In such situations, nuclear weapons are useless. Only Bush, Blair and their followers believe that they can bomb their beliefs on the world. Such ideologies fuel international terrorism rather than placate it. The international warfare that is perpetrated by fearless suicide bombers will be defeated not by nuclear weapons but by superior intelligence and diplomacy. Nobody has suggested that Iran and North Korea seek to develop weapons with a wish to attack us, yet Britain—at the same time as keeping and even talking about replacing Trident nuclear weapons—tells us that those countries should not develop their own arsenal. What blinds the politicians who tell us that with their attitude of do as I say, not as I do? They must be persuaded that that superior and patronising attitude has no place in the world of the 21 st century. Blair and Brown have said that they want Trident to be replaced. The First Minister's idea of using Britain's nuclear deterrent as a bargaining chip in international negotiations has been described by British officials close to the talks with Iran as stupid and completely ridiculous. The SNP's stance on Trident has been clear and unequivocal for as long as I can remember. It is to scrap Trident and to make Scotland nuclear free. The money saved could be put to much better use. The estimated cost of replacing Trident is £25 billion—about £2.1 billion for Scotland. That could pay for new secondary schools, five new hospitals, 30 new community sport centres, 100 new doctors, 100 dentists and 200 teachers—the list goes on. The money would be much better spent in that way. The choice next May is clear—between those who strut the international stage, increasing international terrorism with their blind arrogance, and the chance to use our resources to change Scotland for the better and to make it a haven of peace, rather than a home for nuclear weapons.

Does the member agree that, with the best will in the world, midwives cannot be there at crucial times for women who are at home—for example, if they have problems with latching on? It is best to ensure that the process is going well when they are still in the maternity unit rather than at home. Does the member agree that NHS Grampian's proposal to have mothers in and out in six to 12 hours is not conducive to that?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing this debate, which will be crucial in determining how NHS Grampian configures services throughout the region—not only maternity services but services for older people and diagnostic and treatment services. I expected my colleague Stewart Stevenson to be back from Georgia for this debate. I am still hoping that he will come through the door, but if he does not, my remarks refer to Fraserburgh and the north of Aberdeenshire as well as the south. Mike Rumbles has invested a huge amount of time and effort in this campaign and I am aware of the emotional toll that it has taken on him. At times, dialogue with NHS officials has been fraught—as he has just said. Their unwillingness even to listen to a reasoned argument has made his job very difficult. Therefore, I am pleased to be here to help to secure the future of the maternity units in rural Grampian. I know that Mike Rumbles appreciates that the Scottish National Party is fighting alongside him on this issue. He cannot rely on his own party, whose local government representatives on the health board voted for closure. That was especially lamentable in the case of Councillor Bisset, whose council—Aberdeenshire Council—had voted to keep the units open. I, too, welcome the presence of the save Aboyne maternity campaigners in the public gallery. I hope that the minister will be able to tell us that he has read their business plan for Aboyne maternity unit, which aims to develop and expand the unit along the lines of the Montrose unit. A few years ago, the Montrose unit also faced closure, but now 52 per cent of local babies are born there. It is unfortunate that NHS Grampian has not even thought fit to reply in writing to the proposals that the campaigners have made. I am sure that other members will focus on the long distances, and I am sorry that Andy Kerr declined the invitation to visit the units to see for himself the distances involved. Last week, the Parliament debated the closure of accident and emergency services in Lanarkshire, which will  require people to travel distances of fewer than 30 miles. The people who will be affected by NHS Grampian's proposed closures will have to travel twice that distance or more, on much poorer roads. I recall helping to fight in a by-election in Fraserburgh one January, when I was eight months pregnant. As we drove back to Aberdeen and beyond in deteriorating weather, my fellow activist, Kevin Stewart, became increasingly agitated that I might deliver in the middle of nowhere on a stormy, snowy night. The distances that people must travel are a serious issue. There are stark inconsistencies in NHS Grampian's recommendations, which fly in the face of many objectives. The Kerr report called for health services to be delivered locally and regionally. NHS Grampian says that a community health unit is needed for the north of the area, but proposes nothing similar for the centre and the south. There is a clear economic case for keeping the maternity units open. Last Friday, members of the Scottish Parliament received a briefing from Scottish Enterprise Grampian on proposals to increase tourism on the east side of the Cairngorms national park, around Deeside and Donside. The ambition is to increase the value of tourism in the area by 66 per cent—to £86 million—by 2015, which will generate an increase in jobs from 1,223 to 3,076. Many jobs have already been taken up by young migrant workers and many more jobs will be taken up as migrant workers bring their wives and families to the area. I do not expect that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has told the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care about that—I have yet to find any joined-up government in the Executive—but I urge the Executive to start doing joined-up government and to keep open maternity units that are needed now and will be needed in future.

I welcome the chance to debate the motion, and I thank John Scott for coming on board the Farmers Weekly campaign, albeit at least a month after my motion on the subject was lodged. Perhaps we can add the 33 who signed my motion to the 38 who signed his. There is some duplication, but nevertheless 55 members have signed either one motion or the other. I understand that John Scott was told to lodge the motion, no doubt so that the Tories can attempt to curry favour with rural voters in the run-up to the election next May.

Just a minute. The Tories might be credible if they supported the countryside in the round, which includes public transport, but no Tories were present at this time last Wednesday when we discussed the problems that bus deregulation and the lack of sustainable bus transport in rural and urban areas have caused. The rest of us wonder about the Tories' commitment to the rural economy. It was deregulation under the Government of John Scott's party that brought dairy farmers into their present state of despair. For 60 years, the milk marketing boards trod a fine line between producer and consumer, whereby none made a fortune but none starved, either. Since Thatcher swept aside the boards under her drive for deregulation, supermarkets have charged over the odds for milk and processors have paid less than the cost of production.

I was just making the point that milk is part of local food, yet the Conservatives say nothing about it. The margin between the production costs and selling price of milk is so large that processors can afford to haul milk—some of it not even from Scotland—north, south, east and west, while thinking nothing of the amount of diesel that is wasted in doing that. Is any Tory here big enough to stand up tonight and say that Thatcher was wrong? It is funny how milk is not included in the local food campaign. Of course local food must be given a higher profile. Every time a town gets a supermarket that threatens local businesses—my colleague Fergus Ewing's constituency is to have yet another supermarket—a farmers market should be established in the town centre. That would encourage people into the town and help local businesses to grow rather than put them at risk from the supermarkets. It is all very well for a parliamentary committee to examine the issue, but local authorities are doing a huge amount of work with farmers markets. Once again, the Government at a Scottish national level is not meeting local needs. We should help and encourage lots of local initiatives and we are not doing enough of that.

I, too, welcome the bill. There is no doubt that the laws on adoption that were made early in the previous century are no longer fit for purpose. I am glad that important aspects of the bill are getting a thorough airing, so I do not intend to refer to section 31, other than to comment that although arriving in the Parliament mid-term had its disadvantages, because I have had to play catch-up, one advantage is that I have not made it on to the Bishop of Motherwell's mailing list. As members have said, the individual child must be the focus of adoption procedures. As the minister said, older children, rather than babes in arms, are increasingly being considered for adoption. The wishes and views of those children must be heard and taken into account. The child's interests must be considered first and foremost and if the child can articulate their wishes, they must be listened to. I am concerned about the provisions that will allow parental consent to be dispensed with if a parent or guardian is unlikely to be able to safeguard and promote their child's health, development and welfare during the child's early years. The parent's situation might not be permanent. Many young parents are afflicted by alcohol and drug addictions and many women, in particular, are desperate to beat their addictions so that they can develop parenting skills and become good parents. Like Euan Robson, I welcome the introduction of permanence orders, which will give flexibility that has not hitherto been available. Adoption has a great finality about it—it is a separation from birth  parents, with no going back. That creates traumas. I know of young adults who, when they could, were desperate to find their birth parents but who at the same time did not want to offend their adoptive parents. One individual was left to lead a double life as a result of balancing their contact with both families. I therefore urge the minister to ensure that support services are not time limited. They must be holistic and available to adoptees and adoptive parents on a needs basis, regardless of time. Contact orders must be allowed, to minimise the traumatic experiences of some. I refer to the comments of Children 1 st , which advocates wider family involvement, whether through arrangements for shared care or through future planning that may lead to adoption. In our deliberations, we must take into account the research that has been done in Ireland and elsewhere that shows the positive benefits of kinship care. People whom I have met to discuss children in care have given me the impression that some social workers do not always give kinship placement due weight. I acknowledge that social workers are hugely overloaded and that adoption may be seen as an easy solution that brings finality to cases, but it is not always in the child's best interests. I know of cases in which parents and grandparents had no access to children while they were in care or going through the process of adoption—they were not allowed to forward birthday and Christmas presents or letters, which is extremely sad. Guidance on that is extremely important if we are to avoid those situations. In such cases, parents and grandparents often have to resort to legal proceedings, which cannot be good for anyone. Like Adam Ingram, I am disappointed that the minister has not seen it as a necessity to produce the new fostering strategy to be discussed in tandem with the bill. I am not reassured by the minister's comments on that. Discussing the bill before having a fostering strategy is putting the cart before the horse. In 2001, the Executive promised to carry out a comprehensive review of fostering. If we adopted joined-up government, the bill would have been called the children (fostering and adoption) (Scotland) bill. That would have been a holistic approach to dealing with vulnerable children and would have sent out a message from the Parliament about joined-up thinking and government. Fostering leaves doors open. On any one day, more than 3,400 children are living with about 2,200 foster carers in Scotland. The estimated shortage of foster carers is about 1,700. The funding shortfall of about £5.5 million leaves local authorities struggling to cover costs and condemns foster carers to dig deeply into their pockets, thereby incurring financial hardship. That  is hardly a climate that will encourage families to take up fostering, which is often the first step to adopting. Most local authorities and agencies want clarity on how to deal with the excessive pressure on foster families, which often leads to instability and disruption in children's lives, when fostering falls through. While the proposed power for the Scottish Executive to set rates for allowances, which addresses the long-term funding concerns, is broadly welcome, fostering involves a greater number of children and greater costs, and deals with complicated support needs. It is an important avenue for getting children out of local authority care and children's homes, which we know fail far too many children in relation to their educational, social and developmental needs. Getting fostering right is essential for many children in Scotland. To give due weight to what Barnado's, I and others believe to be the importance of fostering, it should have been part of the bill. However, I support the broad principles of the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers a reduction in Scottish Enterprise's modern apprenticeships programme for over-25s to be discriminatory on the ground of age. (S2O-10415)

The minister's answer does not square with the briefings that I had from Scottish Enterprise this morning and in recent meetings  with Scottish Enterprise Tayside and Scottish Enterprise Grampian. In order to balance the budget, something clearly had to go: it appears that the over-25s modern apprenticeships programme has been reduced. Does the minister agree that that reduction and the in-built discrimination in respect of the business development scheme, in which there is an age limit of 50, are detrimental to the Scottish economy? Does he agree that as we have an aging population we should more proactively encourage people into retraining, which is precisely what the over-25s modern apprenticeship is designed to do?

Will the member give way?

As the minister said, it is fitting that we should have such a debate as the first anniversary of the Gleneagles G8 summit approaches and stock is taken of whether any improvements have taken place in the plight of the citizens of African countries such as Malawi. The prognosis is not good. If we are to believe reports on this morning's "Today" programme on Radio 4, the gap between rich and poor countries is widening rather than  contracting. That is a familiar tale under Labour, both internationally and nationally. The situation in Malawi has been well documented to the Parliament, not least by my late friend and Scottish National Party colleague, Margaret Ewing, who led a delegation to Malawi in February last year. It was a measure of her stature and influence in the Parliament that the First Minister, to his credit, took on board virtually all the recommendations of Margaret and her group. As other members have mentioned, given our history, it is fitting that the Parliament should focus on Malawi. It would be great if every developed country twinned with an African country to assist with lifting it out of poverty.

The member should have listened to what I said; I said, "the recommendations of Margaret and her group." I recognise that it was a cross-party delegation. The G8 summit and the make poverty history campaign raised awareness and heightened expectations, but the task is huge. It was stated that the United Nations target of halving the number of people who live in poverty should be reached by 2015, but on present trends it will be 150 years before that target is reached. Is it not the case that there is still a mindset difficulty? At governmental level, there is still a patronising and paternalistic attitude to international aid. Conditions are often attached to aid money. For example, countries are told that they must buy our goods and services in return. In addition, the World Bank dictates too much to developing countries, some of which are told that they must implement water privatisation. Debates about the ownership of the water industry must seem a distant prospect to people who do not even have water. The minister said that she was impressed by the number of ordinary Scots who want to help and that help is coming from all our communities. In my area of Deeside, over the past 18 months, Drumoak and Durris church has raised £10,000 to help rebuild and refurbish the kitchen at Likhubula House, which is the outdoor centre at the foot of Mount Mulanje to which Mike Pringle referred. Ros, Liz, Claire and three sixth-year school leavers—Lyn, Amanda and Ellie—went out last summer to help with the work. While they were there, they did teaching, helped with after-school clubs and cleaned and painted school rooms. They took out a load of equipment, including medical supplies from Aberdeen hospital.  As Mike Pringle mentioned, Likhubula House is the only outdoor centre in Malawi. My friends and their church thought that supporting it would be a worthwhile, practical and long-term investment. It is hoped that tourism will enable the centre to become self-financing in a few years and, if possible, it will be managed solely by folk in Malawi. In the next few years, the church hopes to send out smaller amounts of money to pay for orphans' carers. The youngsters in the group were struck by how difficult it was for people to rise out of poverty because many families had to look after youngsters from extended families, whose parents had died of HIV/AIDS or hunger. The visit was a life-changing experience for the group, as it was for the many groups from Scotland that have gone to Likhubula, including people from Dunblane and Paisley, some of whom we met the other week when the Malawi choir was at the Parliament. One of the church group, whose name is Amanda, e-mailed me when she found that I would be speaking in today's debate. She said: "Something we in Scotland could do is not necessarily help more just help in a more informed way. Sending 20 school bags out to school children in Malawi helps those children in the short-term, yes. Greater support would come from sending money into the country so a bag producer in the country can get the work from it hence helping the children and the economy. Also needless to say for the amount of the school bags and P+P you would spend you could get double the amount of bags (if not more) by just supporting local business in Malawi." Group members were struck by the corruption that they found at all levels and throughout the country. When they donated money, they found that they had to do it in a very public way so that the money could not be siphoned off. They told me that the immense hardship in the country means that when builders are asked to build a house and are given the necessary funds, some of them siphon off the money that should have been used for the foundations. People find that their house has shaky foundations or that it was not constructed properly. There is still a get-rich-quick attitude in Malawi, although perhaps that cannot be helped if life expectancy in the country is 40. The only way of dealing with corruption is through education and by working effectively to stamp it out. I say to the minister that the task is huge, but we must not give up. People in Malawi are so happy with so little; their optimism must be realised. We must do more, not less. Since 1970, SNP policy has been for 0.7 per cent of gross national product to be given as development aid. As yet, the United Kingdom Government has not reached that target; indeed, it does not expect to reach it until 2013. We believe that the target should now be 1 per cent and that it should be met by 2009. Again, I say to the minister: let us raise our level of  commitment. In that way, we will meet the desire of Scots to assist and of those in Malawi to help themselves.

Does the member agree that we should condemn campaigns that harass Gypsy Travellers, such as that by one of our local evening papers?

Does the member agree that, in elections, council issues are submerged in the national issues that are covered in the media and in the literature that goes out to voters? Because of that, the two elections should be held on separate days.

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the Scottish National Party. Members who were privileged enough to be elected to the Parliament in 1999 may recall that the first debate following devolution, on 2 July that year, was on the report submitted by the McIntosh commission on the relationship between local government and the new Scottish Parliament. I was a member of the commission and was pleased with what we presented to the Parliament, which included a proposal that we move to proportional representation for local government elections. I sat in the gallery listening to the debate and was pleased that the Executive and the Parliament subsequently decided to ask Richard Kerley and his committee, of which I was also a member, to recommend a system of proportional representation. I am pleased that Parliament adopted many of the recommendations of the Kerley committee, including the adoption of STV for local council elections. I am amazed again to find myself heavily involved in the process. That is probably why the Scottish National Party has asked me to open on its behalf today. The bill that we are about to pass effectively dots the i's and crosses the t's of a long seven-year process, but it is important that we give the  green light to local authority returning officers as soon as possible, as the elections are looming ever closer.

I certainly do. I intend to say something about that later in my speech. I am glad that the minister has again given Bruce Crawford the assurance that the boundaries for multimember wards will be finalised by the end of October. Before the debate, I read the Official Reports of proceedings on the bill, so I know that many aspects of it have been given a thorough airing—presumably, because they are close to politicians' hearts. There is no one touchier than a politician at a polling station or, even worse, at the count. I hope that the new, clear policy and guidelines that are contained in the bill will allow electoral returning officers and their staff to say when we query them at polling stations or at the count that we made the rules and that Westminster cannot be blamed. Of course, as usual, we are not free from Westminster's influence. A similar bill is going through that place at the moment, and we have had to watch it closely at all stages of this bill. I am pleased that Westminster has given the go-ahead to e-counting and, I hope, has simplified the ballot papers for the Scottish Parliament elections. As my colleague Tricia Marwick said, we are committed to the principle of separating Scottish Parliament and local government elections. They should be on separate days, and the issues surrounding them and the personalities involved should be considered separately. However, we will have to wait until after May next year to do that job. We welcome measures to encourage participation in the voting process, to tighten up on electoral fraud, to pilot the use of personal identifiers and, at the same time, to help people with particular needs by providing supporting documentation in a form that meets those needs. SNP members will keep a close watch to ensure that the introduction of performance standards leads to standardisation of the way in which elections and counting are run and that the current wide variation across the country disappears. We also hope that part 2 of the bill will achieve what it says on the tin and will improve and update the registration service in Scotland. I offer my thanks to the clerks of the Local Government and Transport Committee. As a new  member, I have probably leaned on them more heavily than other members have. I also thank other members of the committee for their work. The Scottish National Party welcomes the bill, as far as it goes, and will support it at decision time.

I do not want to take on Mr McLetchie on all the legal aspects that he is going into, but does he accept that the first certificate allows the body to be released so that relatives can bury the person? All the other things that he is talking about to do with winding up estates can be done later. There are situations in which people do not have any money to hand to get the death certificate in the first place.

I thank the minister for his remarks. Given that he has made it quite clear that the information will be in the supporting documentation, I seek to withdraw amendment 12.  Amendment 12, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendments 13 to 15 not moved.

Amendments 12 to 15 would add consistency to the bill's provisions on the supply of explanatory documents. Although the bill provides for sufficient information in different formats to be available to people who vote in person in polling stations, it does not extend the provision of such information to postal voters. As politicians know, there has been a marked increase in postal voting in recent years as political parties have realised that voters do not just dash to the polling station every time an election takes place. Many more people work away from home than used to and they understand the benefits of postal voting. All members should want to include as many people as possible in the democratic process but, currently, many of the most vulnerable and marginalised people feel excluded from the process to such an extent that they do not go to polling stations to vote. My amendments would extend the provision of documents that assist in voting to people who opt to vote by post. I am sure that members agree that if more relevant supporting information were provided with ballot papers—which people could peruse at home, in their own time and at their own pace—the democratic process would be enhanced. Such an outcome could be achieved simply by adding to the application for a postal vote a box that people could tick if they want extra assistance. By enshrining such an approach in the bill, we would enhance the credibility of politicians and the political process. I am pleased that the Electoral Commission has given its full backing to amendments 12 to 15. In the light of that, I hope that the minister will be encouraged to agree to them. I move amendment 12.

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and to the minister, as I have to leave immediately after my speech. Fergus Ewing suggested that Inverness is a Cinderella; I will be Cinderella tonight. I have to be at Ingliston for 7 o'clock, but unlike Cinderella I do not have a fairy godmother to transform me immediately.  For the first 17 years of my life I lived less than 50 yards from the A96 on a farm that bordered the road. I have memories from my childhood of the deaths of several of our sheepdogs on the road, rather than of the adult deaths about which my parents probably spoke. I cycled along the road many times and never thought that it was particularly dangerous—save for snow and ice at times. In the past few years, the situation could not have become more different. Whether someone is driving, walking or cycling they have to have their wits about them all the time. Fergus Ewing is right to say that the main cities in Scotland must be connected by rapid dual carriageways. Why should Inverness and Aberdeen—the oil capital of Europe—be deprived of that? As my colleague Richard Lochhead said, creating a dual carriageway on the A96 would create more jobs, which are desperately needed in the larger towns of Elgin and Huntly. The A96 has several crawler lanes. According to roads engineers and roads managers from the former Grampian Regional Council and the current Aberdeenshire Council, those lanes were supposed to be a temporary measure until the stretches of road were dualled, but today we are still putting in more crawler lanes. There were eight deaths on the A96 in the first three years of the Parliament, but in the three years after that there were 19. A friend contacted me this morning who yesterday drove from Aberdeen to Inverness—a distance of 98 miles. On a dual carriageway, or on a good day, it should take about 1 hour and 45 minutes. Yesterday, it took three hours and 45 minutes, even with detours to avoid the major hold-ups on either side of Elgin. Such delays cost employers and businesses a fortune. We are still waiting for the bypass at Fochabers and we will need one at Keith if there is to be a large supermarket in the middle of the town. That is not taking account of the fact that the blockage at the Haudagain roundabout in Aberdeen has been exacerbated by the delayed decision on the Aberdeen western peripheral route. I have not talked about the necessity of dealing with the rail and road blockage at Inveramsay bridge. The minister already knows my views on the rail links between Aberdeen and Inverness, which he heard in the debate on Aberdeen crossrail. Fergus Ewing's call has the backing of many organisations—yesterday, I managed to get the backing of Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce—so we would like some indication soon of the timetable for upgrading the roads.

All the members who have spoken agree that we have a problem and few people elsewhere would disagree, so it would be criminally negligent if society and government failed to take compensatory measures for the sake of present and future generations. I am sure that no member of the Parliament wants there to be a repeat in Scotland of the tragic deaths that took place in France last year as a  result of excessive heat. At a time when we are more used to having to deal with winter deaths and the problems of fuel poverty—on which neither Westminster nor the Executive has the right answers—it might seem unlikely that we will have to deal with the problems that France experienced. However, that is not beyond the bounds of possibility and we should put in place measures to prevent their occurrence. I say to Mr Morrison that architects must put in place heat regulation systems that can both keep heat in buildings and take it out of them. Climate change is happening. Monitoring in Aberdeen has shown that the sea level has risen by 70mm over the past 100 years. We have seen the effects that that has had on the coastline—a vast amount of expensive work is now required to halt and reverse the erosion of the beach at Aberdeen. Other areas are subject to the same pressures. What review and long-term programme of action will the Executive put in place to protect the most vulnerable areas? Rainfall patterns are changing. Although the amount of rainfall is likely to increase by between 10 per cent and 25 per cent in winter months, there could be a corresponding decrease in summer months. In that regard, I agree with John Scott and ask the Executive what review it has undertaken of water abstraction and storage schemes. It is obviously easier to reduce Scotland's carbon footprint and its greenhouse gas emissions in some areas than in others. I do not suppose that even the minister or Alex Johnstone would claim to have the answer to the production of methane by cows, but I am sure that they will be aware that the Rowett Research Institute in the north-east is conducting research on the matter. The Executive will need to help the energy supply industry with research and development on carbon capture. According to a representative of BP to whom I spoke at yesterday evening's Scottish Parliament and Business Exchange event, the company will know about the economic viability of its scheme and whether it can proceed with it by the end of the year. What talks are the Executive and the DTI having with the company to ensure that we create the conditions that will allow that scheme to succeed? How can we persuade other businesses that taking steps to reduce their energy bills not only makes good financial sense but is increasingly important from a public relations point of view, given that it is the right thing to do both ethically and environmentally? I agree with Rosie Kane that the Government must engage with food manufacturers to reduce the amount of packaging around food and that retailers must stop shoving plastic bags at customers. It would take very little  to persuade shoppers to take their own bags to the shops and to get them used to less packaging. In many ways, vast numbers of the public are ahead of Government policy in that area and are waiting for action to be taken but, as other Scottish National Party members have said, Scotland is constrained by always having to refer to another place. Education programmes are vital. For example, the "Talking Scotland" ads on drugs and alcohol that the Scottish Executive produces could be interspersed with advice on using energy-efficient light bulbs, not leaving appliances on stand-by and spending to save by buying more energy-efficient appliances in the first place. We could persuade people to buy food locally at farmers markets, which can be cheaper and can save on food miles. I thank all members who have supported my motion, with Farmers Weekly , to promote farmers markets and buying food locally. As Richard Lochhead mentioned, we urgently need an energy efficiency strategy. In the private house-building sector, corners are still being cut. Pipes that are out of sight are not being lagged and the most energy-efficient boilers are not being installed. Aerial heat loss surveys show that new private house developments are some of the worst when it comes to energy efficiency. Planning and building departments must be signing off those developments. What quality control measures are in place to ensure that building control officers are doing their jobs properly? Given the breaches to which I have referred, are ministers confident that allowing buildings to self-certify is the right way to go? Scotland must do as much as it can to reduce energy consumption. On a global scale, our contribution may be small, but it could be much larger if the Scottish Government were to put its heart and soul into supporting research and development in those Scottish companies that work in the renewables sector. The export potential is huge and would have a substantial impact on jobs and the balance of payments. As our political leaders travel the world, they must use their influence to persuade other Governments to address climate change. It is testament to Blair's weakness with Bush that he has not been able to persuade the Bush Administration to reduce its reliance on oil and to save the planet in more ways than one.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding the funding for a 50-metre swimming pool for the city of Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. (S2O-10075)

Is the minister aware that sportscotland specifically told the council not to include funding for a 50m swimming pool in bidding for enhanced sports facilities for Aberdeen? That seems directly to contradict the support that the minister and the First Minister have recently given to such a facility in Aberdeen. Is not that the latest example of the minister being unaware of the stance that has been taken by a quango that is supposedly under her responsibility, albeit at arm's length—whether it is at the Gyle or in Glasgow?

I welcome this debate not because I want to praise the Executive—which is what Richard Baker no doubt intends—but because I want to highlight some barriers that hinder the development of an integrated transport system in the north-east. I should point out that the Aberdeen crossrail project is only one strand of the work of NESTRANS. Given the focus of the public and media on the western peripheral route, the Executive should fund some public relations work  to highlight the other good work that is being undertaken to alleviate traffic congestion in and around Aberdeen. Any objectors to the western peripheral route whom I have met think that the road—wherever it might go—is the Executive's only answer to Aberdeen's traffic problems. The coalition has only itself to blame for that state of affairs. It is unfortunate—actually, I would call it an act of downright incompetence—that an important part of the north-east integrated transport strategy has been so mishandled by successive Liberal Democrat transport ministers and that there has been no informed debate on the other strands of the work of NESTRANS. As a result, the general public do not really know about the plans for an Aberdeen crossrail project; for rail freight; for access to Aberdeen airport; for bus services; and for the provision of cycleways and walkways. The 13 strands of the proposal for a modern transport system in the north-east have largely been ignored. We welcome the additional £40 million investment. However, although that sounds like a lot of money, it does not amount to very much if we are talking about investment in transport infrastructure. In any case, much of the money seems to go on umpteen feasibility studies and work for consultants instead of on tangible change, and it is little wonder that the public get frustrated when they see no obvious signs of progress. Much of the investment that will be required to make the Aberdeen crossrail project a success will be used to make right successive Governments' underinvestment in the Inverness to Aberdeen line, which has been neglected for years. Indeed, passing loops will have to be installed at many places on the line before the frequency of trains on the section of the Aberdeen crossrail between Inverurie and Stonehaven can be increased. Mike Rumbles is probably glad that the re-opening of Laurencekirk station has not been considered as part of the Aberdeen crossrail project, because much faster progress seems to have been made on that proposal. There seems to be an overriding focus on opening up stations in areas where people live, rather than areas where people work. It is all right to take people into the centre of Aberdeen, but only a fraction of them work in the city centre and there are no good, fast links to the industrial estates. I know of many people who want to take the train into Aberdeen from various points on the Inverness line, but it is difficult for them then to go on to Tullos or Altens. As a result, they are put off using public transport. I seriously believe that, in order to realise the true potential of Aberdeen crossrail, the opening  up of smaller stations along the line is vital. A station at Tullos, where lack of car parking is a serious issue for many businesses and their employees, is a necessity if the project is to take off. Opening stations at Woodside and/or Bucksburn on the other side of the city is also essential—not, as Richard Baker said, in the longer term, but in the initial stages of the project. I would like the minister to tell us what importance he attaches to rail freight and what has happened to the proposed freight terminal at Raiths Farm. Little freight seems to be moving through Guild Street and Craiginches at the moment. Waterloo Quay is mentioned in the NESTRANS document, yet the link is to be ripped up to make way for a retail development at Guild Street railway station. That hardly makes for integrated transport. I welcome the debate that Richard Baker has initiated. I will use my position on the Local Government and Transport Committee to press the matter as much as I can, and I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

Although the publication of the "Hidden Harm—Next Steps" report gives the Executive another opportunity to highlight the plight of children who are exposed to drugs, I hope that the many professionals who work with vulnerable children do not say, with an air of resignation, "Aye, another report—aims but nae action and nae meaningful money into the right places." I hope that the report is not simply a knee-jerk reaction to the media coverage of recent months that has highlighted the tragic consequences for the vulnerable children of drug-abusing parents.  Action must be taken and measurable success achieved as a result of the report. In recent years, studies have concluded that, contrary to popular opinion, children are introduced to drugs not by pushers outside schools or peers, but mostly by family members. In one University of Glasgow study, a third of the 10 to 12-year-olds in the sample had been exposed to drugs, a quarter had been exposed to cannabis and substantial numbers had been in situations in which harder drugs had been used. Although children may be able to avoid situations in which friends and peers use drugs, it is much more difficult for children to avoid situations in which family members are the drug users. As others have mentioned, that would seem to be borne out by the recent tragic cases of Michael McGarrity and Derek Doran, both of whom were identified as children of substance-misuse parents. Such conclusions also highlight the need to ensure that education in schools on the danger of substance abuse not only adopts a broad-brush approach towards all pupils but targets supplementary help at specific groups of vulnerable children. If such targeting allows children, individually or in small groups, to open up to professionals about the specific dangers that they face in their home environment, meaningful intervention might be possible at an earlier stage. That would obviously be relevant only to school-age children but, as Susan Deacon mentioned, those of us who met school nurses at lunch time today and those who have read the Association of Directors of Social Work's report will know that obtaining consent from the parents of primary school children is often a real difficulty, and that solution could allow the problem to be addressed at an early stage. I hope that the minister will agree that removing barriers to listening to children themselves must be an early priority. One thing that I hope will result from the report and from today's debate is a recognition by all those working with children—midwives, practice nurses, doctors, nursery nurses, teachers, classroom assistants and anyone working in health, education, social work, the police and even the prison service, where prison officers see children on prison visits being used as drug mules with drugs hidden in their nappies and in other parts of their clothing—that they have a duty to share their concerns at an early stage. No one should say that it is not their place, and I agree with Trish Godman that everyone should see it as their duty to express their concerns and to have those concerns investigated—better to be safe than sorry. The concerns of wider family members should also be taken seriously, as has been suggested. As soon as such concerns are brought to the  attention of the authorities, action should be taken. Far too often, family members are ignored and those who would be willing to help if support were given are left feeling powerless to intervene. We saw such a situation in the tragic case of Danielle Reid in Inverness. That leads us on to the question whether at-risk children should be left with their parents or taken into the care of foster parents or local authority children's homes. Experience has shown that long-term stays in children's homes can often be detrimental to children's academic and life skills attainment, so it should not be a route that is taken lightly. Fostering is often a more positive experience, but if children who are at risk can be cared for safely by drug-free family members—grandparents, older siblings or members of the wider family—that should be considered. I agree with Scotland's commissioner for children and young people that each case should be considered individually and that the best should be done for each child. I would also like to highlight the question that Pauline McNeill asked at First Minister's question time this morning, and I caution the Executive to think carefully before blindly following England in the numbers game and settling for a maximum of three children in one foster home. Such a limit takes no account of the persons already in the fostering family or of the need to keep larger numbers of children together. The minister mentioned the implementation group. I would have been much more impressed if, instead of a top-down approach being taken again, that group had included members from neighbourhoods with drug problems, people who have already been drug users and others who could enable the group to take a bottom-up approach.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the overall impact on local authority budgets, council tax levels and local services will be of implementing free personal care. (S2O-9761)

Does the minister agree that the figures of £145 for personal care and £65 for nursing care, which were introduced back in 2002, no longer cover the real costs that councils pay for those services? Wales now offers £107.63 for nursing care and Northern Ireland provides £100, but in Scotland the council tax payer is bearing the brunt of the cost of a policy that the Executive heralds as a flagship. When will the Executive put its money where its mouth is?

As Rob Gibson said, we broadly welcome the consultation document, "Rural Development Programme for Scotland 2007-2013", and the chance to debate the future of the land of Scotland and the part that it plays in our overall economic development. As with any plan, the devil will be in the detail and in the funding that is available. Much is said about the rural economy and the need to diversify so that the population in the countryside can be maintained and enhanced, but we must never lose sight of the primary aim of the land, which is to provide food for our people. In January of last year, I was horrified to hear a minister from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs say at a conference in Oxford that he no longer thought that it was important that food came from our own resources. We live in a time of global insecurity, which is mostly caused by Bush and Blair and by the UK Government's pursual of a disastrous foreign policy and failure in its duty to protect and defend the security of our citizens. Failure to recognise the importance in a hungry world of home-grown  food and to protect food sources leaves us, as an island, highly vulnerable. Here in Scotland, where agriculture is a devolved issue, we have an opportunity to take a different tack from our southern neighbours. Food production is immensely important to the Scottish economy. The beef cattle industry, which produces 167,000 tonnes of beef, is worth £450 million. Scotland has almost 30 per cent of the UK herd of breeding cattle and 4 per cent of the EU herd. The sheep flock is worth £98 million and Scotland has more than 20 per cent of the UK breeding flock. The pig industry is worth another £150 million; 63 per cent of the country's pigs come from my area in the north-east. Dairy is worth £230 million, poultry and eggs are worth £120 million, cereals—mainly wheat and barley—are worth £260 million and we should not forget the seed potato industry and our exports of fruit and oil-seed rape, for example. In spite of that, we witness daily pressure on agricultural land, not just from housebuilding, as our towns and cities expand, but from the use of prime agricultural land to plant trees, which is ridiculous. Sustainable forestry must be on moorland rather than on prime agricultural land. We have yet to experience the full effects of the single farm payment scheme, but I am not optimistic that it will encourage food production. The minister mentioned the beauty of rural Scotland, but that is a result of good land management. Nothing can be more distressing to a farmer's daughter than to see good productive land being set aside. That is a travesty in a world in which there is still widespread famine. As people become more aware of the need for fair trade at home and in developing countries and of the need to reduce food miles, we must encourage food production rather than stifle it. We must welcome local farmers markets, which offer excellent benefits to farmers and the public, and recognise the advantages of shopping at small local butchers, bakers and delicatessens, which stock local produce, often at cheaper prices than the supermarkets. It is regrettable that the minister glossed over how the achievement of the rural development plan's aims will be financed. In my view, he seems to be relying far too heavily on EU funding. In that context, I want to discuss the LEADER programme. In an excellent speech, Sarah Boyack spoke about equipping people with the skills to meet future challenges. LEADER has been very good at developing bottom-up community initiatives. Community LEADER agents have given communities confidence to seek funding from a variety of sources to supplement LEADER start-up money. In upper Banffshire and upper Speyside, for example, LEADER initiatives have enabled  communities to start a children's drop-in centre, to refurbish a community hall, to open a visitor resource centre and to develop, with the Crown Estate, a footpath network, which stimulates tourism. Information on walking routes is the information most commonly requested by tourists in that area. In the expanding EU, we must ensure that LEADER money is still available to our upland areas. The minister said a great deal about involving stakeholders, but local authorities are often forgotten about. There is no point in the Scottish Parliament encouraging people to live and work in rural areas if, at the same time, our local authorities are closing rural schools and—as is happening in Liberal Democrat-controlled Aberdeenshire—cutting rather than facilitating access to school transport. The joined-up government that is so often spoken about is far from being achieved.

Does the minister recognise that local action group areas under LEADER are somewhat  large for a small country such as ours? The minimum population for an area is 10,000 and the maximum is 100,000. Is not that prescriptive? Are those thresholds based on EU figures for larger countries such as Germany, Denmark and England?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for allowing me time in this debate to get my first speech over at an early stage. As Stewart Stevenson did, I want in this debate to draw on my 14 years' experience as a prison visitor at Craiginches, where I have witnessed the human misery that is suffered by individuals as a result of drug misuse and involvement with drugs. Over the years, I have seen the prison population at Craiginches change from being predominantly older men on theft and petty criminal charges to the majority of prisoners—some 70 to 80 per cent—being there as a result of drug misuse. As many members have said, the scourge of drug abuse must not be seen as a party-political matter and speeches today have shown that our common goal is to rid Scotland of its drug culture. However, it is my firm belief that sentencing drug addicts to short sentences that are not long enough seriously to tackle their addictions is not the answer, because far too often we see those addicts back in prison again, sometimes within days. That must really frustrate the police. Craiginches has the highest rate of prisoners who have tested positive for drugs, but it has the second-lowest rate of attendance for drug programmes. The provision of methadone substitute is not the answer because the addictive behaviour continues. On a prison visit just last Friday, I listened to one prisoner who had been forcibly removed from Craiginches to Barlinnie on a Wednesday, despite the fact that he told prison staff that his case was due in court in two days' time and that he was likely to be released on bail. He was released from Barlinnie on the Friday, at 7.30 pm, with a bus ticket to Aberdeen that was valid only for Friday, but by that time all the buses had left. He had to sleep rough in Glasgow and return to Aberdeen at his own expense the next day. Worse than that, he was released without his methadone prescription for the weekend, so as soon as he got back to Aberdeen he was immediately back on heroin and back in prison within a few days.  The benefits to the drug user and to society of becoming drug free greatly outweigh the benefits of controlled drug abuse. Residential rehabilitation has been shown to be the most effective way of facilitating recovery, but it is available only to a tiny proportion of addicts in Scotland. I agree with colleagues who have said that there is not a one-size-fits-all solution. The methadone programme alone costs £12 million for an estimated 20,000 addicts. How much better it would be if that money were redirected to provide residential rehab services. Although there is some provision by the private sector, it is patchy and unregulated. I disagree with Miss Goldie's suggestion—if I heard her correctly—that there should be a central unit for rehabilitation, because it is important that addicts be treated in their own environments, so that they can have family support. Grampian has the highest number of babies born with drug addictions. The national figure is 6.1 per 1,000 live births, but in the Grampian area it is 11.4 per 1,000 live births. Now that the women's unit in Craiginches has closed, we do not see those women and they have to go to Cornton Vale, where I am sure there are some human misery stories still to be told. We need residential units throughout the country. In the north-east we desperately need a publicly funded rehabilitation centre. I am sure that the long-term benefits to drug users and to society as a whole would mean that money had been well spent because it would make us safer and save taxpayers money. That really would be joined-up Government.