I thank the minister and fellow members for their speeches, which have been constructive. We all agree that something has to be done about new psychoactive substances. The work that the Scottish Government has done with Police Scotland, the choices for life campaign, outreach support through Crew 2000 and modern technology is welcome. We need to get the message across that new psychoactive substances are dangerous. I concur with my fellow members who mentioned head shops. There are a number of those shops in my Glasgow Kelvin constituency and the most shocking thing about them, apart from the paraphernalia that they sell, is that tourists and others can unwittingly walk into them because they advertise other supplies besides these substances, which I believe should be banned. Because some people simply wander into these shops without realising what they sell, and given everyone’s concern about the issue, I suggest that these shops be looked at. Like other members, I also think that the use of the term “legal high” should be addressed as it gives out entirely the wrong message. In recent years, new psychoactive substances have rapidly changed the global drugs market. Substances that are not under international control but which mimic the effects of controlled substances are now pretty much widely available and have the potential to pose a serious risk to public health and safety. As other members have pointed out, despite their being marketed as a legal alternative to controlled substances, users cannot be certain of either the health risks of using them or their legal status. As has been mentioned, the internet has created a global marketplace, making access to and distribution of these substances easier for people of all ages. It is also important to highlight, as the police have done, the potential for organised criminals to exploit the market for these substances. Given the quite frightening speed at which that market has developed, given the wide availability of and access to these substances and given the concerns about their increasing use, the issue has become very significant and it is good that we are debating it this afternoon. However, although it is international in nature and requires collective global action, there is still no standard national or international approach to the matter. I know that many countries have adopted broader legislative approaches to controlling new psychoactive substances. New Zealand has already been mentioned, but I note that on 1 January 2012 an act came into force in Austria controlling new psychoactive substances listed in regulation by the Austrian Minister of Health and which are not subject to the 1961 or 1971 UN drugs conventions. Moreover, in Hungary, Government legislation took effect on 3 April 2012 that created a schedule C to existing legislation listing such drugs appearing on the market. In any case, although New Zealand, Ireland and these other countries have put into effect proposals to stop the supply of these substances, we do not yet know how successful they have been. I was very pleased to read the G8 statement of intent on new psychoactive substances, which was published on 25 June 2013 and commits signatories including the UK, the United States of America, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and many others to putting in place a range of measures to address the challenges posed by such substances, and to sharing intelligence on them, their impact on public health and the various supply routes. As all members have made clear this afternoon, we have to work constructively and collectively on this matter. New psychoactive substances represent a danger to the whole of our society, particularly our young people. Last week’s tragedy in Glasgow has already been mentioned and, of course, my sympathies and everyone else’s go out to the family affected. We need a global approach to the issue. As members have pointed out, the Scottish Government has been doing a very good job but the availability of these substances on the internet makes things very difficult to police. I know that we are working with the UK Government on this but I wonder whether the minister can give us an update on what has been happening in that respect. In her opening speech, for example, she referred to the latest information that is coming out. The minister also mentioned the drugs strategy and I hope that we might have a regular debate on it so that we can find out what progress is being made. The issue is certainly important. Certain drugs might be legal—and I hate to use that term in connection with these substances—but they pose a particular threat simply because they can be bought off the internet. As Graeme Dey said, anyone can go into one of these head shops and pay X amount of money for these substances but they are a lot cheaper on the internet. Moreover, criminals can get access to a lot more of them. There is a lot to be said for this debate. I thank everyone for their good contributions and hope that we can move forward in tackling what is a very serious international situation.

The one person who got the whole tone of their contribution completely wrong is Hanzala Malik. I remind him about the first part of his speech when he talked about missing money. If the Westminster Government had given back money that was used for the Olympics, we would have had more money. Hanzala Malik should know what he is talking about before he starts casting aspersions. I am from Glasgow and I represent Kelvin, which is one of the biggest constituencies that is hosting the games. I am happy and enthusiastic about that, as I am for the rest of the people of Scotland and those who will come here from the Commonwealth. As a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association executive, I thank my colleagues and the clerks on the executive committee for the hard work that they have been doing with the Commonwealth games committee to push the games forward with a positive message. That is all I have to say on that particular point. I cannot emphasise enough how important the games are to Scotland and to Glasgow, where a number of sporting and cultural events will take place. The bowling competition will take place in Kelvingrove, in my constituency. James Dornan, Patricia Ferguson, Bill Kidd and I had great pleasure in playing a friendly game on the new bowling green against MPs. I will not say what the score was, but we were cheated and the MSPs lost. It was a wonderful day: the weather was good and it was fantastic to be working together to promote the Commonwealth games. The bowling green is a legacy for the people of Glasgow and the people of Scotland. I heard John Mason saying that his football stadium is bigger than James Dornan’s football stadium, so I would just like to tell them that Kelvin constituency is bigger than both football stadiums, and many of the cultural and other events that are taking place just now and will take place throughout the games are taking place in my constituency. For example, the Hydro in the precincts of the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre will host gymnastics, boxing, judo, netball, wrestling, weightlifting and powerlifting. It has fantastic facilities and they will be the legacy for all to enjoy after the games have finished. Patricia Ferguson talked about the games achieving a lasting legacy for Glasgow and for the whole of Scotland, particularly for young people and their participation in more physical activity. Partnership working is key to that and we must consider it, whether it be with the Scottish Government, local authorities or the excellent campaign that the Evening Times is conducting at the moment. Such work must continue after the games to ensure that the games have a lasting legacy. Liz Smith mentioned access to schools facilities and the prohibitive costs of that. That has always been a bugbear of mine and I have raised the issue on many occasions. There can be a school—a public building—in the middle of a community but the people of the community cannot use it because it is not open or because the costs are too prohibitive. I know that I have raised that issue with the minister and with previous Government ministers. Can we please have a word with local authorities in round-table discussions or whatever? If there is a community facility—in some cases these are swimming pools—why can the community not use it to access physical activity? Perhaps the minister could have a round-table discussion or perhaps there could be partnership working to ensure that such facilities are able to be used. We have mentioned sporting activities and physical activities. Malcolm Chisholm is not here at the moment; maybe he went for a walk for some physical activity. I would probably benefit from that also, as would many people. I look forward to accessing many of the excellent facilities. Loads of events are taking place before, during and after the games. We have to remember the great economic benefits that they will bring, not just to Glasgow—within and outwith my constituency—but to the whole of Scotland. They will bring cultural benefits, too. I say to Hanzala Malik once again that we welcome everyone. Being a member of the CPA executive, I know exactly how many people are coming from throughout the Commonwealth. We are going to be there to greet them. We will also have something here in the Parliament to greet them. We are reaching out internationally as well as nationally, which has to be something to look forward to. I will mention some of the cultural benefits that are coming forward. The Glasgow mela is Scotland’s greatest multicultural festival. We had more than 35,000 people attend the mela in Kelvingrove park last year. One of the lasting benefits and legacies of that was the £2 million revamp of the Kelvingrove bandstand from the 2014 cultural fund. That bandstand will be opened and it will host other events. It will get its first airing during the Glasgow mela. That is a fantastic contribution to multiculturalism in Scotland. We have to remember that aspect as well.

I can see that we will not have any positive contributions from Mr Malik—I wonder why. I did mention the £2 million for the Kelvingrove bandstand, which was from the 2014 cultural fund. Lots of money is given from other organisations as well. I turn to the music aspect. The big big sing is fantastic. It is a nationwide celebration of singing produced by Glasgow UNESCO City of Music, inspiring thousands of people, not just in Glasgow but throughout the country to sing and learn to sing during the games. That is a fantastic opportunity to get involved. We have comedy. Thousands of people will come to the stand-up comedy in the Glasgow international comedy festival. We have the Aye Write book festival, which is a fantastic thing attended by lots of people. We also have a Wee Write festival for younger people to take part in. Encouraging our younger people to take part in not just sporting activities but cultural activities will be a lasting legacy. Festival 2014 will transform the merchant city and other areas, such as Kelvingrove and the areas around Glasgow green, part of which is in John Mason’s ward. Those areas will have zones with live music and other forms of activity taking place. The Commonwealth games are a fantastic opportunity to welcome people into the city. Culturally and economically, the Commonwealth games will be a fantastic opportunity to showcase the people of Glasgow and its warmth and vibrancy and the rest of the country as well.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made on implementing the national infertility group report. (S4O-02840)

It is very good progress, which we have achieved by working with the NIG. The minister will be aware that NIG recommended that the number of IVF cycles should be reviewed at the earliest possible opportunity. The minister said that the money that the Scottish Government is investing in reducing waiting times is achieving a positive result. Can he give us a timescale for when the review of the number of IVF cycles will be carried out?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to keep my speech as short as possible. As a member of the Justice Committee, to which consideration of the LCM fell, and of the committee that was involved in considering the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill, I know only too well what effects forced marriage can have on an individual and their family. I thank my fellow members of the Justice Committee for their scrutiny of the LCM and for their comments, which have all been made in the interests of the victims of forced marriage. I also thank the minister for her speech and her assurances that stakeholders will be consulted on the guidelines that are to be developed and that awareness-raising campaigns will be carried out in communities. With regard to Elaine Murray’s point about those who have recommended that the UK ratify the convention, I should point out that they included a group of violence against women stakeholders, which was very much in favour of the UK’s becoming a signatory, and the Scottish representatives on the UK joint committee on women, who have recommended that the UK Government pick up on that point. The fundamental and overriding issue is article 37 of the Istanbul convention on tackling violence against women, which requires forced marriage to become a criminal offence. Unfortunately, existing legislation does not meet the requirement in article 37; the legal advice that the Justice Committee received confirms as much. That is one of the most important aspects of the issue. I believe that by agreeing to the LCM we will not only meet our international obligations but retain our own forced marriage protection orders under civil legislation. I firmly believe that those orders, which will not be removed, will provide an additional safeguard to protect those who are at risk. Victims will still be able to choose between going down the civil route or going to the police. As my time has been cut short, I will conclude by pointing out that a black and minority ethnic women’s support organisation that is based in Edinburgh has made it clear that we should “adhere to the letter as well as the spirit of the Istanbul Convention” because doing so will strengthen support and preventative work. It was also felt that the approach to forced marriage should be in line with approaches to other abusive practices within the family, such as domestic violence and sexual abuse. Mark Ballard, head of policy at Barnardo’s Scotland, has said: “We believe that creating an offence under Scots law of forcing someone into marriage would be the right step to take in order to tackle this very serious issue.”

I thank the convener, John Lamont, and congratulate him on his highly informative contribution. I am sure that most members in the chamber found it extremely interesting. I also thank Malcolm Chisholm, who—as he mentioned—is the local member, for his welcome local knowledge. I found what he had to say very interesting, as I am sure that other members did. In addition, I thank my fellow committee member, Anne McTaggart, for her comments and her work on the committee. When the committee and the clerks went to visit the Leith Links area, it was evident that a great deal of attention had been paid to exactly where the statue would be erected and to ensuring that it would not be in front of anyone’s windows and would not disturb anyone. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, the local community councils have been highly supportive of the bill’s provisions overall. As the deputy convener, I am very pleased to close the debate for the committee. As well as thanking the committee members for their scrutiny of the bill, I thank all those who also contributed to the scrutiny by providing oral evidence, such as those who proposed the bill and the statue. I also thank everyone who wrote in with their thoughts, from the police to people in the community. I thank the committee clerks for their assistance, which was most welcome to me because I have never been a member of a private bill committee before. I found it very interesting to learn about the difference between private and public bills, which the convener has explained, and why private bills have to come through Parliament in this way. It is very much an honour to be deputy convener of the committee. As I said, this is my first time as a member of a private bill committee, and I may be called forward again for such a role. I am always happy do my duty, as are most MSPs. As I said, I visited Leith Links with the committee. I believe that the statue will be an attractive addition to Leith Links and that it will promote awareness of the rich history of golfing on the links, which Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, and relevant historic connections. The Leith community will benefit because the statue will attract visitors, who, as Anne McTaggart said, will make use of facilities and businesses in the area, which can only be a good thing. The bill will also revitalise the Surplus Fire Fund, which had become dormant. The changes to the purposes for which the fund can be applied will improve its use by encouraging more applications from individuals who have been affected by fire. [Interruption.] Is it okay to continue, Presiding Officer?

Thank you very much. I just wondered whether it was all right to continue. I am not one for complaining, but I could not hear myself speak. It is really important that people realise that the bill will open up the Surplus Fire Fund to so many more people—which is why I want to encourage members to listen to these points. As I said, the changes will encourage more applications from individuals who have been affected by fire, because their injuries will no longer have to be deemed to be serious. They will also allow people to claim for damage to domestic premises and household contents; in many cases—this is really important—those applying will not be insured, so that is a very helpful change. They will expressly allow the provision of grants to burns units that care for people who are resident in the City of Edinburgh Council area. Those three points are very important. The transfer of the fund will enable EVOC to refer organisations that it works with in its large network. EVOC believes that that will have a “cumulative impact on other charitable organisations and ... individuals.”——[Official Report, City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill Committee, 14 November 2013; c 32.] That is also an important point. The transfer will also make use of the trustees’ wide experience to ensure that the fund is used to best effect. I believe that both the bill’s purposes will provide benefits to the community. On behalf of the committee, I recommend to Parliament that the general principles of the bill be agreed to.

Presiding Officer?

That was a very welcome intervention. I met Mr Chisholm at the funfair on Leith Links, when I was with my granddaughter and Mr Chisholm was with his. Certainly, lots of things take place on the links. As someone who comes from Glasgow to visit Edinburgh, I will certainly make my way down to Leith Links because I know exactly where the statue will be. One of the great things about the statue is that it will be quite iconic but not out of place on the links. It will certainly encourage people to go down there. I hope that people who are encouraged to do that—perhaps people like me, or even younger people—might take up golf. Who knows? People will read about the statue and will be able to see the historic connections in the links area. I think that the statue is a great idea and I look forward to bumping into Mr Chisholm and his granddaughter again on Leith Links and perhaps having a chat and a game of golf as well. Thank you, Presiding Officer.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how its cities strategy provides additional support for local traders. (S4O-02801)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for that answer and I appreciate the work that is being done. She will be aware of the news that all traders at Glasgow’s Savoy centre in my constituency have been told that they have one week to vacate their shops, which is causing understandable concern among traders who are faced with losing their livelihoods, and anger that no discussion with the owners has taken place. What can the Scottish Government offer those traders, and will the Deputy First Minister meet me to discuss a way forward?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. First, I commend my colleague James Dornan for securing this debate. Unfortunately, due to a family bereavement, he cannot be here this evening. Our sympathies are with him and his family. I point out that the motion highlights the work of the Domestic Abuse Project and the CEDAR project in Castlemilk. Back in November I had the privilege of leading a members’ business debate to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Glasgow Women’s Aid and the work that it does in supporting those suffering from domestic abuse. In that debate we also had the opportunity to acknowledge the CEDAR programme, which many of us know is a therapeutic group-work programme that aims to help both women and children to come to terms with the domestic abuse that they have experienced or witnessed. Typically, the group work for children and that for mothers takes place at the same time and, importantly, the groups mirror their aims, such as to express the emotions surrounding abuse. That allows the children and their mother together to continue to explore, understand and come to terms with what they have suffered and experienced. It is a powerful model that helps to promote empathy and empowerment among those attending. It may seem to many that such an approach is a commonsense one, but it is quite innovative in its delivery. It involves a multi-agency approach, bringing together professionals from a large range of agencies across the public and voluntary sectors. That type of model is also important not only for the way that it can transform people’s lives but, sadly, for a more pragmatic reason: at a time when finances are being squeezed there is more need for that type of multi-agency approach. I believe that the CEDAR model offers a great opportunity to make a real difference to people’s lives and to tackle the thorny issue of how we continue to support some of the most vulnerable people in our society in these times. The CEDAR pilot’s evaluation report noted that CEDAR is contributing to a range of Scottish Government policies and that it represents an opportunity to focus resources in many services. In the previous debate that I mentioned, I noted that CEDAR Glasgow had another two years of funding from the Big Lottery Fund and I said that I hoped that the Scottish Government would look to and learn from the CEDAR model in its approach to other forms of intervention. In response, the minister said that a strategy for Scotland to tackle violence against women was being taken forward, that it would be the first such document in Scotland and that it would shape the way in which we tackle violence against women in the future. I hope that debates such as this one will help to inform the strategy and that programmes such as CEDAR will be very much part of it. I understand that the Government will consult on the strategy in early 2014. Perhaps we could tease out some more details of it from the minister in her closing speech. I will take a moment to commend those who make this work possible for their hard work and dedication. Some of them are in the public gallery and I met many of them earlier during a drop-in session in the Parliament. I was very impressed by the way in which all the groups work together, including Scottish Women’s Aid, from which I spoke to Janice, Catherine and Mariam; the CEDAR project, from which I spoke to Kirsty and Isla; and the WAVES group, and in particular Bessie Anderson, who chairs that group. I know that James Dornan takes a keen interest in the WAVES group, which helps women to move on from violent environments at their own pace. It was explained to me that, rather than being told to go into certain areas, women take it at their own pace, which helps them to feel much more comfortable if they wish to move on. Women gain confidence from that and benefit from personal development, and they go on to voluntary work and some to colleges. I was very impressed by the contributions of the people at the drop-in session. I apologise to the people I met who I have not been able to name. I am sure that they know who they are. Once again, I thank them for all the hard work that they do on behalf of people. When I spoke to my colleague James Dornan, he particularly praised the Domestic Abuse Project in Castlemilk, through which he learned more about the CEDAR project in his constituency. In the past three years alone, it has helped about 100 people each year and, incredibly, 90 per cent of its clients have gained volunteering positions and employment, which I mentioned earlier. That helps them to regain control of their lives. Special thanks must go to all those who help with that. James Dornan also learned of the work of Dr Lombard in his research for a debate on the origins of addiction that was brought to the chamber by Kenneth Gibson, who I believe will speak in tonight’s debate. As a result of Dr Lombard’s work on how children perceive violence, she noted the need for discussions with schoolchildren to help them to understand what is meant by a healthy, respectful relationship in order to break down gender stereotypes that may, unfortunately, lead to violence in future. Her work is a fantastic read. I am not sure whether the publication is available in the Parliament, but I certainly have a copy of it and I am happy to pass it on to others. In our debate on the anniversary of Glasgow Women’s Aid, I mentioned the outreach programme in schools that aims to tackle the issues that Dr Lombard identified in her publication. I hope that her valuable work, alongside the outreach work that is being done in schools, will also inform the Scottish Government’s future approach to domestic violence. As the minister said in her concluding remarks in that debate, the issue is not only about ending domestic abuse and violence against women. It is also about achieving equality, not just for women but between men and women in our society. I look forward to hearing the other speeches and the minister’s summing-up speech. Thank you.

I thank the other Justice Committee members and the clerks, and I also thank Jenny Marra, who proposed that we carry out an investigation into the provisions on title conditions. Although the legislation may seem complicated and dry, it is very much a people’s act and it affects many people’s lives. I thank the minister for her comments on access to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. That issue has certainly caused much anguish in my constituency in the west end of Glasgow, where people who wished to appeal against a development being built in a front garden of a property, of all places, found that it would cost them tens of thousands of pounds. I appreciate that the Government is progressing recommendations in that respect, because we need to look at the issue. We should not expect ordinary people to have to spend £10,000 or £20,000 on appealing against a development. Another issue is the switching of factors. I take on board Patricia Ferguson’s comments about the Homeowners Housing Panel, which I agree has done a fantastic job. There are problems at times with the two-thirds majority requirement and with absentee landlords, and it is important that we look at those issues. The committee received evidence to suggest that the Data Protection Act 1998 is not a barrier and does not prevent factors from giving out the names and addresses of other proprietors. I welcome the minister’s comments and the Scottish Government’s move forward in that regard. The problem of absentee landlords is not just about repairs but about getting something done in a tenant’s property or wherever. It is important that everyone is told about the repairs that are to be done, how much they may cost and where things will go from there. I want to comment on the situation of switching factors. I have many cases, as I am sure other members have, but for a particular one involving a property in the centre of Glasgow I have visited both factors and residents. Everything in that case has been done according to the legislation, but even though a new factor has been appointed the previous factor will not pass on information to them and has held on to floats and residents’ moneys. I know that we can go to the Homeowner Housing Panel on the issue, but what do we do when a factor ignores residents’ wishes? That is a very real problem generally and not just in that particular case. On repairs issues, factors can be taken to the Homeowner Housing Panel and it can tell them that they are in the wrong and that the residents and home owners are in the right, but the factors can refuse to accept the panel’s recommendation. What recourse do home owners have in such cases? I ask the minister and the Government to look into that; real issues are taken to the Homeowner Housing Panel but factors ignore the panel’s recommendations. What recourse do residents and home owners have? I know that time is short, Presiding Officer—I see you nodding to me—so I will finish here. The 2003 act is a very important piece of legislation because it is about fairness for residents—and factors—and ensuring that they get the good service that they pay for.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Police Scotland regarding housebreakers during the festive period. (S4T-00547)

I understand that the crackdown is taking place in areas where there has been an increase in the number of housebreakings. However, my constituency in Glasgow is not included and I wonder whether that could be reviewed.

I appreciate the reply from the cab sec. I have received correspondence from some constituents in Glasgow Kelvin, which has a large proportion of students who tend to go away over Christmas and new year. I will write back to those constituents and the community councils, and I will take his advice and speak to the chief constable and the local community police in the constituency. Thank you.

I take this opportunity to highlight the invaluable work of the many organisations that are involved in helping women and children affected by violence against them. I give credit to the present Government and previous Governments for the continued importance that they have attached to this very emotive subject. I am sorry that the debate is not consensual, but I hope that we can continue to focus on why we are here, which is to try to help. I agree with Jackie Baillie: I do not want to come back to another debate on violence against women; I want to eradicate it. I hope that we can do that. We had debates on this topic last month. Jackie Baillie had one, and I had one on Glasgow Women’s Aid’s 40th anniversary, in which I talked about the work that that organisation does to provide support and refuge for women, children and young people who experience many forms of domestic abuse. The continuing hard work and dedication of organisations such as Women’s Aid and others mean that people suffering in an abusive relationship feel confident enough to come forward—that is an important point to remember—in the knowledge that support is out there. I note the Labour amendment. I want to quote Lily Greenan, the manager of Scottish Women’s Aid—I hope that Jackie Baillie and the Labour Party are listening. She said: “We expect reported incidents of domestic abuse to continue to rise as the awareness of domestic abuse increases, professionals receive more training and as a result, women are encouraged to report the abuse they are experiencing to police ... We commend the high priority Police Scotland has given to tackling domestic abuse since its establishment in April this year.” I think that we have to listen to the experts on that point. It is also worth noting that, as the minister said, funding has increased by more than 60 per cent since 2007 to £34.5 million for the period 2012 to 2015. I welcome the proposed strategy, which is aimed at tackling all forms of violence against women. I look forward to the consultation and subsequent publication of the strategy next summer. I am very pleased that female genital mutilation will be part of the project and the consultation. It might surprise Margaret Mitchell and the Conservatives to hear this, but I agree with the comments made by the leader of their party, Ruth Davidson, about the number of repeat victims, which continues to stand at around two thirds of reported domestic abuse victims. Members should listen for a minute. The fact that much of that abuse takes place in the home makes it very difficult for the abuser to be brought to justice, which leads to such behaviour being repeated. I think that we all agree that the cycle must be broken, but if we are to tackle the issue effectively, surely we have to look at corroboration, the requirement for which is preventing abusers from going to trial. Most incidents of domestic abuse, rape and violence against women take place behind closed doors with only the two people present. I agree with Ruth Davidson’s comments and I hope that Margaret Mitchell also agrees with them. If abusers get away with it once, they will get away with it many other times. The abolition of corroboration is one of the big measures that will ensure that more of the cases we are talking about can be brought to court and that justice can be seen to be done. I note Alison Johnstone’s amendment, which was not selected. I believe that the sentiment in it is certainly worth noting.

We have mentioned domestic violence, but we also need to look at the austerity measures that are coming from the Westminster Government, particularly the bedroom tax and the cuts in welfare benefits. Those affect everyone, but they affect women who experience domestic abuse and violence even more. In some of the debates that have been held, Alistair Carmichael said that people who suffer domestic abuse—

I was at the same meeting and met the same people as Rhoda Grant. I listened to them, and not once did those people blame the Scottish Government at all. I am very disappointed that Rhoda Grant is raising that sensitive issue, which was expressed at a private meeting.

Will the member take an intervention?

On the issue of taking cases to court and of prosecution, does the member support getting rid of corroboration?

I will be very brief, Presiding Officer. I support amendment 19 and concur with everything that Elaine Murray has said. Indeed, women who have suffered sexual abuse have told us that the idea of getting a compensation order is abhorrent to them.

I thank Jenny Marra for taking an intervention. I know of her interest in the subject. When I was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee we inquired into the matter of female genital mutilation and we went out and visited groups of women. Jenny Marra said that 3,000 women in Scotland are either in danger of going through or have gone through that horrific treatment. When members of the committee, including members of the Labour Party, went out to visit those groups of women, we did not find 3,000 women. I would be interested to hear where Jenny Marra got the numbers from.

Having attended the scene and spoken to many of the people there, I echo the comments of the First Minister and the leaders of the Opposition parties and I thank everyone for their heartfelt contributions. The tragic incident at the Clutha has affected everyone in my constituency and people beyond, and my sympathies go to all who have lost their lives and their loved ones who grieve for them. The courage that has been shown by the emergency services and the people of Glasgow is nothing short of heroic, and I pay tribute to every single person. It is said that Glaswegians are resilient—they are, but they are also courageous, as Friday night’s incident has proved, and that courage and resilience will help us through the sad days ahead.

We are all aware of the effects of substance abuse on the individual, those close to them and the wider community. Indeed, many members have visited such individuals and the families and the groups that look after them and perhaps even those peoples’ families, as Anne McTaggart mentioned. We should all pay tribute to their hard work in looking after and supporting families and those who suffer from substance misuse, particularly as they often do so voluntarily. I hope that members also agree that people who suffer from substance misuse need understanding and support, and that they endorse the expert group’s conclusions and recommendations while we continue to improve that support. Scotland’s 30 alcohol and drug partnerships are vital in delivering those aims, and I welcome the minister’s announced consultation with the ADPs on the development of quality principles and, importantly, a strong commitment to human rights. It is true that concerns have been expressed that, as Mary Scanlon mentioned, ADPs have not been as transparent as they could be. It is therefore encouraging to see new planning and reporting mechanisms agreed. However, it is also important that they are given the flexibility to develop local strategies as the level of substance misuse and underlying reasons differ widely across Scotland. Indeed, I am sure that members have many different stories to tell about what happens in their constituencies and regions. David Liddell, director of the Scottish Drugs Forum, when commenting on the report highlighted the fact that “significant income and health inequalities ... underpin much of Scotland’s drug problem.” Anne McTaggart also mentioned that matter in her speech. In Glasgow, the prevalence of drug misuse is still considerably higher than the national average, which is in part due to the inequalities that exist in that great city and the constituency that I represent. Although tackling the issue may fall outwith the remit of the report, it is important to remember those underlying reasons. I therefore welcome the minister’s comments on health inequalities and the public health minister’s involvement in the work. I encourage, if at all possible, joint working with other Scottish Government departments to tackle inequality at all levels. The minister mentioned the recovery initiative fund and the unity recovery football club. That is a great example of a local initiative that not only supports recovery, but offers other healthy avenues that give people a new interest and focus. The fact that it also fosters a sense of community among those participating is, to my mind, an important aspect of such projects. There are many other projects in Glasgow that take a holistic approach to treatment rather than adopting more mainstream methods. Just like us, which is based in Milton in Glasgow, is another great example. It offers a structured 10-week spiritual-based skills programme that focuses on empowering individuals to take control of their lives in a meaningful way and reduce their reliance on prescribed medication. There are plenty more examples of such an approach not just in Glasgow, but throughout the country. They are important to our overall perception and treatment of substance misuse. Perhaps the minister would look at including that approach in the Government’s future drugs strategy. Another important aspect of support and prevention must be to help people coming out of prison to ensure that they do not simply fall back into substance misuse. Unfortunately, the transition from prison life back into society has seen a number of people go back to past habits, reoffend and be sent back to prison. As a member of the Justice Committee, I know only too well from prisoners’ experiences and the evidence that we have heard that substance misuse is part of the revolving door back to prison. It is very much a vicious cycle that must be ended if we are to avoid further drug misuse. The Scottish Government’s public social partnerships have been used in Low Moss prison to tackle that issue and offer the necessary support to individuals after they leave prison. I have an example to share. One user of the partnership said: “There are so many wee things that you need to sort out. Housing, benefits, meds, and add all these wee things together and it feels like an uphill struggle from the start.” After leaving prison, he went to his doctors but he had been deregistered and was told that he would not get what he called his “subbie” or, in other words, his prescription, as they had not received a fax from the prison about it. Faced with that, it would have been easy for him to slip back into substance misuse. However, in his case, the PSP spoke to the prison doctor and got the matter sorted out. That is not an isolated incident but, with the support of the PSP, it was much easier for him not to offend again. PSPs have been shown to work. Would the minister consider rolling the model out across Scotland? I welcome the independent expert review of opioid replacement therapies in Scotland and the fact that, at its heart, it promotes person-centred recovery. The review also highlights the desire further to develop information, research and evaluation systems at a national level. I encourage the minister to include in that research the use of holistic approaches to drugs misuse and the use of public social partnerships in achieving the aims of the Government’s drugs strategy.

Will the member take an intervention?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will do as much as I can. Pensions are a major issue. If Ms Marra reads the fantastic document that is the white paper, she will see—oh, I see that she has it. Great—maybe she will read it; if she does, she will find that there are many pages on pensions. We have heard constantly from members of all the unionist parties—let us remember, they are better together—that they cannot see this or that in the fantastic document that has been given to the Scottish people and is about not just my future but the Scottish people’s future. However, I do not see anything from a unionist party, apart from perhaps that recipe that Patrick Harvie mentioned. It is rather condescending of Opposition members to come to the Parliament, look at the white paper and then present nothing whatever of their own. I would like someone to tell me when they will produce a paper that says what is best about staying in the union. Maybe then we could have a proper debate—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I do not think that it is necessarily just about me—it is just the Opposition benches. I echo what my SNP colleagues said about the significance of this debate and indeed this week, which has seen the publication of “Scotland’s Future”, of which I am enormously proud. It is a privilege for me to be able to take part in the debate, when others could have stood here—I wish that they could have been here to see this day. As many members have said, the white paper sets out a vision for Scotland and a choice for Scotland, made in Scotland, for the people of Scotland. We will have no more Westminster Governments for which we have not voted. We will have no more iniquitous policies, such as the bedroom tax—I remind Jenny Marra that the Labour Party brought the bedroom tax in first; let us not forget about that. The people of Scotland will be able to get the Government that they vote for, as Marco Biagi said. There are many issues that I would like to talk about. An issue that is very often raised in my constituency and in other members’ constituencies is care for the elderly. Free personal care is fantastic and came from this Parliament, but many people seem to forget that £40 million has been taken away from the elderly by the Westminster Government through attendance allowance cuts. I wonder whether we can get that back. I just want to say to my constituents and the people of Scotland that free personal care will continue in an independent Scotland. The concessionary fares policy is a fantastic offer for elderly people because it allows them to get out and about and keep fit and healthy. We must remember that it is under threat from Labour’s cuts, but it will continue in an independent Scotland. Jenny Marra talked about pensions.

I wanted more time to talk about pensions, which will continue in an independent Scotland, but at a better rate of £160 a week. What chance do pensioners in Scotland have with a Westminster Government? They get less money and more fuel poverty. It is time that we stood up for our country and our people—pensioners and others.

I express my solidarity with the workers in Glasgow, Filton and Portsmouth who have been affected by the announcement. I know only too well how important such jobs are, and I will go on to explain why. It is a well-known fact among SNP members—I am sure that the Labour Party also has a memory—-that every single time there is a general election, the Labour Party comes out with the scaremongering story that we will lose our shipyards. That has happened at every general election during the 30 years that I have been involved in politics, but it did not work in 2007, it did not work in 2011, and it will not work in 2014. The people have seen through that ploy. During last week’s debate, I said that I was angry and sad about the announcement, and I still am. Labour members should take a look at themselves, because their mantra, which constantly belittles the people of Scotland, the people of Glasgow, the people of Govan and the people in my constituency, is wearing very thin.

I did not mention any of the names that Johann Lamont has mentioned. [Interruption.] Excuse me a minute, but Mr Smith should know that a lot of my constituents and family are affected by the announcement. If he would stop sniping from the sidelines, I could finish what I was saying. I do not speak for the trade unions, but I speak for people in my constituency and people outwith it. They are not the only ones who talk to me and others. The Labour Party is not the only party that people go to to express their concerns. On Saturday, I was at a conference at Glasgow Caledonian University at which a debate on independence was held. Out of all the people at the conference, only two—one of whom was a member of the panel—said that they would not vote yes in the referendum. All the rest of them said that they would vote yes. Afterwards, we spoke to people individually about the shipyards. A person who works in one of the yards, whom I will meet next week—I will not give their name, just in case Johann Lamont happens to speak to others—does not think that it will close. It is not the case that everyone in the yard says that it will close if people vote yes in the referendum. Johann Lamont should not tell me that the Labour Party speaks for every worker in the Clyde shipyards. It does not, and I am sure that others—both inside and outside the chamber—will agree with me. I was born in Govan and my family—my father, my brothers and my uncles—worked in the shipyards. They were vital to the livelihoods of people in the area. Many other families worked in the yards, from Kvaerner to Harland and Wolff to Stephen and Sons to Fairfields, so I know only too well about the heritage of the Govan shipyards. I also know only too well that, as members such as Chic Brodie have said, they have been run down for many years. We should be diversifying and looking to the future. That is what the shipyard workers are telling us. When we talk about the here and now, what gets to everyone is the fact that Labour is decrying the skills of the shipyard workers. Instead of supporting those workers, as the Opposition should, Labour is using a red herring and saying to them that if they do not stick by the union or by what Labour tells them, they will lose their jobs. Labour is not saying that they have great skills, that they are fantastic workers and that, if the defence jobs do not come to the Clyde yards, it will do everything that it can to ensure that their skills are used elsewhere. That is what we should be doing. That is why I repeat what I said to Opposition members last week: you should be ashamed of yourselves for constantly scaremongering. It is a disgrace. I want to pick up on something that Chic Brodie mentioned: the suggestion that, if we vote for independence, defence work will never come to Scotland. The fact that the MOD is working with Australia on the type 26 frigates has been mentioned. The MOD press release that Chic Brodie cited says: “Areas of potential co-operation include future frigates, with the Royal Navy’s Type 26 design ... the first of many opportunities for future collaboration.” On 7 November, Jim Murphy, who is a member of Johann Lamont’s party, said: “Co-operation on defence procurement is critical, enabling us to maximise our ability” to go forward. That is the view of someone in Johann Lamont’s party, yet she argues against that. Let us be grown up about this. Are all those on the unionist side really saying that a future UK Government would be so small-minded that if its nearest neighbour, an independent Scotland, had the best workforce, it would snub us by going elsewhere and having something much more expensive built? Iain Gray rose—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I say to those members: for goodness’ sake, grow up and stop scaremongering. You have done it for long enough. As I said, it did not work in 2007, it did not work in 2011, and it will not work in 2014 either.

Will Duncan McNeil give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the First Minister for his reply and I am very grateful to the Deputy First Minister and the cabinet secretary for their meetings with the workforce and trade unions. I have written to them and received replies. Many local businesses in my constituency serve the workforce in the shipyards and will be affected by the announcement. What help will the Scottish Government offer them?

I am not a member of it, but I thank all members of the bill committee and the clerks for the excellent work that they have done and the hours that they put into the bill. I am very proud to be one of the people in Parliament who are able to vote yes on the bill today and to vote yes in September next year. I echo my colleague Stuart McMillan’s comments about the many people—too many to mention—who are not here to see this day. We are standing on the shoulders of giants; if not for them, we would not be debating the bill today, so I pay tribute to them. Everyone knows many of the people whom I mean. Margo MacDonald’s speech was excellent. We have all seen what has happened in Scotland; it has flourished under devolution, especially since 2007. No one can deny that the statesmanship of the First Minister and the economics that he has brought to the country are far beyond those of any other Prime Minister, never mind those of any other First Minister or Administration. For some reason, unfortunately, Labour members in particular—[Interruption.] I hear the Labour members from the sidelines. It seems that Labour members just cannot stomach this. They just cannot stomach the fact that someone who does not agree with them—who does not agree with the union—can be so successful for the Parliament and can bring so many people from throughout the world to Parliament; the greatest number of ambassadors et al are coming to visit the Parliament. We should all be proud of that, but Labour members cannot get through the wall of thinking that because it was the SNP that did it, it cannot be good for Parliament or Scotland. Yes, that makes me angry, but it also makes me very sad. I will tell members one thing that makes me even sadder, which is that what comes out—[Interruption.] Duncan McNeil is probably one of the people I mean, along with many others from the Labour benches. When we talk about shipbuilding, the Labour Party tells people to vote no and it says that, if they do not vote no, the yards will disappear from the Clyde. Let us just read what BAE Systems said about that.

No. The Ministry of Defence agrees that Glasgow is the most effective location to build type 26 ships. [Interruption.]

BAE said: “BAE Systems has agreed with the UK Ministry of Defence that Glasgow would be the most effective location for the manufacture of the future Type 26 ships … the Company proposes to consolidate its shipbuilding operations in Glasgow”. Do members know why BAE is doing that? It has said that it is because Glasgow has the best workforce—the one with the most experience. Members should look at all the other countries in the world. We do not need only Ministry of Defence orders; we can build other ships. We can lead the nation but, once again, the people in the Labour Party see doom and failure at every single corner. It is a disgrace. I will give more time to the one thing that really saddens me. As we speak, a lady in Pollok is being evicted from her house because of the bedroom tax. The Labour Party said that it would protect such people—that it would protect its constituents—but its MPs could not even turn up for a vote. I say to Labour members, shame on you. Shame on you.

Last night I spoke in the second debate this week on women’s issues and suggested that the debate’s title should be taken from the popular song, “Sisters are doin’ it for themselves”. I am afraid that I cannot come up with a catchy title for this debate. Perhaps someone else will do so. I thank the minister and members for their comprehensive speeches, which I think have covered most of the areas. Nevertheless, I will do my best to give some background information on the reasons for reform and the bill’s key aims. The Tribunals (Scotland) Bill was introduced on 8 May to create the framework for a new structure and organisation for the devolved tribunals in Scotland. Once an act of the Scottish Parliament, it will provide for the establishment of a first-tier tribunal and an upper tribunal for Scotland. The policy memorandum explains that devolved tribunals “have been established in an ad hoc fashion, with no common leadership, appointments, practice and procedure or reviews and appeals”. It notes that such a complex and fragmented system can lead to a “narrowness of outlook” and variation in standards and performance. The bill creates a structure that will reduce overlap, eliminate duplication, ensure better deployment and allow for available resources to be shared more widely, as a number of members have mentioned. It is intended to create a system that will improve the independence—and the perception of independence—of the devolved tribunals. The policy memorandum overview states that the bill “will create a simple two-tier structure—a First-tier Tribunal for first instance decisions (into which most tribunal jurisdictions will be transferred) and an Upper Tribunal (where the primary function will be to dispose of appeals from the First-tier)—-under the leadership of the Lord President of the Court of Session.” All the members who have spoken so far in the debate have welcomed that decision, as has the committee. The bill follows the Philip report and the Scottish Committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council’s 2011 report. I turn to some of the issues that the committee raised. We considered the judicial system and the idea of judges being salaried, which has been highlighted by Elaine Murray, Rod Campbell and a number of other members. The committee said that we should look at that issue, and its report states: “The Bill makes no provision for the appointment of full-time salaried judges in any of the tribunals envisaged by the Bill. A number of concerns were therefore raised regarding this perceived gap in the legislation.” The report goes on to note that the minister’s reply “was not entirely in favour of this suggestion, noting that ‘it would be difficult to justify the need for full-time permanent judiciary’ as ‘you would be paying salaries to people who would not necessarily be’” there all the time. During the bill process in committee, I noted the knock-on effect for the financial memorandum of that particular recommendation. Perhaps the minister can go into more detail on that issue, because we need to know what effect the committee’s recommendation for salaried judges for tribunals would have in monetary terms and for the financial memorandum for the bill as a whole. The committee recommended that the Government should resolve the delay in “the production of rules for the Upper Tribunal” as a matter of urgency, and a number of members have raised that point today. The committee also recommended that the Scottish Government should set out a definition of a tribunal in the bill in order to protect the character and nature of tribunals. It recommended that, where a tribunal proposes to introduce fees and expenses for the first time, “consultation should be carried out with users and stakeholders of the tribunal”. I concur with the concerns that my fellow member John Pentland raised in that regard, and I think that Alison McInnes also mentioned the issue of fees being charged. I note the minister’s comments on those recommendations and others. They are most welcome, but if she feels that she wants to go into further detail in summing up, that would be welcome too. As has been said, a lot of people go to tribunals but do not necessarily go to court. A lot has been said on that—Nigel Don mentioned that it is part of the legal system and that people who sit on the tribunals perceive them to be part of the judicial system. With regard to the recommendations on people being called judges or judiciary, I think that, as the bill goes through further stages, it will become easier for ordinary members of the public to understand the tribunals system. We are trying to set up a system with no duplication and to give ordinary members of the public who go to tribunals a better understanding and enable them to find out what they are all about so that they get a better service.

On the subject of counter closures and hours, I remind Graeme Pearson of what he said on Sunday, when we were talking about the issue. He asked why Giffnock and Helensburgh police stations were not closing. I wonder what his colleagues Ken Macintosh and Jackie Baillie would think about that. Graeme Pearson rose— That is what the member said. It is important to restate some of the Scottish Government’s achievements. I will name but a few. Crime is at its lowest level in not 10, 20 or 30 years, but 39 years. Drew Smith (Glasgow) (Lab) rose— Youth crime has been halved and an additional 1,000 officers have been provided. All that and more has been done against a background of unprecedented cuts from Westminster. Those achievements should be welcomed across the chamber, as they deliver for the people of Scotland. What people want to know—indeed, the question has been asked before—is the number of police officers that Labour would cut. Labour’s leaders at Westminster—and we know from recent events that Labour in Scotland takes its orders from Westminster—want to cut the budget by 12 per cent, which would mean a cut of more than 2,000 police officers from Scotland’s streets. Is that what the Labour Party in Scotland supports? Does it think that that will make our communities and people feel safer? The simple answer is no, it will not.

Such a move will simply put our communities at risk and will, as the Labour motion puts it, have “a significant impact on the link between communities and their local police service”. It is the Labour Party in Scotland that is the threat to local policing. However, we do not know whether that is actually Labour’s policy because the one thing that it is good at is having no policy, other than the promise of a cuts commission to scrap the idea of universality—

That is something that it supposedly supports in order to end—as its leader stated then later denied—the something-for-nothing culture. Although the comments in question have been removed from the Labour website, everyone can still watch them being made on YouTube—and I would advise them to do so. How, then, can we believe what Labour says? The member who lodged today’s motion, Mr Pearson, recently said that “breaking up the UK could have direct impact on the ability of Scottish police officers to do their job”, but he was contradicted by former director of intelligence at the old Strathclyde Police force, who said: “I simply do not accept these criticisms of Scotland’s abilities to have effective security arrangements ... An excellent Scottish intelligence organisation could be developed in an independent country.” Who are we to believe: the member or the former director of intelligence? Is that just another example of Labour’s project fear?

Is today’s motion not yet another example? Only last week, the head of Police Scotland told the member that there is “no policy” on backfilling. Members can read that in the Official Report—it is there for everyone to see. Who, again, are we to believe: Mr Pearson or the current head of Police Scotland?

I do not know what axe certain members have to grind—[Interruption.]

We need to work with rather than against Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority to ensure that any reform benefits people over politicians. According to Alison McInnes, who I notice is in the chamber, “Community policing must be able to adapt to local circumstances and need”, which is exactly what the Government is doing. We are responding to changes in and cuts to Scotland’s budget that are being driven by Ms McInnes’s party in the coalition at Westminster. As far as I can see, the Liberals have no policy other than to impose, through their man in the Treasury, further cuts on Scotland and have nothing constructive to offer other than to join their partners in project fear and doom-mongering. This SNP Government is protecting local communities by putting police on the street and combating and preventing crime. That is what the people want and surely what this Parliament should be delivering.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate. Given that yesterday’s members’ business debate was on my motion on Glasgow Women’s Aid—the member spoke most eloquently in that debate—the Parliament seems to be very successful on such issues this week. It makes me want to mention—I will not sing it, because I cannot sing—the great song that Annie Lennox and Aretha Franklin sang, “Sisters are doin’ it for themselves”. Perhaps that should be the title of debates this week. I should thank the gentlemen who are here for coming along, too. I fully support the motion and congratulate everyone who is involved in the campaign—members have mentioned various universities and so on. I do not want to repeat what other members have said and lots of things that I wanted to say have already been said. From the speeches, from the work that has been done in the background and from the evidence on the subject, there is no doubt whatever that sexualised images of women—whether we are talking about pictures of topless women on page 3 and in lads mags or indeed lap dancing and the general portrayal of women and young girls—objectify women. We have talked about Women’s Aid and the objectification of women and I absolutely take on board what Sarah Boyack said about the problem going far, far deeper than we are led to believe. When I was on holiday I saw the T-shirts that she described on wee kids who were two or three years old, and there are stores on the high street—I will not say that they are upmarket stores—that sell bras for kids as young as six or seven. There is something pretty wrong with society if not just women but young girls think that the only way in which they can be successful is by looking like a page 3 model. Christian Allard suggested that we should celebrate the activities and achievements of women. Sarah Boyack talked about teaching. Many women here are lawyers and so on. Why can we not celebrate those things in newspapers and magazines and give young women a positive image to look to? The issue lies not just in page 3 but in education. We must educate young women that women are better than that. They are not an object, a body to be looked at by men. When I am on the train, subway or bus, and I am sitting next to a man—or sometimes a woman—who happens to be reading The Sun, if they turn to page 3 I feel not just embarrassed but angry, because someone might be there with kids, who are also looking at it. What does it say about our society that it is A-okay for somebody to read a newspaper, which is supposed to educate people, in which there is a picture of a topless woman? It says that women are objects. I think that it was Alison Johnstone who said that the women on page 3 tend to be young and white with nice figures. That says to young women that that is the only way in which they can be successful. I make a plea to The Sun. It has a real opportunity here: it could be one of the first newspapers in the country to say, “No more page 3. We’ve moved beyond that. We’re in the 21st century and we’re going to dedicate a page to women’s achievements.” That would say something not just to young girls but to women. It would also say to the media industry that we can celebrate women for what they are and what they have achieved and not because they have breasts, can appear on page 3 of a newspaper and look what they might call sexy. I would say to the editor of The Scottish Sun, as Jackie Baillie has done, that if he is smart and wants to do something, he should be the first to move things on and take page 3 away. He should celebrate the fact that page 3 is no longer needed and say, “Here we are, celebrating the achievements of real women. We will give a positive message to young women in this country that they do not have to be topless models to get on in the world.” I congratulate Jackie Baillie once again on securing the debate.

Does the minister share my concern that the work of successive Scottish Administrations to reduce homelessness will be undermined by the bedroom tax, which is a pernicious policy that we did not choose, from a Government that we did not elect?

It was a great privilege to secure this debate and it was also a privilege to attend Glasgow Women’s Aid’s 40th anniversary celebrations on Friday in St Andrew’s in the Square in Glasgow, which was attended by 160 people. I say 160 people because there were two men there, so 158 women and two men attended that fantastic event. The event had lots of things in it, including outreach and breakout participation, and music from SheBoom, which was proud and energising, and from Karine Polwart, with enduring melodies that had a powerful message. There was a wild women writing event, which had spellbinding poetry that was wonderful, inspiring and very moving. There was also a choir at the end of the event. I think that we all went home in great spirits, feeling very positive. I apologise to those whom I unfortunately do not have time to mention, but I thank everyone for their participation in a great day. It is amazing to think how far Glasgow Women’s Aid has come since its humble beginnings back in 1973, when the first refuge—a second-floor flat in the Gorbals—was handed over to Maura Butterly, a founding member of Glasgow Women’s Aid. From there, weekly meetings took place with the volunteers and the women and children who were staying in the refuge. The next year, the flat next door was added, doubling the capacity, and then in 1975 a house with seven bedrooms was secured. In the same year, a parliamentary inquiry into violence in the family was launched, and that is when the issue of domestic violence became much more mainstream, with recognition that it existed and discussion about how best to tackle it. In 1979, in response to a growing demand for information, Glasgow Women’s Aid opened its first office, in the aptly named Hope Street. Now, it runs seven refuges and offers a wide range of other services. It provides information and support, supports children and young people, helps other support organisations, points people in the right direction, provides information on legal, financial and housing rights, and supplies interpreting services. It does fantastic work. Last October, Glasgow Women’s Aid and advocacy, support, safety, information services together—or ASSIST—launched the children experiencing domestic abuse recovery—or CEDAR—programme, which is a therapeutic group work programme that aims to help both women and children to come to terms with the domestic abuse they have experienced or witnessed. That highly innovative approach is, to my mind, a huge success, and I understand that funding has been secured to expand it over the next two years. I hope that the Scottish Government will look to and learn from the CEDAR model in its approach to other forms of intervention. As has rightly been said, it is clear that using a multi-agency approach and sharing information and resources is a successful way of working and that better outcomes can be achieved for everyone. All that cannot be achieved without the hard work and dedication of the staff. I welcome in particular Angela and Marie from Glasgow Women’s Aid, who are in the public gallery tonight. I extend our heartfelt thanks for all the work that Glasgow Women’s Aid and others do. As Angela has said, their innovative, creative, multi-agency approach helps them to form lasting partnerships. Glasgow Women’s Aid relies on donations to provide its services. As little as £5 helps to provide the materials for a child to take part in a children’s group activity, which helps them to regain confidence and involvement with others, and £10 provides an emergency pack for women who are fleeing domestic abuse. That seems a small amount to us, but it goes a long way. Donations help Glasgow Women’s Aid to provide services for the 5,000 women and children who contact it each year. Funding is important for refuge places and outreach work with schools and young children. It is important that young children learn from an early age what domestic abuse is. Prevention is one of the most important things, and I hope that, if we have people in schools talking to young children about domestic abuse, we can prevent it from carrying on from generation to generation. I ask the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport to update us, if she can, on work that is on-going in that important area, which has been raised with me and Glasgow Women’s Aid on numerous occasions. There are issues in the justice system, which I have told Glasgow Women’s Aid I am happy to raise with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. I do not expect the minister who is here tonight to address this, but there are important questions about, for example, access to children and sheriffs’ interpretations of the justice system. We have to talk about those things. Perhaps I will raise them in the near future while we are looking at the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. I give the cabinet secretary a heads-up on that. We are all aware of the issue of domestic abuse, but we sometimes underestimate its extent. One woman in four will experience domestic abuse at some point in her life, and on average two women per week are killed by a male partner or ex-partner in the United Kingdom. In Scotland, we have, unfortunately, seen a rise in the number of reported cases of domestic abuse. That could be due in part to victims being more willing to come forward. People have said that women feel more confident about coming forward, and I hope that that is why more cases are being reported. I am sure that the support that Glasgow Women’s Aid and others offer is invaluable in ensuring that those who are suffering from abuse feel that they can come forward and report it and that they will be supported. More work needs to be done to ensure that, where there is evidence of domestic abuse, the perpetrators are brought to justice. Recently, there has been much discussion in the Parliament about the requirement for corroboration and the need for it to be reformed, with one of the chief reasons being cases of abuse. There are arguments on both sides and the issue is contentious. However, if we are to send out a clear message to those who suffer from domestic abuse and those who perpetrate it, we have to have in place appropriate, accessible mechanisms to secure convictions and reassure victims that they will be protected. Glasgow Women’s Aid and others—I note that Edinburgh Women’s Aid celebrates its 40th anniversary some time this year—all do a fantastic job, for which I commend them. I look forward to the day when domestic violence and abuse are no longer tolerated in any society.

Will the cabinet secretary raise the issue of free condoms being provided to these saunas, which are private businesses? Will that cost be met by Edinburgh council tax payers?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has for the cashback for communities scheme. (S4O-02508)

Will the cabinet secretary detail what projects have been funded by the cashback scheme in my Kelvin constituency?

I have listened carefully to what the member has said and I have looked at the issue. She referred to liability and education, but I draw her attention to people in my constituency who produced a petition and have spoken to me regarding cyclists who go on to pavements and are a danger to pedestrians and cyclists, and who are not educated about using the road. I would like to see more emphasis put on those issues as well.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what avenues of redress are available to residents and community councils involved in local authority planning disputes. (S4O-02487)

I do not know whether the minister is aware that I have been contacted by constituents with regard to the demolition of tenement properties in Colebrooke Street in my constituency. Permission to demolish was not granted, but when Glasgow City Council development and regeneration services department was contacted on the issue, it said that it was common practice and that the act of demolition is not its responsibility but that of other departments. Does the minister know whether that is normal practice for local authorities? Any advice that he can give local residents on the issue would be most welcome.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that recent figures show that teacher unemployment is at its lowest level for eight years. I am sure that, like me and others, he very much welcomes that. Will he explain the reasons for that wonderful success?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the impact is of United Kingdom student visa rules on Scotland’s universities and colleges. (S4O-02457)

I thank the minister for that reply and his earlier reply. Is he also aware of the problems facing many students from so-called blacklisted countries in opening bank accounts in Scotland, which mean that many are unable to continue studying and, ultimately, are forced to return home?

The cabinet secretary said that emergency services have not been affected. Can he confirm that and say whether he expects there to be any problems at all with emergency services?

I am happy to take interventions. This is a very consensual debate. I agree with everything that members have said so far. For many years I have spoken about the disclosure system. It has been said that the 1974 act is complicated. Certainly, aspects of it are perceived to be complicated. For example, groups can put forward a disclosure in one person’s name which can actually cover 12, 15 or even 30 people. We must look closely at that. In one instance, which I will not give details of here, among a group of 30 there were several who had criminal convictions but that was not disclosed because the disclosure was put forward as one action. That has not been raised before but it may come out in the review process. Through the Justice Committee I have visited prisons and, of course, we have constituents who come to us. Willie Coffey gave the example of a 20-year-old man or woman who has committed a crime and done their time but, as Mary Fee said, that hangs over their head throughout their life and may affect employment or family matters. We have to consider the disclosure process in the form of rehabilitation. I will touch on two parts of the motion. The first is whether the 1974 act needs to be modernised and reformed. At the start of my speech, I said that this has been a very consensual debate and that we all agree that the act has to be modernised and reformed. There is no doubt about that. Christine Grahame said that it does not work properly, is perceived to be complicated and is poorly understood. Employers and ex-offenders do not understand it. That is a huge barrier to the employment of ex-offenders. The second part of the motion—Rod Campbell touched on it—is that the legislation has a dual role: to protect the public and to help to reduce re-offending. We have to remember that dual role. Mary Fee also said that, in respect of re-offending, we have to consider not only the public but also the press and how it publicises certain issues; that affects all parts of people’s lives, particularly their families. It is important to remember the dual role for the public and victims, and for those who try to move on. The Justice Committee has done a great job. I have not been a member of it for long, perhaps a year. Others have been longer on the committee. It did a great job when it considered the prison estate and how to stop the revolving door, how to stop people reoffending. Maureen Watt, in her contribution, said that there has been success in that respect and that the rate of reoffending is down. That is welcome. We have also considered mentoring, which is fantastic. The whole Parliament welcomed that proposal. We have considered community service and community pay-back orders, all of which help to prevent people going to prison. In prison, people sometimes learn new things that will not necessarily help them outside. I will touch on the fact—I think that this is the main point of the motion—that disclosure can have a devastating effect on people’s lives. If someone is convicted of a minor crime as a 20-year-old, that can affect their chances of getting a mortgage or insurance three years or six years down the line and it can obviously also affect their chance of getting employment. Like other members, I have spoken to many young folk—either constituents or folk I meet in my role as a member of the Justice Committee—who are in prison. The one thing that they want to do is to get out and live what they would call a normal life. Having a job and having access to their family prevents people from reoffending. We must consider that issue. I congratulate all the parties in the Parliament on having the vision to look at the subject of reoffending and disclosure orders, which are issues that we must touch on. I ask the cabinet secretary whether there is a timescale. Like Rod Campbell, I look forward to the matter coming before the Justice Committee—Christine Grahame has just come back into the chamber, so she will probably castigate me later on for saying that.

I am glad that my words are precious. I look forward to the Justice Committee considering the 1974 act, because it is a wee bit of an injustice that a person who committed a minor crime as a teenager or in their early twenties must pay for that throughout their life. We are looking to the future and considering innovative ways of helping people who do not want to reoffend and who want to get back into the public realm. If someone cannot get a job when they get out of prison, it is difficult not to fall back into old ways, with old friends. Let us look at the issue seriously—I am sure that we will do. It is nearly 2014, and it is time to look at the disclosure aspect of the 1974 act, for the sake of not just offenders but society at large. If we ensure that people get every possible help to stop them reoffending and enable them to live a good and prosperous life, we will help not just victims of crime and the general public but society as a whole.

I will try to be as quick as possible, Presiding Officer. Margaret Mitchell said that we should not be looking at corroboration within the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. I know that she has just become a member of the Justice Committee, but if she goes to page 5 of a recent committee paper she will see that it states: “the Committee noted an underlying consensus; that the corroboration rule should not be seen as sacrosanct, and that it was legitimate to re-investigate from first principles whether it continues to serve a useful purpose in 21st century ... criminal law. The Committee agrees.” Margaret Mitchell should look at that part of it.

I am sorry. I have not even got four minutes. I want to go back to the basics. I must say that the behaviour of some committee members yesterday perhaps raises more questions than does what the witness said. I asked Lord Carloway about corroboration and he said that corroboration is “not widely understood” by the public, the courts or the judiciary, which was interesting. As I said to Lord Carloway, I am not a member of the judiciary or the legal profession but I represent constituents, and we should consider corroboration holistically rather than on its own, given that the issue has come up in the context of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. Margaret Mitchell’s motion has lost sight of that and puts the cart before the horse. Elaine Murray, in her excellent and fair speech, pointed out that although the committee is debating many issues as part of stage 1 consideration of the bill, the Parliament has been presented with a motion on corroboration to consider in a very short debate. If the issue is so important, we should give it more time.

No, I am sorry. I look forward to hearing from witnesses. The committee will hear from the cabinet secretary, the Lord Advocate and various groups. Surely they will give us the evidence that will enable us to make up our minds on corroboration. I point out to Margaret Mitchell that in section 57 of the bill, “Corroboration not required”, it says: “If satisfied that a fact has been established by evidence in the proceedings, the judge or (as the case may be) the jury is entitled to find the fact proved by the evidence although the evidence is not corroborated.” That is what the bill says. Corroboration is not going to be done away with. That is the frightening part of the motion in Margaret Mitchell’s name. She is frightening people out there. Corroboration and the quality of evidence are more important—[Interruption.] Let me tell members what the cabinet secretary said when he explained corroboration. He said that the bill seeks to remove the general requirement for corroboration, not the concept of corroboration. I really think that Margaret Mitchell should consider that. I know that some members will talk about the sexual and violent crimes that take place behind closed doors. The fact is that victims of other crimes are also affected by the current rules. Submissions to the committee included one from a sheriff who talked about older people and children in care who are the victims of crime behind closed doors. Such people are entitled to have their evidence heard. They should be able to be a witness.

We are talking about not just certain crimes but all crime. Members of the committee and the Parliament must stick up for the victims of crime.

I congratulate my colleague Christina McKelvie on securing this debate. I also congratulate—and welcome—people from Scottish Women’s Aid, whose landmark campaign against revenge porn, as Jackie Baillie said, is the first of its kind in the United Kingdom. I thank them and others who have supported the campaign. Abuse—sexual, domestic, physical and emotional—is abhorrent. The perpetrators must be punished and the victims must be protected. I am on the Justice Committee, which is currently considering the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. It is concerned with putting victims at the heart of the justice system. That bill is still open to amendments at stage 2. I do not want to put the minister on the spot, but perhaps we could think about using amendments to that bill to do something about the abhorrent crime that we are discussing. We must recognise that revenge porn is a new form of abuse and is something that we must tackle. We have heard examples of abuses and Scottish Women’s Aid has included examples in its briefing. There must be nothing more horrifying for someone than to find out that—sometimes years later, as has been said—someone with whom they have shared a loving relationship has posted on social media websites images such as the ones that we have been discussing. It must be terrifying and horrifying to see pictures that were taken in, as Christina McKelvie said, a private moment being posted where other people can see them. People do not only put these pictures up on social media websites; they send them in letters and they email them to the individual concerned and to their workmates, as we have heard. They also include personal information such as where the person works, their name, their age and their address. It is horrifying. It must be like being stalked through social media websites. That brings me to some of the issues that are raised in Scottish Women’s Aid’s handout. Others have talked about the legal remedies, but I would like the minister to clarify the situation with regard to the Communications Act 2003, which I understand to be reserved, not devolved. The briefing also mentions the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, which deals with stalking and abusive relationships. Perhaps we can fit an amendment into that act. It is important that we support these women and that they are aware of what is happening with the campaign, but it is also important that we do something to protect these women legally. I would point out that it is undoubtedly women rather than men who are the victims. I commend Joan McAlpine’s speech because, undoubtedly, revenge porn is another form of pornography and of abuse by men. Until we can rectify that and, perhaps, as Margaret Mitchell said, educate men in partnerships between people, we will never get rid of this type of porn or this type of abuse; it will just move on to something else. I ask the minister to consider the issues that I have raised. Perhaps, collectively, this Parliament can amend the pieces of legislation that I have mentioned, particularly the one that is currently going through the Justice Committee.

I have listened very carefully to all the contributions and speeches, but I am still trying to get my head round some of the Opposition’s contributions, if they can be called that. I must say that I take great umbrage at some of the comments that were made. I intended to start my comments in a very positive manner and I will go on to do that. However, I just want to say to the Opposition, particularly Mr Macintosh, that as an SNP back bencher I did not join the SNP for a career as an MSP. I joined because I thought that the best thing for the people of my country was an independent Scotland. I take great umbrage at what Mr Macintosh said about that. I also wonder where the Opposition members, particularly the Labour members, have been during the summer months. Like many other members, I was out in my constituency talking to people. I know what the people in the Kelvin constituency are thinking and what they want. They want a Government that listens to them, not a Government that talks them down and talks down to them. I put that in as my contribution just now.

I am glad that Mr Kelly raised that particular issue. I certainly did come across many people on a housing waiting list. I also came across some very caring and concerned housing associations that cannot place people because of the bedroom tax and the problems coming from Westminster. That seems to be okay for an Opposition party, while the people of Scotland have to do as they are told. That is why I take great umbrage at the Opposition. I will make more positive contributions than Opposition members have. I thank the First Minister for his announcements today. He set out a programme for government that was made in the Scottish Parliament for the Scottish people. I give a positive welcome for the fact that the Scottish Government is still delivering 1,000 extra police officers. We must remember that police numbers in Scotland are unlike those in England and Wales, where police numbers and salaries are falling catastrophically—that is all because of the Winsor report. We must remember that we do not have that problem in Scotland. I thought that the police figures would be welcomed across the chamber. The Scottish people want a Government and a Parliament that work together for them and welcome positive outcomes, and they want a Parliament that can hold the Government to account when that is required. I do not see a problem with welcoming that. As a back bencher, I uphold that approach and I welcome positive contributions from any member. There is much to be welcomed in today’s statement, such as the community empowerment and renewal bill, which is great. The licensing bill, the housing bill, the ending of automatic early release and many more initiatives are all to be welcomed. It is high time that the Opposition parties put aside their opposition for opposition’s sake and worked with the Government to deliver what is best for Scotland and its communities. Although it is not the only factor, the increase in police numbers has undoubtedly contributed to the lowest level of recorded crime for 37 years. We should all be proud of that. I hope that Opposition members would have the maturity to acknowledge that the legislative programme will go further to reduce crime and make our communities much safer. Only last week, the Glasgow Evening Times ran an excellent article on crime in Glasgow. The headlines were staggering. Since 2007, the youth crime rate has almost halved and the number of knife assaults has fallen by 40 per cent—by the way, Glasgow City Council’s Labour leader has welcomed that. The reduction has been credited in part to the Scottish Government’s cashback for communities programme, which £50 million has been put into. We should be proud of that, too. I thank all the people and organisations who have been involved in that not only for making their communities safer but—what is important—for empowering people in those communities to realise their potential. We should look towards that. I have long championed the community empowerment and renewal bill. I echo Alison Johnstone’s comments; the bill has fantastic potential and I will follow its progress with great interest. Like Mark McDonald, I welcome the licensing bill and in particular a new licensing system for airguns. It is a pity that Johann Lamont, the Labour Party leader, did not even have the decency to mention that important bill. I also welcome the inclusion in the licensing bill of a provision to give communities the power to regulate adult entertainment. Some members might recall that I previously tried to introduce a similar provision but, unfortunately, Opposition parties did not support it and voted it down. Perhaps they will support the legislation this time. That is all that I will say on that.

I am sorry, Margo—I do not have time. The Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which is working its way through Parliament, puts victims at the heart of the justice system. I look forward to scrutinising it at further stages. As I have said, there are many things to be proud of. We have heard from everyone about what the Parliament can do with the powers that it has and about the successes that it has achieved so far. We have heard from some members about successes that can be achieved in the future, which can only be a good thing. However, I am keenly aware of the areas of our lives that we have no control over and about which decisions are being taken at Westminster by a Government that is neither representative of nor interested in Scotland’s needs. It might come as a wee bit of a surprise to some Opposition members to realise that the Scottish people out there on the doorsteps are also aware of that. The decisions at Westminster are causing further inequality and further hardships for ordinary working folk and they are pushing thousands into poverty. Westminster legislation is doing that—that is the reality of our not having the full powers of a normal Parliament. I hope and believe that most of us in the Parliament want a fairer and more equal society. The debate serves as a reminder that to achieve that—we probably differ on this point—there is only one way forward, which is for all the decisions that affect Scotland and the people of Scotland to be taken here in Scotland. The only way to achieve that is through a yes vote next September.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the reported comments of Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski and other panel members of the review of higher education governance in Scotland on the draft Scottish code of good higher education governance. (S4O-02304)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive reply. He will be aware that NUS Scotland expressed a number of concerns about the code, in particular about the fact that staff and students will not be fully included in the decision-making process on the appointment and remuneration of principals. What steps will the Scottish Government take to address those concerns?

I apologise for the fact that I am unable to stay for the cabinet secretary’s summing-up speech, as I have another meeting to go to. I have informed the Presiding Officer in writing. I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing today’s debate on a subject that we all know is close to her heart. It was fitting that, last weekend, the loss of life at the battle of Flodden 500 years ago was the focus of one of Europe’s oldest and biggest equestrian spectacles, the Selkirk ridings, in my colleague’s constituency. I am not sure whether my colleague took part in the ride through the town that day—perhaps as a modern-day Lady Godiva.

I thank the member for that correction, but that would not stop my friend from attending. I, too, want to thank Gary Stewart and Elspeth King for the work that they have done on this and other issues. They have done a great deal to ensure that our history is kept alive. As we have heard, the common ridings were established to commemorate the 400th anniversary of the fateful day in 1513 when 80 men left Selkirk to fight for King James IV and just one returned. As legend has it, he returned with a captured English standard, which he cast around his head to let the people of Selkirk know that everyone else had perished. The generation of borderers who were lost in the battle are immortalised in the Scots folk song, “The Flowers of the Forest”: “The Flowers of the Forest are a’ wede away.” I will not sing it, but it is a haunting tune that many know as the lament that is played on remembrance day or remembrance Sunday. The song goes on to tell the fate of the battle: “The English, for ance, by guile wan the day”. It is said that, although King James IV’s army vastly outnumbered that of his English rival, through Scottish mistakes and English guile, the English inflicted on the Scots one of the heaviest defeats in Scotland’s history. King James was killed and his body removed and taken to Berwick, where it was embalmed and put in a lead coffin. The coffin was taken to London and was placed in a monastery, but disappeared during the dissolution of the monasteries about 20 years later. Mystery still surrounds the whereabouts of the body, with some rumours suggesting that the king was eventually buried at St Paul’s cathedral. It would be interesting to know whether that is the case. Maybe that is something that my colleague could take up, among her other crusades. I support my colleague in her calls for the artefacts that are attributed to King James—a sword, a dagger, and a turquoise ring, which are currently with the College of Arms in London—to be returned to Scotland in time for the anniversary. Only the other month, more artefacts of the battle were unearthed on the field where the battle was fought. One was a badge made of copper alloy, which appears to have been snapped off a hat band. Its design includes the fleur-de-lis, with jewels and diamonds—elements that were part of the Scottish crown in 1513. That shows that there is still much to be discovered about the battle and Scotland’s history. I was surprised and interested to hear that James IV was fluent in many languages, including Latin, French, German, Flemish, Italian and Spanish. If only we had such language skills today. Perhaps we will move on to that. Those skills reflected the vital importance of Scotland in Europe at that time and the enduring friendships that we had built up throughout the continent. It is a shame that events that followed seemed to reduce that friendship. However, as history moves on, we can see those friendships being rebuilt, particularly with our European friends. I am sure that history will not repeat itself, that we will go on to independence following the referendum in 2014, and that the friendships and the languages that have been built up will continue to flourish in an independent Scotland.

I am a bit confused about what Jenny Marra said. I wonder whether what she and Labour members say in the Justice Committee does not represent the Labour Party’s position. I say to her that she could have recorded her dissent if she felt strongly about the matter. I wanted to make that point—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank the many individuals and organisations that responded to the consultation, and I thank the committee clerks for their support. I also thank the Health and Sport Committee for its work. I am a member of the Justice Committee, so I did not take part in the Health and Sport Committee’s investigations, but I was involved with the petition that was lodged when I was a member of the Public Petitions Committee. I am pleased that things have moved so far, and I congratulate Duncan McNeil on his speech, which I must say was wonderful. The bill aims to improve support for victims and witnesses as they encounter and move through the criminal justice system. That is to be welcomed. As the Justice Committee said on page 5 of its report, under the heading “Background to the Bill”, improvements in support have been happening “against the backdrop of a growing public perception that the balance of rights is tipping in favour of the accused.” That is why we need the bill and why it is so important that we talk about victims and witnesses. Many people might think that the perception is not correct, but the evidence that we received certainly suggested that the public and witnesses need to be made more aware of court proceedings, enabled to have more involvement with key stakeholders and given access to information, support and protection. Above all, people need to be treated with respect. Many people who gave evidence felt that they did not receive such a service from the justice system. The bill covers many areas, but I will concentrate on a couple of issues, because time is short. Much has been made of the definition of “victim”. Everyone who has spoken in the debate has used that word, and I remember that at one of our many committee meetings—I am sure that other members of the committee remember it, too—a lot of time was taken up debating the term and whether we should talk about a victim or a complainer. I can only repeat what I said at the committee. If a crime is committed against me, I am a victim and not a complainer. I note—Jenny Marra raised this when I asked a question—that the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 uses the word “complainer”. However, most members of the public are not lawyers and, if a crime is committed against them, they are victims. That is why the bill is called the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. I draw members’ attention to that. I am pleased that the committee’s recommendation recognises that, and I take on board the cabinet secretary’s comments and the clarity in that area. Most people know that it is not just the victims of crime who are affected but their families and loved ones. I know that my colleague Willie Coffey will highlight that again. I have made the point about using the word “victim” rather than “complainer” more than once because, as I said, we discussed it for a long time—probably longer than any other aspect of the bill—and, given the time that that took, I am concerned about how long it would take to discuss a definition to be put in the bill. I welcome the measures—particularly live television links and the use of screens and supporters—that are being taken to protect vulnerable witnesses and encourage them to take part in court procedures. I particularly welcome the inclusion of victims of sexual offences, domestic abuse, human trafficking and stalking, which will ensure that they are automatically entitled to use standard special measures when giving evidence. I ask the cabinet secretary whether he is minded to extend the powers in the bill—or will consider doing that—to include further measures to protect victims of human trafficking and particularly children who have been trafficked. Jenny Marra and others have mentioned the letter from the victims organisation collaboration forum Scotland and Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, their objection to the provision that both parties have the right to object to special measures being used when evidence is given and their call for the removal of sections 9 and 13. I take on board what they say, but I believe that a balance has to be struck. Vulnerable witnesses should be and will be identified early and, if special measures are needed, they should and will be explained to witnesses as early as possible. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on that issue in his speech. I look forward to processing the bill through the Parliament. It has many good provisions. We have heard about them and we will hear more later. We will also hear concerns that other members raise. That is how it should be in debates, particularly at stage 1. The bill’s overall principle is to ensure that victims and witnesses receive support and feel able to participate in the justice system. The bill will give them that opportunity and enable them to do so.

I, too, congratulate John Wilson on securing this important debate. I know how much work he has done with the credit unions. In a previous life, before becoming an MSP, I used to go to Ladywell, which is in my constituency, to ask John Wilson and others for advice on debt matters. Given that I know John Wilson from the Scottish Low Pay Unit, I am not surprised that he is pushing forward credit union issues. I congratulate, too, ABCUL on winning the contract, which will enable credit unions throughout the country to expand, which is very important. I admire Kezia Dugdale: her speech touched all the right issues and was delivered very well. I ask the cabinet secretary to say in his closing speech what the Government and the Parliament can do, not just to expand credit unions—they are very good at expanding themselves, as we will certainly see with the new contract—but to make more people, both outside and here in the Parliament, aware that credit unions exist. I know that there is a credit union here, but many people do not know about the credit union system. They may think that credit unions are only for people who do not earn a sufficient amount, so it is important that we get the message across that we can all benefit from credit unions by saving and putting money in. I want to give a wee bit of background to credit unions. I remember that my dad, many years ago, belonged to a credit union and was able to save money and get money out at reasonable rates, without being ripped off by companies such as Wonga. I always admired credit unions for being financial co-operatives, owned by their members and operating under common bond criteria. Profits are distributed to members through dividends and members have a say in how the union is run. Credit unions are grassroots operations that are for the people and benefit the people. It is not just about saving money and being able to get money back; it is also about training. Lots of people who began as savers in credit unions wanted to get involved in the voluntary aspect and were given training by their credit union on finance, budgets and financial management. That was a great tool for them, and some of them went on to get employment as a result. I admire that aspect of credit unions very much. Glasgow Credit Union has been mentioned already and will probably be mentioned again. It was founded in 1989 for the employees of what was then Glasgow District Council, and has expanded greatly since then. Thirty thousand people are members of Glasgow Credit Union, and this year it became the first credit union to reach £100 million in assets. That is a lot of money for a credit union—money that is helping all the people who have put money in the union, trained in it and learned from it. Although it is called the Glasgow Credit Union, it is larger than some United Kingdom-wide building societies, which shows the greatness of credit unions. Regardless of what happens, I want to make a point about advertising credit unions: it is important that everyone is made aware of them. I also think that is rather crass of Danny Alexander to scaremonger by sending out press releases that say that credit unions would not be viable if there was a yes vote for an independent Scotland. I thank the credit union managers who turned around and said, “Sorry, that is definitely not on; we will still be here and we will still be supported.”

I thank the minister—I am sorry; I did not mean to promote the member. I thank him for taking an intervention. Although I accept Liam McArthur’s arguments when he talks about Scotland’s independence from the rest of the UK, he might not accept mine. Does he accept that MSPs should have the same rights as MPs to defend our constituents who are seeking asylum on our shores?

I worked with asylum seekers and refugees for many years, back in the 1990s when they first arrived in Glasgow and in other areas of Scotland. I know only too well how difficult it is for asylum seekers—for the adults, never mind the children—to work their way through and understand the system. A different approach was needed then and is definitely needed now; we need to look at that. In my work, I was involved with a group, supported by Glasgow City Council social work department, that worked with unaccompanied asylum seekers. The concern about age always raised its head when I visited the groups and the children. I see that we have young people in the public gallery today; they have been listening very intently. For them and also for others I want to give a small case study of one of those disputes about age. The study concerns Abdul, who arrived in the UK in 2011 and was referred to the service in June. Abdul believes that he is 14 years old; indeed, he was told his date of birth by his mother. However, when he came here he was assessed as being 16 years old, which caused numerous problems. The dispute about Abdul’s age meant that he was unable to attend school; he was told to attend college. Obviously, Abdul wanted to be with children of his own age and he refused to go to college. As a consequence, he has become socially isolated and increasingly withdrawn and his mental health has deteriorated. As I said, I give that example because we have children and young adults in the public gallery today. Some of those young adults may be voting next year. They have the freedom to do that; yet here in our country we have unaccompanied young adults, trafficked from whatever source, who do not have the opportunity to have a say—or would not have if we did not have the unique Scottish guardianship service. The Scottish guardianship service is, indeed, a unique partnership between Aberlour and the Scottish Refugee Council. It is funded by the Scottish Government, and I welcome the minister’s announcement of an extra three years of funding. It is also supported by many charities, including Barnardo’s. Like other members, I thank everyone who is involved. The project was set up and developed with young people and for young people. It is little wonder that the UK Parliament’s Joint Committee on Human Rights has recommended that the UK Government should commission similar pilots in England and Wales with a view to establishing a wider system of guardianship. I hope that the minister will monitor whether that goes ahead and report back to us on whether the UK Government accepts that recommendation and looks at such a project, which would add to what we are doing in Scotland. I thank Professor Crawley and Professor Ravi Kohli for their independent evaluation of the service. Annabelle Ewing mentioned some aspects of that. They found that the guardians advocate for all decisions by professionals to be taken in the best interests of the child, and that guardianship has worked within the principles of getting it right for every child. That is an important point, and it perhaps answers some of Neil Bibby’s questions about how we go forward with the service. Using the premise of getting it right for every child for unaccompanied children is a good start. The evaluation also found that guardianship has lifted the overall quality of service provision by encouraging professionals such as legal representatives, social workers and residential staff to work together more closely, and it demonstrates the advantages for young people when they do that. As I said, it is difficult for adults to cope with the asylum process, so we can only imagine what it is like for a child. Having guardians there to go through every single step with them gives them support and builds up not only their confidence but their capability to take on the things that are happening in their lives. I am pleased that this fantastic service will operate for another three years. I would like it to be monitored, with more reporting back. However, we cannot have a debate on asylum and immigration without mentioning the UK Border Agency. I see that Liam McArthur has left the chamber, but I believe it is really important that we, as representatives of our constituents, have the same right as MPs at Westminster to contact the UK Border Agency and the Foreign Office. I have contacted the Red Cross, which is a fantastic organisation that can find the birth parents of unaccompanied asylum seekers back in the Congo or wherever it may be. It does not ask whether we are an MP or an MSP. If we have an interest, such as a constituent who is looking for their long-lost child, it will do that work for us. I know that the minister will speak to the Minister for External Affairs and International Development, and I plead with the Government to speak to the UK Government once again. We can do what we can, but we desperately need the same powers that MPs have to find out, on behalf of constituents, exactly what is happening in the asylum system. We have talked about unaccompanied children, but we also have young children who are with families who are seeking asylum in our country. I ask the minister whether there is anything that we can do to make their lives better. Can we extend the project to include the children of those families? Can we prevent them from having to go down to Brand Street in Glasgow to have their fingerprints taken just in case they are not the children they say they are? They are taken out of schools and away from doctors appointments. I see that the Presiding Officer is asking me to wind up. I thank the minister and everyone else for their speeches.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that half the money that is collected in fines goes to the Treasury in London. In 2007, £113,000 went to the Treasury rather than being kept in Scotland. Does he agree that that money could go a long way in helping victims and bringing the perpetrators of crime to justice if it was kept here in Scotland?

The cabinet secretary and others have mentioned the Audit Scotland report and voluntary redundancies. Does he agree that the Scottish National Party Government’s policy of no compulsory redundancies is providing staff with employment security at a time when unprecedented cuts to the Scottish budget are coming from Westminster?

Like other members, I pay tribute to the many campaigners who have worked tirelessly to ensure that chronic pain is at the top of the agenda. In particular, special thanks must go to Susan Archibald. Like Joan McAlpine, I met Susan on the march in Glasgow at George Square and was bowled over not only by her frustration at what was happening in the health service—for example, concerning prescription charges—but by her tenacity to push forward anything at all. She spoke eloquently on the bedroom tax and welfare changes. I also pay tribute to Jacquie Forde for her hard work in bringing the matter forward. Like the cabinet secretary, I remember the early days of the Parliament when Dorothy-Grace Elder took up the cudgels—I think that “cudgels” was her word—on behalf of chronic pain sufferers, and I welcome her back to the Parliament today. She worked long and hard to ensure that chronic pain was at the top of the agenda, so I thank her along with all the others who have worked tirelessly to bring the matter forward. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of the provision of residential accommodation and look forward to other ideas coming forward. I was taken by Fiona McLeod’s interesting suggestion of using the homoeopathic hospital. As one of quite a few MSPs who brought the plight of the homoeopathic hospital to the Parliament when it was under threat of closure and who worked with MSPs from all parties to debate the issue, I think that Fiona McLeod’s idea is a good one. It is a fantastic building on a fantastic site that is very easy to reach. It is in a good setting and offers fantastic treatments. A number of members may have visited the homoeopathic hospital. It has a relaxing feel about it and, as Fiona McLeod said, it has won awards. I would be interested in exploring that idea, and the homoeopathic hospital may support it in the consultation. The cabinet secretary talked about integration, clinical networks, health boards and the creation of action plans by the health boards to improve the services that are available locally. Every one of us would agree that it is imperative that we have not just joined-up thinking but joined-up working. All the services must have that in order to ensure that the services that people suffering from chronic pain get are the very best. We have heard from practically every member who has spoken in the debate, regardless of their party, that the service that is provided by health boards is patchy in the extreme. My health board, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, seems to offer one of the best services, but in other areas people are not getting the service that they deserve. It is therefore important—as, I am sure, the cabinet secretary and the minister will take on board—to monitor the health boards to ensure that they produce plans. If they do not work together, the system will not work at all. The service that local community pharmacies deliver has been mentioned on numerous occasions. In Glasgow Kelvin, they provide an invaluable outreach service. I ask the minister to say, in his summing up, exactly what role community pharmacies will play in the Government’s plans. Will their role be enhanced? Will they be involved in the consultation that is going out to patients and so on? What exactly will they be doing? I am sure that community pharmacies would also like to know that.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time left. Joan McAlpine touched on the important issue of prescription charges. Although the debate has been, on the whole, consensual, we cannot ignore the Labour Party’s proposal to reintroduce prescription charges. I do not know whether it will be Jackie Baillie or Drew Smith summing up, but the Labour Party should come clean and tell the Parliament and the people in the public gallery and beyond—[Interruption.] Jackie Baillie may be laughing, but people should be told about some of the issues that she and others have raised. Joan McAlpine made the valid point that people who are suffering from chronic pain do not need anything else to make them suffer even more. [Interruption.] It is an important point, Jackson Carlaw, and it is about time that the Labour Party came clean. Perhaps whoever is summing up for Labour will tell us exactly what it means by prescription charges. [Interruption.]

I seem to have touched a nerve. I am sorry for that pun. The debate has, on the whole, been a good one. As others have said, congratulations must go to the people who introduced the topic to the Parliament.

I look forward to the introduction of the chronic pain centre.

I welcome the many people in the public gallery, from the Shia community and beyond, and I thank them all very much for turning up. I also sincerely thank my fellow MSPs from all parties who signed the motion, enabling this debate to take place and the plight of the Shia Muslims to be heard. Violence of any form against any individual is wrong and is something that we all have a duty to speak out against. Only yesterday we saw the aftermath of yet another attack in Iraq, which caused the deaths of at least 66 people and injured more than 200. During the past two weeks, more than 300 people have been killed in a wave of attacks that threatens to drag Iraq into a sectarian war and plunge the region into further conflict. In Syria there has been an escalation of violence in a conflict that has already taken many lives and which is having a catastrophic effect on thousands of people in Syria, Lebanon and beyond. Although the Government of Pakistan has condemned systematic attacks that go back many years, attacks against the Shia community continue. Only this morning, gunmen in Karachi shot dead a Shia Muslim high court lawyer and his two sons. Last week’s terrible attack in Woolwich brought home to us all the barbarity of acts of violence. The violence has been condemned by all the Muslim community, in Scotland and beyond. I ask members to take a moment to condemn such acts and remember all those who have lost their lives in terrible acts of violence throughout the world. Extremism in any form is rightly to be condemned—it does not discriminate. It is important to remember that the violence perpetrated against the Shia community is another example of that extremism. What are we to do in the face of extremist attacks? How do we stop them? We need to work together towards understanding and to have respect for one another. It would be wrong to see those acts of violence as a reason to put up more barriers; they should be seen as an opportunity to explore why they are happening and to find ways of ensuring that they do not happen again to any minority group here and beyond. In Scotland, there was widespread opposition to the war in Iraq, a war widely accepted to have been illegal. Security for the Iraqi people has not been improved: the situation has deteriorated and it is getting worse by the day. Given the false premises of and promises for the war, the United Kingdom Government has a responsibility to the Iraqi people and other minorities who are being persecuted to ensure that the sectarian attacks are ended. In Scotland, we have a responsibility to speak out against the atrocities and, although foreign policy is reserved, to do everything in our power to influence the thinking of the UK Government and the Governments throughout Europe and the world. We have a part to play. We have a distinct voice to bring to the table, which is one that I hope will be listened to. Scotland is an inclusive and pragmatic society that looks at dialogue and discussion as a way forward. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development, Humza Yousaf, is a very capable and understanding MSP. He is someone who can articulate the will of the Scottish Government clearly, and I am sure that he will do everything that he can to put our view across to the UK Government and others. Scotland is a country that is respected across the world for its contribution to the modern world, its sense of fairness and justice and its welcome to all. When I talk about justice and fairness, it would be remiss of me not to mention the work that is carried out in my own constituency of Glasgow Kelvin and throughout Scotland by those in our Muslim communities—some of whom are here, as I have said—the integrated role that they play in the services that they give and offer to all, and their deeply held conviction of standing up for the underdog and minorities. That sounds very familiar; it is what the Scottish people are also renowned for. It is always a pleasure to meet with my brothers and sisters and to know that the mutual respect that we have unites us not only in our approach to each other but in our respect for others. I will not go into the individual details of having dinner at the mosque or my meetings in houses, but I am always saying, “No thank you. I have already had too much food.” We are treated very well and very respectfully. I thank those people for the contribution that they make to Scottish society. The mosque doors are always open, and anyone in the community can go there and learn about Islam. The people in the mosque go out and do fantastic work in the community. That is why it is important to have this debate. As I have said, the mutual respect that the Shia community and other minorities show to everyone is important—it shows what a society is. They stand up for the underdog and for the minorities throughout the world. We need more dialogue, not more weapons, if we are to end sectarian attacks against the Shia community and tackle the causes of extremist attacks across the world, regardless of who they are perpetrated against. The Shia community has a long tradition of condemning violence and promoting peace and understanding, something of which they are rightly proud. That is a voice that we share and one that needs to be heard. I thank the chamber for allowing me to have the Shia voice heard here today. I look forward to the minister’s speech.

I congratulate Anne McTaggart on securing the debate. I am reminded of the debate on science that we had on Tuesday, and the comments in that debate about encouraging more women to be involved in science. It is apt that today we are debating the very positive and strong impact that women have in their communities and beyond, in wider society. I echo Patricia Ferguson’s comment about the bedroom tax. It is also very apt that the debate is taking place at a time when we are talking about the bedroom tax. Perhaps aspirations will go further. Who knows what will happen with regard to the bedroom tax and what all of us will do against it? I was born and brought up in Govan and I grew up with the story of Mary Barbour. My relatives worked in the Fairfield shipyard and stayed in the Fairfield community, as it was called. I recollect my great auntie Bessie, who was a great storyteller, passing down through the generations the story of Mary Barbour and the other ladies, who were ordinary housewives, and the children who were involved in the rent strike. It was a fantastic story that was certainly an inspiration to us all. I remember, a number of years ago, when my aunt and my mother were elderly, taking them along to the Pearce Institute in Govan to listen to Alice Sheridan give a talk for the Govan reminiscence society about the rent strike and the strong women who were involved in it, not just in Govan but in Partick. The story goes on and on. The motion is correct to say that we have nothing to commemorate these inspirational women. A monument or a statue—whatever it may be—is a must. As Ruth Davidson said, regardless of politics, we should all stand together to commemorate and celebrate the strong women in our society. The theme of strong and inspirational women runs through the debate. I know that Mary Barbour and the Independent Labour Party have inspired other members, but if members will indulge me, I will say who in my party my inspiration came from. Wendy Wood was my inspiration. She was probably not the most popular person, as she incurred the wrath of both Westminster and her own party, which was called the Scottish National Movement at the time. I am not saying that I am deliberately like Wendy Wood, but I admire her stance on many things. I will mention two wee snippets of Wendy’s life. She had two spells in prison. Her first was in Saughton prison in Edinburgh after she attempted to disrupt a meeting of the Blackshirts at the Mound in Edinburgh and was arrested for a breach of the peace. Her second spell in prison came because she demonstrated against the conditions in women’s prisons in Scotland, and she was imprisoned for that. Once she left prison, she set to work on the prison commissioners and eventually got a letter saying that Duke Street prison was to be demolished and a new women’s prison was to be built at Greenock. I was inspired by Wendy Wood as well as by Mary Barbour and what I was told by my aunt. We have had great women in our society, but do we honour them properly? I do not think so. At this point, I depart from what Ruth Davidson said as she called for a monument or statue in George Square. As I am a Govanite, I think that members will expect me to look for some form of monument in Govan. It does not have to be in Elder park, but it should be somewhere in the area where the whole thing started. For me, that would be an appropriate commemoration. It will be up to Maria Fyfe and others in the working party to decide where it will go, but as a Govanite I would like to see something in the Govan area to commemorate Mary Barbour and those many other women.

The member has a business manager, who obviously meets the business team. Why did he not give the idea that he is putting forward to his business manager so that he could propose it to the Parliament, instead of waiting until now and basically rubbishing the debate? I have some worthwhile things to say about my Glasgow Kelvin constituency and its involvement in science.

Yesterday, I attended Glasgow Science Centre to present awards to pupils on behalf of the Prince’s Trust. The morning started off with a number of experiments that the pupils joined in with and it ended with them having the opportunity to participate in all that the centre has to offer. The pupils who were there and the others who were queuing up to come in certainly enjoyed the experience. I will give the centre a wee punt—just under 800,000 people visited it in 2010-11 and 2012-13, which is the largest number of visitors that any of the science centres in Scotland has received. That is fantastic. Members might recall that I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning about the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s announcement of innovation centres and the participation in those of businesses. I requested a list of the businesses involved, which I have with me. I will not read out the names of all of them; I just want to make a point. The 20 or so organisations that are involved in the sensors and imaging systems innovation centre include the University of Glasgow, the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow Caledonian University and the Scottish universities physics alliance. The industry partners include BP International and IBM, and the small and medium-sized enterprise partners include Gas Sensing Solutions. Other public partners include the UK Astronomy Technology Centre. Members of the stratified medicine Scotland innovation centre include Health Science Scotland and GlaxoSmithKline. I would be happy to send anyone a list of all the various organisations; I am sure that the cabinet secretary would be, too. I read out the names of those organisations to make the point that science does not operate in a vacuum—if members will pardon the pun. Science is a very wide-ranging discipline. Mention has been made of the need to encourage more women into science. Mark Griffin’s remarks were spot on—it is terrible that science toys are designed for boys. In encouraging women into science, we should make more of the fact that it covers a number of disciplines. I am glad that Hugh Henry is back in the chamber, because I wanted him to hear this. After I asked Mike Russell about innovation centres, I received an email from a researcher, who was very pleased that I had asked my question. They went on to say: “the Medical Innovation Centre is particularly exciting as the partnership between university research, industry and healthcare ... should bring great benefits and advances in healthcare.” That is what I meant when I said that science is a wide discipline. The researcher also said: “I am delighted that the Scottish Government has allocated time to debate the importance of science and technology in Scotland, and on identifying good practice in public engagement in science. As a researcher, I have benefited from access to the Inspire and Challenge training programme at Glasgow Science Centre, which gives researchers the skills to design activities to get young children interested and excited by science”. That is what the debate is all about. We want to encourage that and to let people know what is happening. The researcher—who is not involved in politics—mentioned the meet the expert days that the centre hosts, and said: “I will be putting those skills into practice with a group of primary school children who are coming to visit our lab at Glasgow University to explore plant pigments on Tuesday (as part of a wider programme of activities to celebrate Fascination of Plants Day)”, which I think the minister touched on. The researcher said that they were also “participating in more public engagement activities at the Botanic Garden on 11th June, also organised by the Plant Science group at Glasgow University. Hopefully these local examples highlight how scientific researchers are engaging with the wider community in Glasgow ... and beyond.” It is important that we highlight the community engagement aspect. What better way of getting people interested in science is there than to go out into the local community and to have members of the community come and visit the labs. That includes all genders—not just men—and we have to start at a very early age on that. I think that the proposed Conservative amendment to the motion would have highlighted that primary school teachers should have scientific qualifications before they enter the profession. However, we should take note of the comments by Susan Quinn, who is president of the Educational Institute of Scotland, who said: “We want our teachers to be as well qualified as possible. But there is an argument that if you start looking and being prescriptive about particular subjects at Higher, other than English, then you close down looking at potentially good teachers”. I think that people should consider that point.

That intervention clarifies the RSE’s point, because it came across that the RSE and others were asking for primary teachers to have a higher in a science subject before they enter teacher education. Liz Smith’s point was well made and I am sure that it will be taken on board. However, we must consider the issue carefully, because we cannot turn away perfectly good teachers simply because they do not have a science higher. However, as Liz Smith said, it is about qualifications in all disciplines. This has been a very good debate. I am not, by any manner of means, a scientist. However, I certainly look at the discipline of science in its wider context. I think that we should have more debates like this, particularly when there are younger people in the gallery who can take on board what has been said so that they do not always think that, for example, to be an astronaut they have to have science qualifications; there are other things that they can do with science qualifications. We should have more debates on the issue and we should make them much more wide ranging. Perhaps then we will then encourage more women to come into science.

Perhaps I can address some of the issues that Neil Findlay raises by quoting Professor Tim O’Shea, the principal of the University of Edinburgh. He says: “I don’t see there’s any reason why any form of constitutional change should preclude participation in higher order research councils. There is a multiplicity of research mechanisms. For example, we now get £30m a year from European research bodies.” If Neil Findlay’s Westminster partners want to pull the UK out of Europe, there will be no research funding for anywhere.

The member has a business manager, who obviously meets the business team. Why did he not give the idea that he is putting forward to his business manager so that he could propose it to the Parliament, instead of waiting until now and basically rubbishing the debate? I have some worthwhile things to say about my Glasgow Kelvin constituency and its involvement in science.

Yesterday, I attended Glasgow Science Centre to present awards to pupils on behalf of the Prince’s Trust. The morning started off with a number of experiments that the pupils joined in with and it ended with them having the opportunity to participate in all that the centre has to offer. The pupils who were there and the others who were queuing up to come in certainly enjoyed the experience. I will give the centre a wee punt—just under 800,000 people visited it in 2010-11 and 2012-13, which is the largest number of visitors that any of the science centres in Scotland has received. That is fantastic. Members might recall that I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning about the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s announcement of innovation centres and the participation in those of businesses. I requested a list of the businesses involved, which I have with me. I will not read out the names of all of them; I just want to make a point. The 20 or so organisations that are involved in the sensors and imaging systems innovation centre include the University of Glasgow, the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow Caledonian University and the Scottish universities physics alliance. The industry partners include BP International and IBM, and the small and medium-sized enterprise partners include Gas Sensing Solutions. Other public partners include the UK Astronomy Technology Centre. Members of the stratified medicine Scotland innovation centre include Health Science Scotland and GlaxoSmithKline. I would be happy to send anyone a list of all the various organisations; I am sure that the cabinet secretary would be, too. I read out the names of those organisations to make the point that science does not operate in a vacuum—if members will pardon the pun. Science is a very wide-ranging discipline. Mention has been made of the need to encourage more women into science. Mark Griffin’s remarks were spot on—it is terrible that science toys are designed for boys. In encouraging women into science, we should make more of the fact that it covers a number of disciplines. I am glad that Hugh Henry is back in the chamber, because I wanted him to hear this. After I asked Mike Russell about innovation centres, I received an email from a researcher, who was very pleased that I had asked my question. They went on to say: “the Medical Innovation Centre is particularly exciting as the partnership between university research, industry and healthcare ... should bring great benefits and advances in healthcare.” That is what I meant when I said that science is a wide discipline. The researcher also said: “I am delighted that the Scottish Government has allocated time to debate the importance of science and technology in Scotland, and on identifying good practice in public engagement in science. As a researcher, I have benefited from access to the Inspire and Challenge training programme at Glasgow Science Centre, which gives researchers the skills to design activities to get young children interested and excited by science”. That is what the debate is all about. We want to encourage that and to let people know what is happening. The researcher—who is not involved in politics—mentioned the meet the expert days that the centre hosts, and said: “I will be putting those skills into practice with a group of primary school children who are coming to visit our lab at Glasgow University to explore plant pigments on Tuesday (as part of a wider programme of activities to celebrate Fascination of Plants Day)”, which I think the minister touched on. The researcher said that they were also “participating in more public engagement activities at the Botanic Garden on 11th June, also organised by the Plant Science group at Glasgow University. Hopefully these local examples highlight how scientific researchers are engaging with the wider community in Glasgow ... and beyond.” It is important that we highlight the community engagement aspect. What better way of getting people interested in science is there than to go out into the local community and to have members of the community come and visit the labs. That includes all genders—not just men—and we have to start at a very early age on that. I think that the proposed Conservative amendment to the motion would have highlighted that primary school teachers should have scientific qualifications before they enter the profession. However, we should take note of the comments by Susan Quinn, who is president of the Educational Institute of Scotland, who said: “We want our teachers to be as well qualified as possible. But there is an argument that if you start looking and being prescriptive about particular subjects at Higher, other than English, then you close down looking at potentially good teachers”. I think that people should consider that point.

That intervention clarifies the RSE’s point, because it came across that the RSE and others were asking for primary teachers to have a higher in a science subject before they enter teacher education. Liz Smith’s point was well made and I am sure that it will be taken on board. However, we must consider the issue carefully, because we cannot turn away perfectly good teachers simply because they do not have a science higher. However, as Liz Smith said, it is about qualifications in all disciplines. This has been a very good debate. I am not, by any manner of means, a scientist. However, I certainly look at the discipline of science in its wider context. I think that we should have more debates like this, particularly when there are younger people in the gallery who can take on board what has been said so that they do not always think that, for example, to be an astronaut they have to have science qualifications; there are other things that they can do with science qualifications. We should have more debates on the issue and we should make them much more wide ranging. Perhaps then we will then encourage more women to come into science.

Perhaps I can address some of the issues that Neil Findlay raises by quoting Professor Tim O’Shea, the principal of the University of Edinburgh. He says: “I don’t see there’s any reason why any form of constitutional change should preclude participation in higher order research councils. There is a multiplicity of research mechanisms. For example, we now get £30m a year from European research bodies.” If Neil Findlay’s Westminster partners want to pull the UK out of Europe, there will be no research funding for anywhere.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what help is available for local traders to ensure that local communities thrive. (S4O-02117)

The Scottish Government’s action is most welcome, and traders in my area tell me so. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware of the situation in Byres Road and High Street in my constituency, where many small businesses have closed, leading to concerns among traders and communities. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, if those areas are to survive and flourish, urgent action is needed, in particular by Glasgow City Council and its arm’s-length external organisation City Property, which we know is under investigation? Will the cabinet secretary agree to meet me and interested parties to discuss the situation and perhaps address the issue?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Mary Fee on securing this debate. I know that she has a special interest in the issue and I pay tribute to her tenacity. As I mentioned in last week’s debate, reoffending and rehabilitation are something that I, too, feel very passionately about. Mary Fee mentioned the throughcare service being piloted at Greenock prison. That is, indeed, a fantastically innovative project. I would like to quote from a meeting at which Mary Fee was also present, where the prison services said: “It is widely recognised that offenders frequently find it difficult to successfully return to their communities and avoid reoffending when released from prison. The SPS is continually exploring ways to additionally support prisoners after their liberation, for the benefit of both offenders and the communities which they return to.” That is very important: it is not just the prisoners but their communities and society as a whole who benefit from these fantastic, innovative ideas. The goal of HMP Greenock is to sustain the unique relationship between prison officers and prisoners, an important subject that I also raised in last week’s debate. I believe that they know each other best. That is what is stated in the innovative project—that prison officers get involved in the attempt to build the lives of prisoners when they are released into their communities. I am delighted that a number of the agencies mentioned by Mary Fee, in both the Government and the third sector, are working together on this fantastic project. Mary Fee mentioned the mentoring service, which is something that I also feel passionately about. To tackle reoffending, £7.7 million has been spent on a network of mentoring schemes throughout the country. I want to give an example from one of the projects, called Includem, in my own area of greater Glasgow. I will not give any personal details; just a couple of soundbites about what has happened. This story is about a chap called Andrew and how for many years he had been in and out of prison, almost as though there were a revolving door. The first thing he said was, “If I hadn’t had Includem, I’d probably still be fighting and picking up charges.” Andrew came from the sort of situation that Mary Fee has just described. I will not call his background dysfunctional, but he had a home life that was not the norm as we would probably see it, and his family relationships really suffered because of that and the young man got involved in gangs and alcohol and was on the wrong side of the fence and the law—whatever we would want to call it. Once he was in prison again, Includem became involved and involved him in a mentoring scheme. Since he has been released from prison, he has had no further charges; he has been in no trouble at all. His family have all been helped to get on with their lives. Andrew says now that he is really looking forward to the future. We in this Parliament should be proud of the introduction of those innovative types of rehabilitation. As I have said on many occasions, we can lock everyone up, but it is no good for them or for society outwith. I thank Mary Fee for lodging her motion and I congratulate her on her first members’ business debate, which is very worthy. I hope that we can all work together, no matter what our political party. This is not about parties; it is about making sure that young people and others have a life when they come out of prison and that communities benefit from that life.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s investment in technology innovation centres in Edinburgh and Glasgow will bring to the life sciences industry. (S4O-02074)

I thank the minister for his reply, which is certainly very good news for the life sciences industry in my constituency of Glasgow Kelvin and in Scotland as a whole. I note that 22 industry partners are supporting the innovation project. Will the minister provide me with more details of those industry partners?

4. To ask the First Minister how communities are benefiting from proceeds of crime. (S4F-01351)

Can the First Minister confirm that the investment of the £80 million that he mentioned and of future recoveries that are made through the proceeds of crime legislation will continue across Scotland through the cashback for communities programme, to build on the impact of the £50 million that has been invested since 2007?

Perhaps I am the only one—I do not know—but I am pleased to speak in the debate. I take on board what everyone has said, but the more we discuss the community justice system, the better it is all round. I am sure that we will come back to a fuller debate. I say that not only because I am a member of the Justice Committee but because I believe passionately in delivering a justice system that serves all the community and delivers a better outcome for victims, communities and offenders. It must also deliver positive outcomes for all, because that is what we are in the Parliament to do. It is difficult when we go out to communities and listen to the victims’ stories, but it is also difficult when we go into prison and speak to prisoners who have experienced the revolving-door system and had a chaotic lifestyle, perhaps even from childhood. It is important that we debate the redesign of the community justice system. It will be better for everyone in society, not only in our local communities. A number of people mentioned the three options for the CJAs. Members will probably be glad to know that I will not mention those, but I will make a small point about CJAs. Perhaps it is a failing on my part—I really do not know—but I have never had any contact with my local CJA. No one from it has contacted me, and I could not tell anyone who the members are. Perhaps, if some other members tell me their experience of CJAs, I will be able to understand the options better. I am sure that we will get further into that. I will raise two areas that a number of members have mentioned: throughcare and delivery, and mentoring. Like other members of the Justice Committee, I recently went on a visit. I visited Barlinnie prison in Glasgow and, when I spoke to the officers, agencies and prisoners, one thing came through clearly: the need for joined-up thinking and throughcare in relation to housing—which has been raised before—health and financial support. The prisoners I spoke to told me that, although they were visited by agencies that could provide housing, they received no advice about housing until they were released. When they turned up, there was no housing for them and they had to go into hostels. As Graeme Pearson mentioned, in some cases they were given sleeping bags. The prisoners told us that they did not want to go into the hostels because that would mean that they were going back into a life of crime and would have to sleep on the streets. That must be looked at. I hope that the redesign of the community justice system will examine that in particular. I hope that it will also consider the simple matter of what time people get out of prison and how they can access social work and finance. It became clear that, although there are a number of agencies that do a fantastic job, they do not seem to meet together. There is a desperate need to look at the number of agencies, the services that they provide and whether there is joined-up thinking in throughcare. The cabinet secretary mentioned the £7.7 million that has been given to extend the mentoring system. I am a great supporter of mentoring, as I have said in the chamber before. In particular, the extension of using prison staff and peer groups to mentor prisoners is a fantastic idea. That system provides support to vulnerable prisoners who lead chaotic lifestyles. It is not only about the prisoners but about the communities into which they are released and their families. Everyone in the Parliament should be extremely proud of the mentoring system and the fact that we are moving it on and delivering more. Much has been said about reoffending. I take that on board, but we must also take on board the fact that progress has been made on tackling reoffending. The reoffending rates are at their lowest for more than a decade. Graeme Pearson mentioned the figures for 1999, which is more than 10 years ago. Recorded crime is also at a 37-year low. We must also consider the fact that community payback orders, which members have mentioned, have been successfully implemented. Between April 2011 and March 2012, 10,228 orders were commenced. Although I realise that the system must be looked at, the whole-system approach for young people continues to be rolled out throughout Scotland, resulting in a decrease in the number of recorded crimes and offences committed by young people. There are positives, but we have to do something to move forward. I think that we all agree that there is a revolving-door system and that, although progress has been made, we need to do something to stop that. As I said, I am pleased to speak in the debate, and I believe that the outcome of the consultation will go some way towards achieving proper community justice and stopping the revolving-door system, which is a blight not just on individuals but on entire communities.

Perhaps Mary Fee will be able to educate me on the CJAs. She said that various members of CJAs had contacted her. Would she say that the CJAs work differently in different areas? As I said in my speech, no one from my local CJA has ever contacted me. I wonder whether the situation is different in various local authority areas.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to maintaining police numbers despite the United Kingdom Government’s cuts. He will be aware of the Home Office’s refusal to commit to funding the policing costs of the Liberal Democrat conference that will take place in Glasgow in September despite funding such costs when conferences take place in England. I find that quite bizarre. Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that all parties should support calls for the Home Office to treat Scotland equally in that matter?

I am not a late convert, but a late addition to the debate. I had said that I would listen to the debate, but I was so moved by the evidence at the meeting earlier that I had to make a contribution. Many years ago, in a past life, I ran voluntary organisations and in the summer I used to run a play scheme. As John Mason said, some kids that we took on the play scheme had never been on the subway and had never been on a train. I will not tell members exactly what happened when I got them to Kelvingrove art gallery and they saw the fountain there with the money in it; members can imagine what they tried to do. Those kids had never been outside that small place that they were born and brought up in. When I was talking to Liz Buchanan and others at the meeting this afternoon, in particular some of the teachers from Sandaig primary, I was reminded of the fact that in some inner cities—in particular in Glasgow, but it probably happens all over—there is a territorial issue. Kids will not cross the road to go to another area, so therefore they perhaps do not see the sea or the grass because they are confined to that particular area. It is rather sad. This holiday idea gets the kids completely out of such areas, and some of the examples that have been produced show how good it has been for the kids to be able to break away from what happens in their lives—the poverty, domestic violence in some cases, and other issues; for example, when someone in the family has passed away. It is absolutely fantastic to be able to offer—not just to the kids, but to their families—the opportunity to get away for a complete break. Mary Scanlon and other members mentioned that such breaks help with mental health, which they do. I know how I feel when I have been able to go for a break, but it is wonderful for families who cannot get away at all, because they do not have the money, to be given that opportunity. I congratulate John Mason for lodging the motion. As others have said, I had heard a little bit about the topic but not an awful lot. I hope that we will hear even more about it. I will touch on two other areas. In addition to the recommendations that Mary Scanlon highlighted, I want to mention first the recommendation on the European Commission’s Calypso programme on social tourism. We are told that participation in the programme costs nothing, so I hope that the minister can look at that. As John Mason and others said, social tourism can help to boost the economy because it puts money into the economy and because those who work in the sector can be employed for longer. We should also remember—in case anyone from the press takes the wrong idea—that the proposal is about giving people holidays in their own country and not abroad, which makes it even better. Secondly, given the recommendation about providing disadvantaged families with free tickets for venues in the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics, perhaps the minister could speak to his colleague Shona Robison on whether we could do something like that for the Commonwealth games. That could kick-start this idea of social holidays. Again, I am grateful to John Mason for bringing the issue to the attention of the Parliament. I certainly look forward to seeing how far we can go with the concept of social holidays.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answers, particularly what he said about the roll-out of more programmes on mentoring. Will the mentoring programme include both prison staff and other offenders or ex-offenders helping with mentoring? How will it work as it is rolled out into the community?

I acknowledge the speeches by Lewis Macdonald and Margaret Mitchell. I take on board the concerns that they have raised and, as a member of the Justice Committee, I reassure them that the committee will scrutinise the recommendations robustly and thoroughly. I am sure that, in the process of its scrutiny, the committee will explore the specific concerns that they raised. We would welcome their input into that process, and I am sure that we will receive it. Although Lewis Macdonald might regret the speed at which the recommendations are being implemented, as the Labour motion says, I believe that he agrees that there is a need for reform. He is also aware—as many members are—of the United Kingdom coalition Government’s cuts agenda, which is affecting the money that the UK Government gives Scotland. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, the Westminster Government has made a 26 per cent real-terms cut in Scotland’s capital budget. Against that background, every one of us must admit that it is inevitable that difficult decisions will need to be taken.

When we look at the results of the elections, it seems that the people of Scotland trust the Scottish National Party, rather than the Labour Party. We need no lessons from Hanzala Malik. The Scottish Court Service has stated that the closures will affect 5 per cent of overall court business. It also points out that the three High Court centres hear about 80 per cent of all cases. Indeed, the chief executive of the service has said that it is “confident that more than enough capacity exists to deal with current and future volumes of business.” I am sure that the Justice Committee will explore that in more detail when it takes evidence on the issue. I will take up Margaret Mitchell’s points about overstretched courts and present some facts. Let us look at the numbers. The number of summary complaints registered at the sheriff courts has declined from more than 8,000 per month to less than 6,000 per month. The number of summary complaints registered at the sheriff and JP courts together has shown a continual and consistent decline. The number of High Court indictments registered has declined from just under 90 per month to just over 60 per month. Margaret Mitchell will admit that there is, perhaps, room for manoeuvre and, when we see the evidence, improvement. One recommendation concerns using information technology to make the experience more effective. We all know of the huge advances that we have made in recent years and the opportunity that those advances present. A few years ago, not only I but other members would never have imagined that we would be able to talk directly to somebody in, for example, Malawi. In certain circumstances, as the convener of the cross-party group on Palestine, I have had videolinks with people in the West Bank, have been able to ask them questions and have heard them answer. Every one of us would admit that we can develop such technology in the Court Service. Of course we must ensure that it is used only in specific areas of the Court Service, but we should certainly be looking into it. I think that it would benefit absolutely everyone. Among the responses to the initial consultation, there was a very positive response to the increase in the use of technology, particularly in relation to the administrative side of things and the registration of cases. There was also a positive response to the idea of allowing certain court appearances to be made by live videolink. As part of the Scottish Government’s making justice work programme in the north of Scotland, work is nearing completion on the introduction of a new secure live-link videoconferencing network covering six northern courts and four other locations. Very importantly for the justice system, that will give criminal justice organisations the opportunity to use the technology for some cases, instead of participants having to travel to court. Members would all agree that those are positive possibilities, which we should embrace. As I said, we all recognise the need for reform. We all certainly recognise that the UK Government is making huge cuts in Scotland. We all have a responsibility to spell out how we will deal with them. With that in mind, I must admit to being slightly confused by the Labour Party’s motion. It appears that Labour recognises the need for reform, and the motion highlights Labour’s opposition to the closure of some courts, but does that mean that it recognises the need to close the courts that the motion does not mention? That seems a wee bit odd. Perhaps the mover of the motion would like to take the opportunity to clarify the position—or perhaps not. I cannot thank Lewis Macdonald for any clarification; if he does not wish to intervene, he can perhaps ensure that the point is dealt with in the closing speech.

In a recent interview, Lewis Macdonald’s colleague Jenny Marra also failed to provide clarity on the Labour Party’s proposals. She acknowledged that there were inefficiencies and she stated that the Labour Party did not oppose all cuts across the board and that Johann Lamont had already said that she would be prepared to put the matter on the table. I do not know what Johann Lamont’s opinion is on these matters—in fact, I do not really know what her opinion is on many matters, and I do not think that the Scottish people know, either. The Scottish Government has clearly stated its position on the future of court services, and it would be good if the Opposition parties stated their position, too.

I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on her first members’ business debate on such an emotive subject. It is something in which every one of us here and outwith the chamber should have an interest. Linda Fabiani spoke about East Timor and Iain Gray spoke about the Congo. I remember a speech that the late, great Margaret Ewing MSP—not Margaret Thatcher—who did an awful lot of work on tackling violence against women, gave when she came back from the Congo. She said that she had spoken to women who had been raped in every orifice. The shock and the horror of hearing her say that has never left me. Rape is still being used as a weapon of war, with atrocities being committed against not just women but young children. There should be a special sentence for anyone who uses rape as a weapon of war. It is important that we keep our eye on international events while we, in the Scottish Parliament, are tackling certain issues of violence against women. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities paper “Safer Lives: Changed Lives: A Shared Approach to Tackling Violence Against Women in Scotland” sets out all the things that the Parliament has done to tackle violence against women and domestic abuse. Those include establishing the domestic abuse task force, setting up domestic abuse courts, considering the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which we are doing just now, and addressing the issue of corroboration particularly in relation to sexual offences, which is still to come. Yes, we should be proud of those things, but there are lots of other things that we can do. Like everyone else here, I am very interested in tackling the sexual exploitation of women. I have never appeared on page 3 of certain newspapers, but I have certainly been slated in many of those newspapers because of my stance—which is shared by others—against sexual exploitation in the many forms that it takes. We have heard about the need to address the educational opportunities for young girls and their belief that, if they say no to a young boy when they are a teenager, they deserve a slap in the face. That was a horrific report. Sexual exploitation takes many forms, including the words of the music that is aimed at young girls. We see girls as young as five, four or even three—toddlers—gyrating about a stage and people think that it is fine because they are in one of those dance classes, but it is actually sexual exploitation of kids as young as three, four and five. We also see the clothes—I will not name the stores that sell them—with terrible slogans across the front. Not long ago, I saw a wee five-year-old wearing a tiny T-shirt that said “I am a mini WAG” on it. We have had bras and pants for kids as young as four and five being sold in shops. That is sexual exploitation. What can be done about that? People must be educated. I know that many members have tried to take action. I proposed legislation on the licensing and control of adult entertainment venues, including lap dancing venues. Unfortunately, the legislation was not passed, because certain parties voted it down. I appeal to them to support my new member’s bill when it is introduced. We must ensure that we tackle the sexual exploitation of young girls and the horrific crimes that are a consequence of that and the fact that women are looked on as sexual objects and not human beings. We must do everything in our power in this Parliament—and throughout the world—to ensure that women are treated as equals to everyone else on the planet.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will update legislation and guidance to ensure that ashes are always treated appropriately following cremation. (S4T-00311)

I sincerely thank the minister for that reply. I am sure that the many people who have contacted me and others will sincerely thank him also, particularly given that the legislation that underpins much of this is more than 100 years old. Does the minister agree that local authorities such as Glasgow City Council must not shy away from their responsibility to investigate any case that is brought to them and give answers to parents? Will the Scottish Government provide best practice guidance to local authorities on the conduct of their investigations, and will the minister ask the national health service to co-operate with any local investigations?

I thank my fellow MSPs for supporting this members’ business debate. Without their support, we would not be having the debate, so I thank them very much. I also thank those who have been able to stay behind to take part. Some 3,400 new cases of bowel cancer are diagnosed in Scotland each year. We know that increasing the number of people who live healthy lifestyles would cut that number and prevent bowel cancer. I know that some of my colleagues will use and speak about the facts and figures, but I want to keep my remarks to the bowel cancer—don’t take a chance, take the test screening, as this is a fantastic opportunity to bring that to the fore. I attended the launch of the campaign at the Centre for Contemporary Arts in Glasgow. The Scottish Government launched it as part of the detect cancer early programme, which is backed by NHS 24 and the Scottish cancer coalition. It is true to say that the campaign has certainly raised some eyebrows. It features Ford Kiernan in a very visual situation on television and in a very good voiceover on the radio, and it does not leave a lot to the imagination. I am sure that members have seen it. I think it is absolutely brilliant. Some people have said that it is designed to shock, but certainly it brings to people’s attention exactly what bowel cancer is. The campaign’s aim is to bring home bowel cancer, particularly to men and particularly to men on the west coast. As we know, men find it particularly difficult to talk about their health and certain illnesses. In the case of bowel cancer, many men do not just find it difficult to talk about it but are very embarrassed and would not take the time to go to the doctor. Bowel cancer is the third most common form of cancer in men, so anything that makes people sit up, take notice and take the test can only be a good thing. When we announced the campaign and that I was going to lodge a motion on it, it was obvious that some people who had seen the video were quite embarrassed and shocked by it. However, as I said, I thought it was brilliant. If it makes people sit up and take notice, it is a very good thing. A couple of weeks ago, I had a conversation with Jackson Carlaw about the test. A number of us in Parliament will have received the test and not used it, set it aside or put it in the bin. I am not saying that Jackson Carlaw did that, but we did have a conversation about it. The test kit is aimed at 50 to 74-year-olds and I appeal to people: when the kit lands on their doorstep, they should please take the test. It comes through the door every two years, it is very effective and simple to use, and the diagnosis is excellent. People can start treatment if bowel cancer is caught early enough, and if people do not have signs of bowel cancer but are worried about it, those worries could be completely gone after taking the test. That plea is the reason why I lodged the motion—I am sorry about the pun. People have to take the test because it can save so many lives. It is really important that bowel cancer should be caught early. With early detection, nine out of 10 people can survive bowel cancer. As the motion says, Glasgow has the highest rate of bowel cancer deaths in Scotland, so it is imperative that people take part in the screening initiative. I thank Beating Bowel Cancer, Bowel Cancer UK and Cancer Research UK for their work and the magnificent job that they have done of highlighting the issue. At the launch at the CCA, I met Lynn Faulds Wood, a broadcaster whom many people know. She is Scottish but now works and lives in London and she is a survivor of bowel cancer, which she had in her early 20s. Not only older people get bowel cancer. Lynn is such a good ambassador for this campaign; she speaks very highly of the people who have worked on it and says how important it is that people take part in it. I also spoke to other survivors and people who are receiving treatment. They are very positive in their outlook, while recognising the real challenges that lie ahead. I will not name the person, but not so long ago I lost a very dear friend and colleague to bowel cancer. Six weeks before he was diagnosed, he had been playing squash, running and leafleting up and down tenements in Glasgow. If he had thought about taking the test, he might still have been with us here today. There are many other examples. The message that I want people to take out of the debate is that bowel cancer is treatable if caught early enough. Help is there: there is a website and a hotline that people can phone if they happen to have thrown their kit in the bin. I make a plea, particularly to men who think that they do not need to take the test because bowel cancer will not happen to them and who would be embarrassed to talk about it: they should listen to the radio campaign, watch the video on TV and take the test. If nine out of 10 people survive a positive diagnosis, one of those nine could be any of them. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to debate the motion, Presiding Officer. I thank members for supporting it.

I thank Jackie Baillie for securing the debate and pay tribute to Tommy Whitelaw and the others who are in the public gallery today. The Tommy on tour campaign was fantastic at raising awareness of what dementia means not just for the sufferers but for the thousands of carers out there and the organisations that have put it at the top of their agenda. I had written down some words, but I think that the best thing that I can do is just to hold up the dementia carers’ voices leaflet on “Supporting Rights and the Carer Voice”, which tells us everything. What I really like and admire about the organisation is the fact that it is very much a grass-roots organisation that is built from the bottom up and that listens to the people at the coalface, not necessarily the professionals who receive from the coalface. It mentions various issues to do with carers’ experiences, which the organisation knows about from people writing back to it. It says that there needs to be greater understanding, particularly among professionals, of the national dementia strategy and the right to dignity and respect—an issue that Fiona McLeod raised. As she said, when someone is caring for a person with dementia it is difficult for them to get through the maze of paperwork and bureaucracy to find exactly what is right for them. The national dementia strategy offers that, but we need to push it out more to professionals, who are the ones that we need to speak to and tackle. Mark McDonald talked about the amounts of money that carers receive each week through their benefits. As Claire Baker and others have said, it is not about the money, but if someone has a family with a couple of kids and they have to give up their job, they need something to support them—particularly with the increase in utility bills—and £58.45 is not a lot of money. In some cases, people cannot take another job. I know that, unfortunately, benefits are outwith the scope of the Scottish Parliament, but we need to look at that situation. I am the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing—Nanette Milne is the deputy convener, as Jim Hume was—and dementia has been raised on many occasions within the group. There are many fantastic organisations and individuals out there, including Alzheimer Scotland and Tommy Whitelaw, who give their all to ensure that people who have dementia are put to the forefront. We always look forward to someone coming along to give us advice on the best way forward. Today’s debate is a fantastic opportunity to hear about individual cases. We did not realise that my mum had dementia until my dad died and, when we went to visit her, we found that the sink was overflowing, the pot was burned and the gas was left on. Similar to the case of Jim Hume’s parents, my dad had protected my mum from anyone knowing that she had dementia. Fortunately, as we are a big family, someone was able to stay with her every night—that is not the case for everyone—until she became so ill that she could not stay in her own home and, unfortunately, we had to put her into a care home. Such personal experiences, which come through the carers’ voices, mean so much; it is about the grass roots and the people who have suffered. We talk about suffering but, as Nanette Milne said, there are sometimes humorous moments or moments of great joy when the sufferers hear music that they remember or when they see kids, as Mark McDonald said. In my mother’s case, such moments were when she saw her grandkids and great-grandkids. However, at times, she thought that I was her sister and said that I was not to go out because I was bad or something like that—obviously, my auntie had done something wrong in her past life. For us, that time was joyful as well as sometimes sad. I commend what is being done, which we have heard about in the debate. To have a grass-roots organisation talking upwards to professionals is the best way forward. I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing the debate to Parliament.

I would like to take the opportunity to remember those from all sides who lost their lives as a result of the invasion of Iraq. Drew Smith mentioned the motion and, funnily enough, I was going to draw that to members’ attention, as the Labour Party said that it was going to abstain. I think that Drew Smith made a good point, but the part of the motion that he picked up on is about the need “to act as good global citizens rather than engaging in reckless, illegal military conflicts with incalculable human and material costs.” I cannot understand how anyone could not vote for that. In the motion, we are talking exactly about the need “to act as good global citizens”.

In the debate I do not have the time to tell you everything that I have done for Iraq, but it includes fundraising and speaking to people. As you come from Glasgow, you will have realised that we have many Iraqi refugees who are in Glasgow because of the illegal war in Iraq and who are still suffering. I would like Hanzala Malik to remember that. It is rather ironic that dictators such as Pinochet, Saddam Hussein and Gaddafi were all right when they were your—the Opposition’s—dictators; they were good dictators then. Then, all of a sudden, they changed to bad dictators and we had the illegal war in Iraq. That is something that you should remember.

I never said that, Ms Lamont. It beggars belief that you think that you have the right to say what you want to say, yet we do not have the right to say that the war was illegal. I think that you should think about that.

The dodgy and discredited dossier that was used by Tony Blair to justify the illegal war, the accusations of war crimes against Tony Blair and the continuing suffering of the Iraqi people deserve to be debated. It serves this Parliament well and is a fitting testimony to this Parliament’s maturity that we are having this debate, even though Opposition parties did not want us to. It is shameful that Opposition parties tried to stifle the debate.

If you would just let me finish this point, please. The Labour Party can say what it likes, but it did not even have the courtesy to lodge an amendment. It did not want to take part in this debate at all and I would like to ask why that was. To the credit of the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives, they have lodged amendments. Although I have serious issues with John Lamont’s utter refusal to address the issue of legality in his amendment, I welcome his contribution and the fact that he has lodged his amendment. Johann Lamont’s inability to put forward her party’s view is pretty shameful. The Labour Party really needs to do some soul searching. It has moved so far from its founding principles that it is barely recognisable anymore. We know that the Labour Party and Johann Lamont supported the Iraq war. However, millions of people in Scotland and throughout the world did not and they took to the streets in protest against it. With all the evidence that the Iraq war was illegal and that people are still suffering, I ask the Labour Party whether it still supports it. Do Labour members still support the fact that they voted for that war? In her opening remarks, Johann Lamont said that we should talk of important issues. Does that mean that the issue that we are talking about—the illegal war—is unimportant? Fundamentally, I disagree with that. The questions that we are asking today are important; they should be asked and we should have answers. Was the war illegal? Yes, it was. Without proper acknowledgement of that, we run the risk of simply accepting that illegal actions are part of our world today and are okay. We have already seen the consequences of that thinking, and they are making our world much more dangerous, rather than safer. As was acknowledged by credible intelligence at the time, there were no weapons of mass destruction—others have said that—and the invasion would lead to a fracturing of Iraqi society and an upsurge in terrorism across the whole region. Surely we can all agree that that concern has been borne out on the ground. There has also been a huge increase in the use of torture and drone strikes, with a blatant disregard for international law. We really have to look at that. Does silence imply complicity? Perhaps not, but by speaking out against what we believe to be wrong, we send out a clear and unequivocal message that illegal wars will not be carried out in our name and that we will accept our duties under international law.

I am sorry, but I do not have even a minute to finish what I want to say. One of the main sources of information used to justify the war in Iraq was subsequently linked to the use of Scottish airports. They facilitated the transfer of interrogators to Egypt, where, through torture, a suspect claimed that Saddam Hussein and al-Qa’ida were in league in producing weapons of mass destruction. That claim was repeated by George Bush in October 2002 as a pretext for going to war in Iraq, and then by Colin Powell in front of the UN. Finally, it was parroted by Tony Blair. In conclusion, I would like us to consider those rendition flights. We said in the Parliament that we would have an investigation into them, but we have not done so to date. I would like to think that we will have an investigation into the illegal war and the illegal rendition flights.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I think that my point of order is similar to Christine Grahame’s. What relevance did Jenny Marra’s speech have to the motion? It had none at all.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what meetings it has had with the Scottish Police Federation to discuss the federation’s position on the impact in Scotland of the Winsor review of police pay and conditions. (S4O-01895)

The Parliament is set to debate a Liberal Democrat motion on justice this afternoon. It is reassuring to hear this Government support rather than denigrate the police force. Will the cabinet secretary outline what other measures the Scottish Government is taking to support Scotland’s police service in keeping our communities safe?

I, too, thank all those involved in the police service whom Graeme Pearson mentioned—officers and staff alike—who make our communities much safer for the members of the public we serve. We have a short time allocated to the debate. I therefore limit my comments to the motion and the amendments. I will deal with the Liberal Democrats motion first. It refers to a “democratic deficit”. As has been pointed out, it is worth mentioning that there are designated local commanders for all 14 divisions. They will work with local elected councillors and community planning partnerships to shape local services and prioritise needs. That is a good thing. There is also a local policing plan for every single council ward, which will ensure that policing across Scotland reflects the needs of our communities, which I think is what the Liberal Democrats are looking for. I would have thought that that was self-explanatory. That is a wholly democratic system.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. I bumped into Councillor Paul Rooney, who is a Labour councillor in Glasgow City Council and a highly respected member of Strathclyde police authority. He will be a member of the new board. When I asked him how he felt about the new board, he told me that he was honoured to be on it, so perhaps Labour should speak to its own colleagues. I hold Councillor Rooney in high esteem. The Labour amendment focuses on the backfilling of civilian posts, which is an issue that Lewis Macdonald mentioned. I attended the meeting that Lewis Macdonald referred to and I spoke to individual members of staff. However, we must also remember what Stephen House said about backfilling in response to Jenny Marra’s questions in the Justice Committee. He said: “I believe that Police Scotland needs a balanced and integrated workforce of Police Officers and Police Staff. I would be keen to examine ways to improve that balance within our agreed budget. But I must repeat that we do not have a strategy or plan to backfill Police Staff Roles with Police Officers. I want as many Officers as possible to be on the street in an operational role”.

I am sorry, but I have only a couple of minutes left. Stephen House also said: “there is no plan or strategy for reform that I am in charge of that is predicated on backfilling.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 23 October 2012; c 1851.] Members must listen to what the chief constable said on that topic. I want to touch on the Conservatives’ amendment. I am not sure whether Margaret Mitchell will remember that the Conservatives called for directly elected police commissioners during the stage 3 debate. We do not have to cast our minds back too far to remember what happened in England and Wales when they had directly elected police commissioners. The elections resulted in a turnout of 14.9 per cent at a cost of—wait for it—£75 million. Is that the Conservatives’ contribution to the debate? They want to spend on police commissioners when we can have a single police force and locally elected police boards that will serve all communities.

I am interested in the member’s point. Could the issue of housing for older people be included in the review of Scottish planning policy?

Does Jamie Hepburn agree that had the UK Department of Work and Pensions not taken the tenants’ allowance funding that was to be delivered to Scottish pensioners for free personal care, local councils and the people who receive the personal care would have benefited greatly?

I declare an interest as the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing. Sir Harry Burns has been quoted and we should remember that he said that we have to look at not just health but areas of deprivation and everything else in the round. We cannot pick and choose what we want to say about Sir Harry’s contributions. I am not a member of the Finance Committee, but I read its report with interest. Like Jamie Hepburn, I was rather taken aback by the view that the IMF expressed in its report on the financial crisis, which the committee’s report quotes. It said: “In spite of the large fiscal cost of the crisis, the major threat to long-term fiscal solvency is ... unfavourable demographic trends.” I took that to mean that people are living longer. It is pretty shameful to refer to it in that way. Surely increasing life expectancy is one of the measures of a successful modern society. We should all celebrate that, rather than looking just at the economics. That is a fundamental point. Should we look at demographic change from the point of view of basic economics, or should we look at it differently? Over the past few decades, the economy and its importance to our everyday lives has taken on more and more significance, to the point where everything is seen through that prism. I think that we need to look at things differently. It might take time to create a society that looks beyond economics, but issues such as those that we are discussing show clearly that we need to explore how to tackle such matters from a wider viewpoint than that of whether we can afford a particular approach.

Certainly. That was the point that I meant to make. The IMF’s view seems to be that we should not celebrate the fact that people are living longer, but those people contribute to society economically and in other ways. That is why we must adopt a different approach and take a wider viewpoint. As the Finance Committee recognised, older people make a huge contribution to society, and not just economically—they benefit the people around them and the wider community. Many of those benefits might not be easy for an economist to quantify, but they are an essential aspect of a vibrant society. Some have shone the political spotlight on provision such as free personal care and free travel entitlement, but in my opinion they have done so without giving proper thought to the positive impact that such policies have on older people and wider society. When those policies are discussed, mention tends not to be made of the elephant in the room—I am not referring to anyone in the chamber, but to the powers that we in Scotland need but do not have. Age Scotland’s document “Older People, Public Policy and the Impact of Devolution in Scotland” noted that a number of key policy levers that impact on older people, such as those to do with pensions, benefits and taxation, are still reserved to the UK Parliament. It concludes that, as a result, there are obvious limits on the Scottish Government’s capacity to develop an integrated policy approach. I think that that lack of real powers is hindering rather than helping our ability to tackle demographic change and other issues. I pay credit to the Labour Party under the leadership of Henry McLeish, which did not buckle under the pressure from Westminster not to introduce free personal care, even when the UK Department for Work and Pensions disagreed that we should be able to rely on the continued payment of attendance allowance. As I mentioned to Jamie Hepburn, that added significantly to the cost of implementing free personal care. At the time—nearly 12 years ago—the cost of free personal care was £40 million per year. I believe that it has now gone up to £60 million per year. That equates to £500 million denied to our budget for older people. In the debate, we must acknowledge that, if we are to face the challenges that lie ahead, we need to have real powers to tackle them. It is no use simply attacking steps that have been taken without acknowledging what steps could be taken. That is an extremely important point. That is not to say that we should not make every effort to come to terms with the issues that confront us. As the committee notes in the report’s conclusions, the Scottish Government and the main public services are doing a great deal of work to address some of the challenges that we face. The committee makes an important point about that work—namely, that it is not clear whether the many initiatives that have been mentioned are making real change—and suggests that an approach that is based on better partnership working is needed. Everyone has mentioned the partnership approach, which is particularly important in the context of community health partnerships. I hope that the Government will take that main point on board when it looks at how best to deliver for our older people. I recognise that the cabinet secretary mentioned partnership working but, as we have seen in the past, it sometimes proves extremely difficult to achieve. My colleague Kenny Gibson mentioned that, throughout Scotland, partnership working is very patchy indeed. In the past, I have raised the issue of having an older people’s assembly or parliament to discuss and decide on the best way forward. It seems clear to me that hearing older people’s views on the best way to tackle issues that affect them is a good idea, so I propose that idea as an appropriate next step to take in the general debate. I mentioned the review of Scottish planning policy. I ask that the review looks at older people’s housing needs and councils’ local development plans, which could include the identification of land and areas for the development of retirement housing of all tenures. I praise the City of Edinburgh Council, which as Malcolm Chisholm said has a 10-year plan. Many councils do not go as far as that. However, through Scottish planning policy, we have an opportunity for local councils and local development plans to consider older people’s housing needs.

On free personal care, does the member agree that, if the UK Government had not taken away the attendance allowance, which, as I mentioned, was £40 million a year and which would now be up to £60 million, we would have even more moneys to spend on free personal care for our older people?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank John Mason for securing the debate, which is very timely, given the publication of the Scottish Government’s national parenting strategy, in which—as has been mentioned—the Scottish Government has announced that it is investing £18 million, and the emphasis that it places on fathers, including fathers who live apart from their children. I know exactly where Anne McTaggart was coming from but, like John Mason and other MSPs, I have had numerous constituents come to me on the issue. It is not the case that the fathers concerned think that they are better than anyone else or that they should have extra rights; what they want is equality of rights. I think that that is the gist of tonight’s debate. The debate is timely not only because of the announcement of the strategy, but because of the announcement of the consultation on the proposals to transform Scotland’s courts, which include changes to sheriff courts and civil cases, and the recommendation that specialist family sheriffs be introduced. I note that that is mentioned in the briefing that we received from Families Need Fathers, which says: “We suggest that more courts should have specialist family sheriffs who have adequate support and training, to avoid cases dragging on for months and years.” John Mason mentioned that issue. I am sure that I do not need to, but I suggest to Families Need Fathers and other groups that they take part in that consultation. I am sure that their participation would be more than welcome. Families Need Fathers also makes a point about the courts that is similar to the point that John Mason made. In its briefing, it mentions contact orders, which are raised with me. John Mason explained the issue well. Contact orders should fulfil not just the needs of the mother and the father, but those of the child. That is an extremely important issue, which should be raised in the consultation on the proposed changes to court proceedings. I hope that the recommendations that the strategy makes will go a long way to alleviating some of the difficulties that exist. One of the recommendations includes a “Focus on fathers and male carers, including those who live away from their children”, which is one of the issues that we are debating. In the strategy, the Government also says: “we will update the Parenting Agreement for Scotland—a pack with a parenting agreement for separating parents”. That is extremely important, too. Another interesting aspect of the strategy is that it says that “A fathers’ roundtable meeting will be held twice a year”. Will the minister give us some more information on that twice-yearly meeting, such as who will attend it and how people will be approached to attend it? A proposal that is particularly important in the context of what John Mason said about court orders and fathers not always having the ability to get medicine for their children is that “NHS Health Scotland will set up a Fathers’ Forum”. It would be interesting to find out more from the minister about how that forum will be set up and whether groups or individuals will be involved in it. It has been a great pleasure to speak in this debate on a very important subject—as I said, many constituents have come to see me on this issue—and I am grateful to John Mason for securing the debate. The fact is that families need fathers and fathers need contact with their children.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has for regeneration in the Glasgow Kelvin constituency. (S4O-01814)

I thank the minister for that detailed reply. In fact, I attended a meeting on that issue on Monday with the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. Is the minister aware of reports that George Square will undergo no redevelopment before the 2014 Commonwealth games, despite the redevelopment being part of a tax increment financing agreement? Does the minister have more information on that? The minister might also be aware that parts of Byres Road and Sauchiehall Street in my constituency are suffering badly due in part to Glasgow City Council’s policy of lumping them together with more prosperous areas of the same streets. Will the minister meet me to discuss those issues and perhaps consider an action plan for those areas?

Oh!

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01772)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the alleged practice in Glasgow City Council of implementing quotas for placements in care homes, resulting in a delay in discharging patients from hospitals? Will he raise that matter at his next meeting with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on concerns regarding Glasgow City Council’s plans for the redevelopment of George Square. (S4O-01709)

I can only echo what the people of Glasgow are saying: the whole sad episode has been an absolute shambles from start to finish. The cabinet secretary may be aware that £90,000 has already been spent, the cost is rising and people are most concerned. If the cabinet secretary or the Scottish Government is going to meet Glasgow City Council and Councillor Gordon Matheson—whose idea this was—could the cabinet secretary please keep the Parliament and the people of Glasgow informed of any updates, as that has not happened? Do not keep the people of Glasgow in the dark.

Will the member give way?

I thank Elaine Murray for taking my intervention. She said that we should talk only about Scotland and that to speak about any other part of Britain, and England in particular, was irrelevant. However, Richard Baker said that he was not interested only in Scotland but in England and the rest of Britain. Is that a sign of a Labour split?

Most of what has been said has been excellent. It has been a good debate. However, I am glad that Jackie Baillie raised a particular point at the end of her speech, because I was going to upset the apple cart, perhaps, with my speech. I just think that I need to put this on the record. I would like to lay to rest the false claims by Gordon Matheson, the Labour leader of Glasgow City Council, Labour councillors, Labour MSPs such as Jackie Baillie and some people in the media with regard to how hard the council has it. Glasgow City Council has the largest budget of any mainland council, and it has choices to make about how it spends that money. I will give just two examples—I could probably give hundreds more—of the choices that it has made. It gave half a million pounds to the chief executive of Glasgow’s Regeneration Agency—a decision that the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator not only criticised but described as misconduct. It has given £15 million to regenerate George Square, but there has been no consultation with the general public in Glasgow. Only 42 people have been asked out of the whole population of Glasgow. That decision has been greatly and widely criticised by Glaswegians.

It may be coming from the Scottish Government and from tax increment financing, which Glasgow City Council welcomed, but the council has choices to make, and it made that choice without asking the people of Glasgow.

I am sorry. I have only two and a half minutes left. I want to lay to rest the false claims that continually come from Labour Party spokespeople and councillors. I congratulate Bob Doris on raising the issue and on his excellent motion. He quoted the mother of a user of a day centre that Glasgow City Council closed down under what was described as modernisation. The person now sits in a heated room and gets a sandwich, but I would not describe that as a day centre. Day centres are popular, not just in Glasgow but throughout the country, because they meet a range of needs. Many are integrated with community leisure facilities and linked to work opportunities, with people enjoying a wide range of activities that are personalised to their needs and wishes. Some day centres do not draw a line between the community and centre activities, but see them as linked together. That is the type of day centre that we want, and that is why people go to day centres. As I have only a short time, I stress that we should look at keeping day centres open and integrating them with community services. In closing, I reiterate something that Bob Doris states in his motion. It mentions instigating “a full and comprehensive consultation exercise involving the active participation of service users and carers in any proposed service redesign”. That is the way forward. Jackie Baillie said so, as did others, including Drew Smith, and I would like the minister to address that point. That is the way forward for redesigns and for the people of Glasgow who use day centres and do not want them to close. They know that perhaps something has to be done, but they want to be consulted. The people who attend the day centre in my constituency, in Hinshaw Street in Queen’s Park, deserve nothing less than to be asked for their views by Glasgow City Council. Given what has happened with the George Square redesign, which I have mentioned, and other consultation processes, I do not hold my breath that that will be forthcoming, but I am certainly one of the people, along with MSPs of all parties, who will push the council to consult the users of day care services.

Will the member give way?

The minister’s comments are welcome, but the situation that he describes is far from being the case in Glasgow, given the George Square debacle and the situation in relation to Otago Lane and the Kelvin meadows. The proposed developments all require more consultation and in some cases infringe local plans. What advice can the minister give my constituents and perhaps other people on those issues?

Does John Pentland not think that a great drain on resources for local councils, particularly in his area and Glasgow, is the fact that big companies are allowed to buy up land and have land banks? If my memory serves me right, that came from a Labour Government in Westminster. It has caused great problems on a site in Glasgow, which a huge company has had for 15 years without building on the land. Is that not a drain on resources?

On the proposed changes to court services, the cabinet secretary will be aware of the consultation that closed on 21 December. Can he give us an idea of the timescale for the publication of the consultation responses?

I am sure that the First Minister welcomes the member’s genuine interest in ensuring that the new police service of Scotland is a great success. Does he agree, however, that we need to focus on and highlight the substantial progress and success that have already been achieved since last summer and that have, among other things, resulted in the establishment only the other day of a national road patrol, which I am sure we all welcome as a way of making Scotland’s roads safer?

I am grateful that the debate has been extended so that we can all make a contribution to it. I thank Malcolm Chisholm and congratulate him on securing the debate. I also congratulate Zero Tolerance and the many other groups that have worked tirelessly to raise awareness of the truly horrific crime of domestic and sexual abuse. The speeches have been excellent, although they have raised harrowing issues. As others, including Annabel Goldie, have said, it is not just the victims of domestic abuse—the women—who suffer; it is also the children who witness the abuse. I hope that the criminal justice bill, with its emphasis on the issue of corroboration, will be a positive move towards convictions for those horrific crimes. I want to concentrate on one particular part of the motion—Malcolm Chisholm mentioned lap dancing clubs and adult entertainment—basically, the commercial side of sexual exploitation. It is something that I and others have worked to address for many years and I am grateful that other members have mentioned the bill that I tried to put through. Many of the members who are in the chamber will remember that before the 2011 elections I tried to put forward legislation that would enable councils to say that when it came to any form of sexual exploitation such as lap dancing clubs, pole dancing, adult entertainment venues and strip clubs, even one was too many. The councils would have the power to say that they did not want such clubs in their areas. I thought that it was a perfectly good piece of legislation. Unfortunately, as members will recollect, when it was put forward with Government support, the Opposition voted it down. I am sorry about that, but I take heart from tonight’s speeches. It is a positive sign for the bill that I am proposing and also for the bill that has been proposed by Rhoda Grant. We should look at my bill and debate it and I hope that it will have cross-party support. I look forward to the debate on those members’ bills. I have been looking at the internet in relation to this topic and people have been sending me various newsworthy items as well. In the city of Aberdeen, there was a recent application for a new strip club. If it had been approved, Aberdeen would have had eight strip clubs—fortunately the application was thrown out. That would have been the largest number of such clubs in any city in Scotland. It would have been the same number as in central London. I am reminded of the South Ayrshire application for a pole dancing club. The applicant was not going to apply but took heart from a change in council and also from the fact that Glasgow City Council was not allowed to stop such a club in Glasgow. The application was put forward and it was approved. Now we are looking at possibly four or five such clubs in the South Ayrshire area—not in a city. It is incumbent on us to say that legislation comes from the Parliament. It should be handed down to councils and they should have the right to say whether the local people want such a club. As Malcolm Chisholm and others have mentioned, thoughts of sexual abuse and sexual violence start somewhere. Where do people see that? Graeme Pearson mentioned the internet and Hanzala Malik mentioned the television. Women are looked upon as objects and not human beings. That is where things start from. It is also about education, and we should consider that. I am grateful for being allowed to speak in the debate and hope that people will support the legislation that will come through.

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate and I wish her a speedy recovery. I am sure that she would have been fantastic and I hope that I will say much of what she wanted to say. It is an honour to lead a debate to celebrate migrants’ rights day and to mark the 22nd anniversary of the “International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families”, which was adopted by the United Nations general assembly in 1990. The United Nations says: “Throughout human history, migration has been a courageous expression of the individual’s will to overcome adversity and to live a better life.” As globalisation has increased, the number of people who have the desire and the ability to migrate has also increased. In the past 10 years, the total number of international migrants has increased from an estimated 150 million to 214 million. It is interesting that women account for 49 per cent of migrants worldwide. After adoption of the convention, a first round of high-level dialogue on international migration and development took place in 2006. Participating member states affirmed a number of key messages. First, they underscored that international migration is a growing phenomenon that can make a positive contribution to development in countries of origin and destination, provided that it is supported by the right policies. Secondly, they emphasised that respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of all migrants is essential if we are to reap the benefits of international migration. Thirdly, they recognised the importance of strengthening international co-operation on international migration bilaterally, regionally and globally. The next round of high-level dialogue will take place next year and will give member states and their partners a chance to discuss practical measures to facilitate labour mobility, to foster sustainable development and to protect the rights of migrants, especially women and girls. As the secretary general of the UN said in his address to mark this year’s migrants’ rights day: “Attention to the rights of migrants is especially important at this time of global economic and financial distress. As budgets tighten, we are seeing austerity measures that discriminate against migrant workers, xenophobic rhetoric that encourages violence against irregular migrants, and proposed immigration laws that allow the police to profile migrants with impunity. During economic downturns, it is worth remembering that whole sectors of the economy depend on migrant workers and migrant entrepreneurs to help to create jobs. When migration policies are developed without attention to vulnerability, marginalization and discrimination, millions of migrants become cheap, disposable labour, the scapegoats for failed economic and social policies, and even casualties in an ill-defined war against ‘illegal migration’.” It is a sad fact that in such difficult times, attitudes to migration harden. We must ensure that here in Scotland we continue to welcome migrants, who make a positive contribution to our society. It is perhaps timely, therefore, that only yesterday it was reported that Scotland’s population has hit a record high of nearly 5.3 million people after a surge in inward migration and increased life expectancy. As the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs has said, those figures represent a “historic moment for our country ... A decade and more of devolution has delivered a growing and record high population. That is not simply a sign of the dynamic, attractive nation we are building. It is also a key factor in delivering economic growth in future years.” Everyone in the chamber will have among their constituents many first-class migrant workers—people who came here not just to work within and help to boost our economy, but to help to enrich our country with their cultures and their attitudes. They should be praised for that. Instead, we sometimes see xenophobic comments in certain tabloid newspapers, and some politicians have a very wrong hard-line attitude towards migrant workers. It is important that we have this debate so that people in Scotland and throughout the world can realise the worth of migrant workers. One organisation that is to be commended for its work in ensuring that migrants are welcome to Scotland and that they are able to become involved in the community is Migrants’ Rights Scotland. After setting up a separate organisation in Scotland in early 2010, it has supported migrants here in Scotland in a number of ways, including through the support of migrant community organisations, or MCOs. Without those volunteers, we would not know what was happening to migrants with regard to certain aspects of their experience, so it is incumbent on us to pay tribute to the workers in Migrants’ Rights Scotland for the hard work that they do to ensure that migrants have a welcome in our country. Also, as I said previously, the culture that migrants bring is greatly welcomed. MCOs help migrants to share information and expertise while allowing them to become part of their local communities by putting them in touch with local organisations and encouraging them to get involved. So far, the work that Migrants’ Rights Scotland has done has been hugely successful. However, there is much concern over recent changes to immigration policy by the United Kingdom Government. Those changes will have a detrimental impact on migration and even on migrants who are long-term British citizens. Undoubtedly the minister will be aware of those changes and how they will adversely affect migrants who already live here and those who wish to come here. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with the UK Government with regard to that? The portfolio of experiences that is currently being compiled by Migrants’ Rights Scotland on migrants’ hopes and fears will be presented to the family migration inquiry at Westminster early in 2013. However, would the minister consider setting up a migrants conference here in Scotland, to hear from migrants who live in Scotland, in the hope that it would inform any future approach by the Scottish Government to the Westminster Government on the issue? I am interested to hear the minister’s response. I draw members’ attention to the reception that is being held after the debate in committee room 2 to bring together representatives of minority civic society groups, migrants and their families and MSPs to develop a deeper understanding of who counts as a migrant and of the issues that face real people as a result of immigration policy. I believe that the minister will be attending the reception. I ask members who are here, and others, to come along to committee room 2 to hear about the real experiences of the people there.

I, too, welcome today’s debate on policing in Scotland. As the cabinet secretary has pointed out in both his speech and the Government’s amendment, it comes at a time when the number of police officers in Scotland has reached a record high and crime is at a record low. The general public welcomes that record, and am surprised that the Labour Party has not recognised it. It is important to acknowledge those achievements, and I hope that all parties will balance their views with recognition of the achievements that have been made. It is equally important to take a moment to recognise the hard work and dedication of all those who are involved in Scotland’s police force and to thank them for the work that they do in keeping our communities safe. That said, we cannot rest on those achievements alone. The Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill was passed with the support of the Labour Party. Although the Conservatives abstained and the Liberals opposed the bill, we were able to respond to the challenges that face the police service at a time—it must be mentioned—of unprecedented cuts to Scotland’s block grant, which we must acknowledge come directly from Westminster. As I said, the Labour Party supported the bill. In its manifesto, it stated that it would, if elected, “increase administrative efficiencies and free up resources for the frontline” by legislating “to deliver a single police force for Scotland”. I welcome that. One of the principal aims of the single police force is to avoid duplication, allowing the police service to protect front-line staff and front-line policing. I note Lewis Macdonald’s contribution to today’s debate, and to an extent I agree with some of his comments. It is important that there is a clear agreement between the chief constable and the chair of the Scottish Police Authority. As a member of the Justice Committee, I had the opportunity, as did others, to listen to evidence from the chief constable and the chair of the authority. They said that most areas of the new police structure had been agreed upon and that agreement will be reached in any other areas that require it.

The issue might be the language that has been used by some, such as “dispute”. We needed clarification, but I believe that the cabinet secretary has clarified that the chief constable and the chair have agreed and it will not be long before we have a full agreement on the matter. I believe that, if we think back, there has been a pragmatic approach to the establishment of a single police force, as we would expect. I have no doubt that both the chief constable and the chair of the SPA have the best interests of the police force in their minds and that they will work to achieve what is best for it. All of us in the Parliament should support them in doing that at this time. When the 2012 act was passed, members of other parties raised the issue of political interference in the police force and wanted assurances that that would not happen. I agreed with that 100 per cent, and I still agree with it fully. That is one reason why I am a little confused by Lewis Macdonald’s motion, which clearly calls for a significant degree of political interference in the police force—something that he did not want when the act was passed. It would be confusing—or perhaps a little disappointing—if Mr Macdonald’s motion sought to make political capital out of a situation that we all want to see resolved. It is worth noting the chief constable’s view on backfilling. He stated: “there is no plan or strategy for reform that I am in charge of that is predicated on backfilling.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 23 October 2012; c 1851.] I welcome the chief constable’s assurances that backfilling will not happen on his watch. I also welcome the fact that both the chair of the Police Authority board and the chief constable have stated that they are focused on delivering the best police force possible for the people of Scotland. We should support them in that aim.

I congratulate my colleague Christine Grahame on securing this important debate. Two or three years ago, I held a summit in Glasgow with the then minister Jim Mather on this very issue. The concerns that were raised then are being raised now, which makes the debate doubly important. I thank the Carnegie Trust for the briefing papers that it sent along, and I welcome its new project, neighbourhood news, which is a £50,000 competition to improve local news reporting that seeks applications to develop new and innovative ways of producing local news—I plug the fact that I have lodged a member’s motion on it. It is a very good initiative and that might get across some of the concerns of members, the newspaper industry and our constituents. I hope that the Presiding Office will indulge me if I widen the debate. The motion calls for a media panel. There has been talk about the newspaper industry, but I wonder whether the cabinet secretary, if she wanted to create such a panel, would widen it to include other aspects of the media, such as the entertainment industry, and look at the situation that it faces in Scotland as highlighted in the Equity make it in Scotland campaign. The campaign is supported by not just Equity’s branches in Scotland but all its branches in the United Kingdom and calls on the entertainment industry and Governments to invest in programmes that are made in Scotland. A quote from the Equity website about the campaign says: “Members are frustrated at not getting local opportunities, particularly because they believe there is a wealth of talent outside of London. ‘There’s a perception among the media elite that you can’t be any good unless you go to London, but why shouldn’t Scottish performers and crew be able to make a living in their own country?,’ said actor Michael Mackenzie. According to Ofcom, 61.8 per cent of spending by public service broadcasting channels in 2010 went to productions made within the M25. Productions in Scotland received 4.6 per cent of spending, Wales 2.6 per cent and Northern Ireland 0.4 per cent.” The issue is clearly a live one. I have spoken previously to Equity about the matter, and I went to Equity’s make it in Scotland reception that it held in the Parliament on Tuesday night. It basically said that some programmes that are not made in Scotland are labelled as being made in Scotland. Equity is not calling for all Scottish programmes to have only Scottish actors; it is just asking for justice and fairness. I know that the powers to make some media regulations—such as those relating to Ofcom—are not delegated to the Scottish Parliament but, as others have said, the issue is not just about radio or newspapers. Margo MacDonald—she is no longer in the chamber—made the valid point that we must get the situation in Scotland sorted first. If we are losing talent, how can that talent be replaced? I make the plea that if we are looking at having such a panel, we involve other parts of the industry, including the entertainment industry. We have Creative Scotland; we have had loads of fantastic films made, particularly in the Glasgow area; we have had Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt—to name just a few of the people involved, although I did not meet when they were in Glasgow. That shows the strength that we have to make productions in Scotland.

As one of the laypeople the cabinet secretary mentioned, I was very interested in his answers. What is the average length of custodial sentence for those who are convicted of serious crimes such as handling offensive weapons?

It is a great pleasure to speak in this debate. I congratulate my colleague Linda Fabiani on securing the debate and on all the work that she has done on the issue. I also congratulate the members of the previous cross-party group on asylum seekers and refugees, the Refugee Survival Trust and the Scottish Refugee Council. I start by commenting on the news that came through today or last night that 150 unopened boxes of applications for asylum in the UK have been found. They have been there for God knows how many months, or even years. That shows just how bad the system is in this country. We must highlight the fact that those applications are sitting there, unopened, while people are waiting for them just to be looked at, never mind put through the system. We really need to take that on board. Zimbabwe, Iraq and Afghanistan have been mentioned as countries from which asylum seekers have fled. Those people absolutely deserve our help and security. What has not been mentioned is the fact that there are some people in this country who cannot go back to their own country. That is recognised by the UK, which tells asylum seekers who come from countries on a list that it holds: “Sorry, you can’t get asylum, but it’s too dangerous for you to go back to your own country so we’re going to make you destitute.” Those people have nowhere else to go and through no fault of their own have had to flee violence, yet the UK will not give them the succour that they deserve. We must remember that there are certain people in this country who are told that they cannot go back to their own country because it is not safe, but, because they will not be given asylum here, they can go out and sleep on the streets. Linda Fabiani mentioned the gentleman who died on the bus. I met that gentleman. He got help, to an extent, as everyone else did—he had a sleeping bag from the Simon Community. He slept in a graveyard one night, in the winter time, and he was not a young man. Perhaps lots of people in Glasgow knew that gentleman pretty well, yet we could not help him in the end. That is a terrible indictment not just of us, but of humanity. That is what this is about—it is about humanity, and trying to help those people, because we are all human beings. People have mentioned constituents. Whether or not people have a right to remain here, if they live in my constituency, they are obviously my constituents. I will tell members about two of my constituents. One is a gentleman who has leave to remain—he has a British passport. The other is a lady who is still awaiting a final decision, having been here for six or seven years. They applied to the UK Border Agency to get married—they were living together, having met at college, where they were learning English—and the UKBA said yes. However, now the lady has been refused leave to remain, and they are looking at an appeal. She has been told to go back to her own country and apply from there, and that her husband should go back with her. I will not name them or say which country they come from, but I ask members to guess how old they are. They are 63 years of age, yet—despite the fact that the husband has a British passport—they are being told to go back to their country and that maybe they will be able to apply to come back in. What does that say about the UK as a whole? A 63-year-old couple, who are doing nobody any harm whatsoever and who bring great joy to the community that they live in, are being told that they cannot stay and that they must go back. That shows what an absolute disgrace the asylum system is. I will finish on a wee point that other members will probably make. Those people are my constituents—but they are everyone’s constituents, too. We deal with such people daily and it is about time that the UK Government recognised that and recognised that we should be able to represent our constituents.

There are some good MPs who will do that work, but there are some MPs who will not. As parliamentarians, we cannot cross that line. We need to get those powers here, so that we can to represent those two 63-year-olds, who do nobody any harm and bring a great deal of good to our country.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its international development strategy is in relation to the occupied Palestinian territories. (S4O-01484)

I congratulate the Fire Brigades Union Scotland on the Palestinian training project for which the Government has provided money. The minister will be aware of recent developments by the Israeli Government to construct 1,285 houses in east Jerusalem and the West Bank in a move that has been condemned by Foreign Office minister Alistair Burt as illegal under international law. He will also be aware of the killing of Palestinians in Gaza yesterday in Israeli air strikes reminiscent of operation cast lead, which saw more than 1,000 Gazans killed. Does the minister agree that those actions are against humanity and against international law? What role can the Scottish Government play in alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian people?

I congratulate John Mason on bringing the debate to the chamber. The 2014 Commonwealth games is a great opportunity for Scotland to showcase exactly what the great city of Glasgow—my home city and constituency—has to offer. I am talking not just about the buildings, but the people who live there and—as John Mason said—the whole of Scotland. I will mention some of the regeneration that has been happening in my Kelvin constituency. One project that has benefited directly from the 2014 games is the upgrade of the subway stations. That work—particularly the Hillhead upgrade—has been fantastic. I must mention the mural at Hillhead, although I will not dwell on it too much.

I thank Patricia Ferguson very much for mentioning the mural, and I congratulate Alasdair Gray on the fantastic work that he has done. The mural is hugely popular in the area—that is all that I will say. The next step of the upgrade is the Kelvinhall subway station, which is the gateway to the Kelvingrove art galleries and Kelvingrove park, where we have excellent grass facilities. The bowling competitions will be held in Kelvingrove park, and I was there—along with the minister—to open the new bowling greens. They are wonderful, and people talk about them all the time. We also have the walkway along the River Clyde, which is getting an upgrade, and there will be transport along there. I would like more money to be spent on that particular project, especially on the part at Custom House Quay. The idea is that people will be able to cycle or walk all the way from the SECC to Glasgow Green and on to the east end. I look forward to that walkway being completed, as it is a fantastic project. John Mason mentioned volunteering. That is an excellent project, and I am sure that we will get even more volunteers than we ask for. I point out to the minister—I have raised this with the 2014 Commonwealth games teams—that I have been approached by a number of groups in my constituency, as I am sure other MSPs have, that want to find out how they would go about taking part in the opening ceremony. There are some excellent groups in my Kelvin constituency. There is a dance group called Indepen-dance that includes people with various levels of disability. It has performed in the Parliament, which was fantastic, and it would be wonderful for the group to take part in the opening ceremony. Another group is called—I will say this very carefully—the Partick pluckers. It is a wonderful group of elderly people who play the banjo and sing, and it is based at Stewartville Street in Partick. There is also the Glasgow Old People’s Welfare Association, and many other groups. Perhaps the minister can let me and other members know how those groups might be able to get involved in the opening ceremony. As I have only 40 seconds left, I ask the minister if she could possibly get in touch with Glasgow City Council about the regeneration of George Square. A lot of constituents have come to me to discuss that issue. The square will be closed for something like two years, and it seems crazy that, while we are thinking about regeneration, we are not considering traffic-calming measures around the square. Perhaps the minister can take that suggestion on board; I have put it into the consultation. People are concerned that the square itself will be closed off for two years and may not be ready in time for the Commonwealth games.

Aside from the construction of the new prison at Inverclyde, which is long overdue, and dealing with the situation at Cornton Vale, what other initiatives have been introduced as a result of the recommendations made by Elish Angiolini’s commission?

I warmly welcome Humza Yousaf to his role as Minister for External Affairs and International Development and wish him well; I know that he will do very well in it. I have known Humza from the very beginning, and I know that his heart is in the right place. A role in external affairs and international development is made for him. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning for his announcement of £100,000 for postgraduate scholarships in Malawi. We all know that education is knowledge and that, through knowledge, people can evolve. I think that it is an excellent initiative, which I look forward to reading more about, and I congratulate the Government and the education secretary on it. I pay tribute to all those organisations and individuals who have been involved in the partnership with Malawi—they include schools, Mary’s Meals and politicians from every party. Lord McConnell has been mentioned, and I congratulate him on his work. However, like Liam McArthur and others, I think that Karen Gillon deserves a special mention. Along with Ted Brocklebank, she was a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, whose executive committee I am a member of. Throughout her time on the CPA, she had a special interest in Malawi, which extended to her personal life. I put on record my thanks to her and Ted Brocklebank for the excellent work that they carried out on behalf of the CPA and the Parliament. I have mentioned the CPA because I want to base my remarks on the involvement of the CPA with Malawi and what we gain from that involvement. It is not just about the contribution of the members of the Scottish Parliament—those whom I have mentioned and others—but also about the contribution of the Scottish Parliament staff. Not a lot has been said about the involvement of the Scottish Parliament staff with Malawi through the CPA. I will name a couple of projects that went through the CPA—there were study visits by Malawi committee clerks to the Scottish Parliament, who learned from that experience, and Scottish Parliament committee clerks have held workshops in Malawi to show what we do here and to share their expertise. There has also been a successful internship programme when a Malawian clerk came over here and shadowed and worked closely with the Parliament staff. That is partnership working. Engagement with Malawi has provided a direct international perspective for MSPs and Parliament staff and has allowed them to work with people in Malawi as equal partners—that is an important point—to share knowledge and experience. The CPA Scotland branch and its members are keen to ensure that that special relationship between our two countries continues for many years to come. I am sure that under Humza Yousaf’s stewardship it will. Arrangements are being put in place to invite two Malawian officials to the Scottish Parliament for an intensive work-study visit early next year. We also have a group of MSPs who are paired with members of the National Assembly of Malawi—Maureen Watt, Sarah Boyack, Patricia Ferguson, me and others. We believe that working together on that initiative will strengthen democracy in both Parliaments. In May 2010, Annie Lennox, the musician and campaigner, became the special envoy for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland branch for Africa, focusing on women—

I welcome that intervention from Patricia Ferguson and I agree with her suggestion. Perhaps this can be a free advert for any interested colleagues to contact Margaret Neal, who is secretary to the CPA. They are more than welcome to join us. I think that everyone knows that Annie Lennox became a special envoy, but what I am very proud of is that it was the CPA Scotland branch that initiated that. Annie Lennox gladly got involved and is now famous, not just in her own right, but as a special envoy for the CPA and for the Scottish Parliament. She takes that good will throughout Africa, and particularly in Malawi. Annie Lennox has embarked on a campaign to tackle HIV and AIDS issues across Africa. Her role as a special envoy for the CPA Scotland branch is to report back on those issues regularly, with a particular focus on Malawi. Annie visited Malawi in February 2011 with the former presiding officer, Alex Fergusson. They met the Speaker of the National Assembly, politicians who were involved in the Scottish Parliament pairing initiative and the Malawian Parliament’s women’s caucus. They came back to the Scottish Parliament a month later and reported on that visit. It is important to let people know that, although we do not always agree on things in this Parliament—sometimes we think that some things are being done wrong—on this particular issue we all agree. We should be particularly proud of that. Yes, there is work to be done, but it has been started and we should be particularly proud that this Parliament has such a close mutual link with Malawi and the people who live there.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the model of microfinance proposed by the Grameen Scotland Foundation for tackling poverty. (S4O-01410)

I welcome the Scottish Government’s support for the project, which was devised by Nobel laureate and new chancellor of Glasgow Caledonian University, Muhammad Yunus, and has been inspirational all over the globe. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the university is to examine the long-term impact of Grameen lending on communities. Will the Scottish Government support that work and, if so, how will it feed that research into its own communities strategy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Are you saying that members can make any remark that they wish as long as they are not standing up? That is what Mr Henry did, but no one told him to desist.

As a new member of the Justice Committee, I think that the debate has been a good one. All the contributions so far—whether they were from members of the committee or not—have been very informative for me and for other members, and perhaps even for those in the public gallery. I will concentrate on a few points that members and interested parties have raised. First, I will touch on the proposed Scottish civil justice council. Having looked through the papers and read the Justice Committee’s report, I believe that the council will be an agent of change. It will have a much wider role than the rules councils for the sheriff courts and the Court of Session, which—as members have mentioned—it will replace. I believe that giving the council a wider role to advise and make recommendations on improving the civil justice system is generally a good thing. Jenny Marra and other members raised the point about lay members of the new council, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s reply that he will address that issue in his speech. I want to ask the cabinet secretary a couple of questions about the civil justice council, which will undergo changes throughout the years as the justice system changes. Does the cabinet secretary view the council as an evolving body? Can he reassure members that, if the changes are to take place, they will be monitored and—as my colleague mentioned—checks and balances will be put in place to ensure that there is full transparency in the council and discussion at a parliamentary level or otherwise? Part 2 of the bill refers to criminal legal assistance. I have respect for Malcolm Chisholm and I take on board what he has said. However, if we are to protect access to the justice system as far as possible in relation to civil and criminal cases, we must target legal assistance at those who need it the most. It is right for those who can afford to pay towards the cost of their defence to do so, which is what happens at present with civil legal aid. The expansion of contributions brings criminal legal aid in line with civil legal aid and corrects a manifest injustice in the current system. Malcolm Chisholm and the cabinet secretary have both mentioned that issue. However, is it right that a victim of domestic violence must go to court to protect herself and be liable for a contribution to civil legal aid while the perpetrator of the crime can receive full criminal legal aid even if they have far greater financial resources? To my mind, that is grossly unfair and I think that most people would see it in that way. Almost every member has mentioned the £68 threshold. As I said, I have been reading through the papers as a new member of the Justice Committee, and my understanding is that the starting figure of £68 per week is not—as Mary Fee mentioned in her contribution—gross income or even take-home income. It is what is left after deductions, and there is quite a long list of deductions. It includes housing costs, council tax, childcare costs, loan repayments, maintenance repayments, costs associated with disability—which have been mentioned and which I will pick up on—and an allowance for dependent spouses and children. On top of that, the board has the discretion to waive a contribution if it would cause undue hardship. We need to look at that particular issue, but we have had assurances that the £68 figure can be reviewed. Like others, I thank the cabinet secretary for what he said about DLA, which I regard as a positive step. I also thank Inclusion Scotland for its welcome briefing and positive comments on the subject of legal aid and benefits. I echo other members’ comments about the decision not to take DLA and PIP into account with regard to the bill’s provisions.

Obviously, those are Westminster issues, so perhaps the member should speak to her Westminster colleagues about them. In that respect, I believe that the war widow’s pension, too, should not be taxable. I will finish with a quote from Inclusion Scotland that may, in fact, address the issue that Jenny Marra just raised. With reference to not taking DLA and PIP into account, Inclusion Scotland said: “This is particularly salient in the context of the significant cumulative damage already being done to disabled people’s incomes under the UK Government’s welfare reforms.” We should support the bill at stage 1.

I will try to be as speedy as I can be, to allow everyone to speak. At the Justice Committee meeting, one witness—Iain McKie—made the good point that “we cannot put the genie back in the bottle”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1775.] He could very well be right. Of course, we cannot stop—and, perhaps importantly, some people would not want to stop—the growth of certain media and people’s access to it. It is important to debate the role of the media in the justice system in order to listen to both sides of the argument, and I hope that we can move towards a consensus on the best way forward. Some argue that we need to look more closely at the juror system and even suggest that we should explore the possibility of having professional jurors. I take on board the minister’s comments on jurors, but I would like to touch on that aspect. The idea of professional jurors involves jurors being trained to understand the complexities of some cases and have expert knowledge, or being given a better understanding of the media and social media in particular. A recent—unintended—case of expert jurors in America springs to mind. In a patent dispute between two very well-known companies over the use of software, one juror was revealed to have expert knowledge of software. In his words, he was quickly able to see that copyright had been infringed. In an interview after the trial, he said that he was able to inform the other jurors of his knowledge, and the reasons for his decisions helped the jury to reach a verdict much more quickly than it might have done without him. In that case, having a juror with expert knowledge of a complex issue seems to have helped in reaching a verdict, but I am still to be convinced that moving towards a system in which all jurors are professionally appointed is the way to go. The professionalisation of the jury service could raise a number of questions about its impartiality, which is of serious concern, although I take on board what the minister said. We all know that our jury system is intended to represent a broad section of society and to involve people of many differing backgrounds, professions and opinions, who can reach some form of consensus. However, I admit that, given the complexity of some criminal trials, many jurors may feel somewhat overwhelmed—other members have mentioned that. In such cases, it would be a good idea to explore the possibility of offering impartial expert advice on the issue and on points of law that are being discussed. On broadcasting criminal trials, I have sympathy with the idea of having wider access, transparency and therefore oversight of trials in general, but it is important for any move towards more coverage to ensure that the principle of protection for the victims and the accused is paramount. Many witnesses expressed concern to the Justice Committee about the need to protect victims and witnesses from any undue stress as a result of the media’s role. Going to court can be a difficult experience for many, as they have to relive the crime that was perpetrated against them and face the accused. That can be traumatic, as Lewis Macdonald said. As was mentioned in the committee’s evidence session, it is true that many witnesses come forward reluctantly. However, if they did not come forward in the first place, we might not get a conviction for many crimes, especially those of a violent or sexual nature. That issue is of paramount importance in informing any proposals. Conversely, it is also important to protect those who are accused. Many people have mentioned Aamer Anwar. In his evidence, he noted that it is important to protect the rights of the accused who are subsequently acquitted. I agree that that is important. We have all read about cases—some have been mentioned—in which the police have released the name and details of their suspect, only for that to be the wrong person. In the time that it has taken for the mistake to be corrected, the media have seized on that information and, in the process of reporting, put the suspect and their family under considerable stress. That can also be the case with trials, which are highly publicised. Even if the accused is acquitted, they may find themselves having to live with the public perception that they are somehow guilty by association for many years to come. If reform is needed—and I say “if”—it must be done as carefully as possible to ensure that people have the right to a fair trial by their peers and that those who are involved in the criminal trial are protected at all times. The genie cannot be put back in the bottle, but—as in many stories involving genies—we must be very careful about how we deal with the issue once the genie is out of the bottle.

4. To ask the Deputy First Minister what progress is being made with reducing waiting times for treatment for drug misuse. (S4F-00883)

That is great news and everyone should be grateful for what is happening. I congratulate everyone—from families to professionals—who has worked so hard to achieve the target. What is the next stage for the future delivery of the strategy, which is vital for people who are tackling drug addiction?

Although the motion is on the public consultation on the Carloway report about reforming Scots criminal law and practice, most of the speeches have focused on corroboration, to which I will return. A number of aspects of the proposed reform have been generally welcomed and accepted. The cabinet secretary and other members have mentioned them. They are: a simplified unitary system of arrest on reasonable grounds for suspicion and detention; an arrest will trigger a set of rights, including access to a lawyer; any proceedings against the suspect should constitute a fair trial; and suspects who are charged should be brought before the court within 36 hours of arrest. The cabinet secretary raised those issues in his speech, particularly that of legal advice and representation. I completely take on board the cabinet secretary’s and other members’ comments on the legal aid budget. The Justice Committee, of which I became a member today, is looking at that issue. I very much look forward to seeing exactly what is happening to the legal aid budget and hope that justice will be served for people who want to access legal aid through that budget. I return to corroboration. Many have said that our current rule is archaic, that other countries do not have it, and that we must move with the times into the 21st century. We have to change and move into the 21st century in some areas. I absolutely take on board John Finnie’s point about two police officers being needed to corroborate a label, although Christine Grahame’s intervention seemed to make that particular aspect of John Finnie’s contribution slightly redundant. I take the point on board, but I am very concerned about how the removal of corroboration would be perceived by the general public.

I thank Christine Grahame for pushing that point even further. I know that John Finnie accepted her point in his reply to her intervention. As I was saying, I am concerned about how the removal of the requirement for corroboration will be perceived by the public. Corroboration is not just about the need for two witnesses. It is much deeper and more complex than that. I believe that my colleague Stewart Maxwell will go into the issue in more detail, so I will leave it to him. However, I want to raise two constituency cases that I dealt with that might have a bearing on corroboration. In the first case, someone reported my constituent for alleged racial abuse. The police came to their door and they were taken into custody and kept in a police cell for two nights. There was no corroboration. It was one person’s word against the other’s. In the second incident, a lady was arrested for alleged homophobic remarks. She was taken down to the police station, questioned and asked for evidence. Again, there was no corroboration and it was one person’s word against the other’s.

I thank Mr Finnie for the explanation. I just put it down to, perhaps, Strathclyde Police being overzealous in those two cases, but I accept his explanation and I will perhaps look forward to Strathclyde Police coming back with the same explanation for those incidents. There have been other, similar incidents. I raise them simply because constituents have raised them with me, and the issue is something that we should bear in mind. A number of members have mentioned Scottish Women Aid. On page 11 of its response to the consultation, it answers the question “Should the requirement for corroboration be abolished?” It states: “Overall, we are undecided on this difficult matter as there are compelling arguments for, and against, removing corroboration ... The arguments broadly in favour of removing corroboration refer mainly to the issue that it is a ‘quantitative’, numerical, counting test requiring the presence of at least two sources of evidence to assess ‘sufficiency’, as opposed to a ‘qualitative’ test of these sources. On the other hand, the case in favour of retaining corroboration states that abolition would require the Fiscal to base their assessment of the success, or otherwise, of a likely prosecution solely on the basis of the complainer’s evidence, meaning that Fiscals would spend more time assessing credibility and reliability. Unintended consequences could arise in relation to the treatment of victims in domestic abuse and rape and sexual assault cases; removal of corroboration, particularly in rape cases, would likely place a greater emphasis on their testimony, character, sexual history, medical history, etc, with the defence arguing that questioning has to be more ‘robust’ and probing.” I know that the proposals are out to consultation, but those important points must be kept in mind. I also mention that, although the requirement for corroboration has been removed in England and Wales, conviction rates have not risen. In conclusion, I ask everyone to put forward their thoughts in the consultation.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its priorities are for the next tranche of funding from the cashback for communities programme. (S4O-01289)

It is excellent news that so many young people and communities are benefiting from the initiative. However, will the cabinet secretary confirm that the amounts that have been raised under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 are still capped, with any excess going to the London Treasury—something that I think everyone will find simply unacceptable and outrageous? Does the cabinet secretary believe that we can achieve cross-party consensus in the Parliament to put pressure on the United Kingdom Government on the issue in order to ensure that any moneys taken from criminals in Scotland benefit the communities blighted by those criminals?

I have been following the proposed bill with a lot of interest since the idea was first put forward in the SNP’s manifesto, and I very much support it. The minister and the previous minister will know that I was never out of the office, pushing the bill on, because it is very important. I appreciate that it has taken a while to get it where it is today, but we are here now and it is a great opportunity to give local people a real say in their communities. Margaret Mitchell mentioned what she said were some good things in the proposed bill. I absolutely agree with you, Margaret, about common good funds—they have to be looked at—and community gardens. However, if we took out of the motion what the amendment in her name suggests that we take out, it would not say that we are to look positively on the “partnership with COSLA, local authorities and the wider public” and it would not say that we are to congratulate the huge number of people throughout the country who dedicate their time and energy to making “a positive difference in their communities”. That seems to be what the Tory amendment would make the motion not say. Instead, it talks about demoralising people and stifling community empowerment.

I leave it to the Tories to talk about that. As my colleague has just said, the Tories are the experts in demoralising people and stifling communities. I am sorry to see that type of amendment being lodged.

I accept your explanation. It is a pity that that was not part of the amendment, which certainly did not read that way to me. The bill is all about what the member says—giving people more powers to be involved in their communities. Members have talked about local government. The concordat between the Scottish Government and local government has its detractors—we have heard from a few of them today—but its real aim is to devolve more power over decision making to local authorities so that they can decide what their priorities are. Surely that is a good thing. Although we may debate that in another sphere, it must be a good thing to be able to work together to give real power to local communities. The Labour Party’s amendment seems entirely reasonable. The community right to buy, which Sarah Boyack mentioned, is one of the Scottish Parliament’s landmark achievements. Like Sarah Boyack and others, I hope that the experience of rural communities will generally inform the process to be followed in urban areas. For instance, in Glasgow—in my constituency and in others—we have often looked on enviously as communities in rural areas have been able to take forward a real vision of what they see as a local asset and have been able to provide it to the community, being able to take over public assets. It would be fantastic if we could do that in inner cities as well. Members have cited examples from their areas. There is a fantastic building at the bottom of Byres Road, in my constituency, which used to be the old Church Street baths. When I have been walking around my constituency, people have asked me on numerous occasions whether we can turn the building back into swimming baths, but I do not know. They have also said, “It’s a great building. Can we turn it into a market?” I do not know, although I have written letters about it. If we can get a commitment to turn it into something that people would dedicate themselves to, that would be absolutely fantastic. It would also be fantastic if the bill could give us the necessary tools to do that. Since the consultation opened, I have sent out loads of messages to my contacts to ask them to respond, and I know that they have done so. People are very excited and energised about what the bill could do for them, and local communities will certainly use the opportunities that it provides. Community planning partnerships, community councils and local groups are working together, but they sometimes feel that they are hindered by current legislation and the lack of devolved decision making at a local level. I ask the minister and encourage the Government to work closely with those groups, local authorities and others to facilitate the devolution of more power to local communities. We can learn from what has already been achieved. One example of good practice is the Glasgow Woodlands Community Development Trust, which was set up in 1985 by local residents with support from Glasgow City Council and, later on, from the Scottish Parliament. It has gone from strength to strength, involving local nurseries and schools, and it is a fantastic community asset. The climate change fund, zero waste Scotland and—as I said—Glasgow City Council have all helped in taking it forward. Another example is the SAGE—sow and grow everywhere—project, which is in the middle of Glasgow city centre, not far from where I live. I have an allotment there, although I must admit that I should get my green fingers out and do some work. The project has been taken forward with Government funding and help, and we need to look at that type of thing. It is important that we give local communities a say, and the provisions in the bill will enable us to do that. I look forward to further consultation and to examining the ideas that come in, and—I hope—to another debate to scrutinise the consultation results. The bill is really good, and I congratulate the minister on taking it forward.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing the debate. I concur with most of what she said—I have been a fan of “River City” since its inception. Talking about modern media, I have tweeted about “River City” quite often and someone came back and said that perhaps I would like to go and have a tea in Gina’s cafe. I would love to have a tea in Gina’s cafe, although I am not auditioning at the moment. I have met Gina on many occasions, particularly at Queen’s Cross Housing Association events in Maryhill—I know that Patricia Ferguson knows her well, too—where she does a lot of charity work. “River City” is fantastic—look at the dedication of those involved and the talent and expertise that it has produced over the years. It has raised issues pertinent to Scotland. It encapsulates all that is good in Scottish broadcasting. The motion mentions the 10th anniversary of “River City” in September 2012. I remind the chamber—and perhaps Jackie Baillie in particular—about the fact that in September 2011, the BBC was trying to close down “River City”. I have a copy of a press release about that. Notable figures such as Andy Murray and Lorraine Kelly signed a petition to keep “River City” going. So just last September, the BBC was talking about axing “River City”. It is apt to raise that. Jackie Baillie touched on certain aspects of BBC Scotland, although perhaps not in the way that I will touch on them, and John Finnie raised the issue of BBC Scotland job losses during First Minister’s questions today. There are various issues around the BBC—issues that I have raised—to do with cuts to programmes and to funding for Scottish broadcasting. The First Minister, in his reply to John Finnie, said that that was absolutely disgraceful—and I think so, too. Unlike Jackie Baillie, I think that we should be pushing for more broadcasting powers to come to Scotland in order to ensure that programmes such as “River City” are not axed and people do not lose their jobs. A 16 per cent cut in funding from the BBC will have terrible adverse effects. It is not just the people who petitioned last year who are concerned about that. I have a letter from a member of the Scottish committee of Equity, which states: “Equity is launching a campaign calling for more television drama to be made in Scotland using the talent that lives here.” It is a very good letter and I will be happy to pass it to the cabinet secretary. It goes on to say that, in recent years, too many jobs have been moved down to London, “employment prospects of technicians in Scotland” are being lost and the performers in these fantastic programmes “have been ignored”. I would like the cabinet secretary to take that on board. Annabel Goldie said that the programme is relevant to Scotland’s social issues, and she is absolutely right. Most recently, the obesity situation with Big Bob has touched the hearts of many people—not just men, but women as well—including people who did not realise the adverse effects of obesity, such as diabetes. The issue of trafficking was covered recently as well, and I thought that the way it was handled was fantastic. The programme has also raised the issues of drugs and alcohol, death, marital break-ups, problems within the family—all issues that are pertinent not just to Scottish society, but to society as a whole. As I said, I have been a fan of “River City” for many years, during which I have watched it develop. Even in the past nine months, it has changed its tune slightly, if members will pardon the pun, because there is certainly more music in it. In focusing on certain issues, it has really touched the hearts of the Scottish people and reflected what they are going through. We had the situation in which the doctor went over to Liberia to help people there, and the programme showed a pan shot of Glasgow in which poverty was rife. That was very touching. It certainly touched me, and I imagine that it touched many other people. The doctor was going to another country to help people there, but we saw a pan shot of the real poverty in Glasgow. “River City” is a fantastic programme and a fantastic production. I praise everybody who takes part in it, but I also want to raise the issue of the funding cuts. Let us not forget that, exactly a year ago, in September 2011, the BBC was going to axe the programme. If it was not for the campaign that was run by a newspaper and people such as Andy Murray and Lorraine Kelly and the many others who signed the petition, we might not be having this debate today. I ask people to remember that, and the fact that the forthcoming cuts to the BBC could still lead to the axing of the programme.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During the exchange with Neil Findlay regarding the First Minister and the tweeting or whatever it may be, the question was also asked how Neil Findlay could find out about it. While the First Minister was not using a device in the chamber, Neil Findlay was. So, is there not an order against him?

The member referred to powers for ministers. Does he agree with me and many others that, rather than just muck about, it would be best for the Scottish Parliament to have full powers over the benefits system in order to protect vulnerable people, particularly given that the Tories have said that they will bring in regional benefits, which in fact even Labour proposed?

I was not going to speak in this debate, but I have been appalled by what the Labour Opposition has been saying. I have always had great respect for Patricia Ferguson and thank her for introducing this subject for debate, if only to see exactly what the Opposition has to say on the matter. Basically, the debate has been nothing more than a moan and an attack on the SNP Government. The Opposition parties were in power from 1999. Paul Martin highlighted the differences in his constituency, but when Labour was in power in Springburn, Maryhill, Baillieston and Provan, what did it do?

I am sorry, but no. What did Labour do in the years for which it was in power to help our young people in disadvantaged and other areas get on and meet their educational aspirations? Absolutely nothing. Labour members should not give me their crocodile tears on this matter.

No. I am a great proponent of colleges; indeed, I came up through the college route. I did an access course at Cardonald College and then went to Glasgow Caledonian University and the University of Glasgow. I am very much in favour of and speak to colleges. Stow College is in my constituency—the other college that has been mentioned is not—and, having spoken to Robert McGrory, I know that although the college is quite annoyed and upset it is nevertheless willing to work with people to get on and ensure that it has a future for students. I have visited Stow College, Metropolitan College and Central College and the answer to the situation is, as Joan McAlpine has pointed out, amalgamation. The letter from North Glasgow College, John Wheatley College and Stow College makes it clear that their boards have endorsed the merger; Anniesland College, Metropolitan College and Central College, too, have endorsed it.

Everyone—not just the Scottish Government, but local elected politicians—has a duty to speak to the staff and other people in the colleges. The way in which Patricia Ferguson started this debate does not help the consensus one bit. The Opposition is playing a blame game; it has no answers. We need to get together and ensure that the colleges work together.

I did not criticise Patricia Ferguson one bit about her comments about the merger; I was criticising her for not working together on this matter and not pointing out that the merger represents a way forward that has been accepted and welcomed by colleges. Instead of using further education as a political football as the Opposition parties have done, we should be looking for positive outcomes and trying to get round the table to find out how we can bring positive attitudes into further education.

I thank Kezia Dugdale for her informative speech—I will certainly visit the cafe that is just around the corner from here. I also thank Nanette Milne for initiating the debate. As many members have said, the problem affects many families throughout Scotland. Neil Bibby and other members were correct to mention the consensus in the debate. We all feel exactly the same way—we want to do something positive and work together. I will expand on the benefits changes that the Westminster Government has proposed, and which Maureen Watt touched on. Under those changes, claimants who have drug and alcohol problems will be forced into accepting treatment. Otherwise, their benefits will be cut. Kezia Dugdale has talked about people with chaotic lifestyles being forced into treatment. It is difficult for such people to cope with bureaucracy. Conservative members should let their counterparts in Westminster know what we are doing in Scotland and tell them that the proposals will be counterproductive to the work that is being undertaken in Parliament and throughout Scotland. The changes are the worst thing that could happen to drug users. The demands that will be made on them will do more harm than good. Christine Duncan of Scottish Families Affected by Drugs said: “Proposals from the UK Government to link benefits with accessing drug and alcohol treatment are quite worrying as this would have the impact of adding pressure to someone’s personal attempts at recovery which can only impact even more on families and carers. We support the Scottish Drugs Forum call to the Scottish Government to maintain the thrust of the Road to Recovery.” I accept what Nanette Milne said about recovery and relapse, but we need to look at the benefits system, because the changes will do more harm than good. I pay tribute to the many groups and individuals who face every day the reality of drug abuse and its tragic consequences. For example, Glasgow North United Communities provides fantastic support to families and individuals whose lives have been affected and, in many cases, completely destroyed by drug abuse. As Neil Bibby and other members have, I have visited many such groups and individuals in the Glasgow area and know of situations in which grandparents look after their grandchildren, sometimes while still looking after their grown-up children who have drug problems. There are individuals who have reached rock-bottom and if it was not for the support of families and support groups, they simply would not be here today. I take my hat off to those grandparents. I will not recount individual constituents’ stories, but some of those stories would have you on your knees. They are people who are just trying to get through life. Kezia Dugdale and others have referred to the stigma of drug abuse. We talk about families in terms of grandparents, mothers, brothers, sisters and fathers, but there is a bigger family out there and people with drugs problems have to spend a long while in recovery mode before they can get back into the family group as a mother or father, for example. I pay tribute to the effort that such people make. They sometimes do not have support at the start, but they tend to find it. However, it can still take them many years to recover. Members may think that I am not being consensual in terms of the debate, but I believe that we need to look at the UK Government’s benefits changes. I hope that we are trying to ensure that people with drug problems are on the road to recovery and will not relapse, but if they are forced into getting treatment that may not be suitable for them, they probably will relapse and all the good work will be wasted.

I am very pleased to speak in this Equal Opportunities Committee debate. As a previous member of that committee, I am proud to say that it lives up to its name and I commend its work. Research has concluded that, in developed nations, there are clear links between higher rates of women’s employment and lower rates of child poverty. As Mary Fee said, Sweden and other small countries lead the way on that, while in Scotland there are much lower rates of maternal employment and much higher rates of child poverty. As Malcolm Chisholm said, there are certainly many lessons to be learned from other countries, particularly the Nordic countries. I welcome the minister’s announcement that the women’s jobs summit will take place on 12 September. Among other issues, it will discuss childcare, which has been raised by almost every member so far; indeed, Ken Macintosh says that is his number 1 priority for getting women back into work. Although I welcome the increase in free nursery education for three to four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds, responsibility for children does not end when they reach a certain age. We have sometimes overlooked that when we have considered the various issues of nursery care. We need to provide affordable childcare for the age group that is not in nursery school. Many women prefer not to go back to work when their kids are at nursery, if they are fortunate enough, but they want to go to work when their kids start school and the problems sometimes start there. They cannot re-enter their career and cannot re-enter the workforce. A number of members mentioned the proportion of women in particular jobs. I will give members some of the stats that I looked up. In health and social care, 85 per cent of workers are female, yet in construction, 99 per cent of workers are male. In early years care and education—a very important career—98 per cent of workers are female, yet in vehicle maintenance, 98 per cent of workers are male. We must ask ourselves something here—it is a basic issue that every member has raised. Is that to do with gender stereotyping or cultural attitudes, and what can we do about it? One of the things that we can do about it—and the Government can perhaps raise this issue at the jobs summit—is a positive attitude, which goes a long way. Obviously, having more female representation in the Scottish Parliament promotes a positive attitude to young women. Politicians can go out to schools and speak to young women’s groups to tell them where they can go, what we have achieved and how they, too, can achieve it. The media, teachers and parents can all put forward a positive attitude towards women. Are the jobs and careers that have predominantly women employees undervalued? Is enough emphasis put on jobs such as teachers, nursery teachers, hospital workers and nurses, which are very important jobs? They seem to be undervalued. As Malcolm Chisholm said, it is about the economy. If women have the money, they will spend it, and their kids will be taken out of poverty. Perhaps the Government—possibly at the summit—will look at the undervaluing of those jobs. Perhaps it will take the lead by looking at the modern apprenticeship scheme to see where the money is going—whether it is to construction or to social care, as well. I am grateful for being able to take part in the debate. I hope that we can move forward to give women a positive attitude and bring more women back into work.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what consensus it has reached with other parties regarding allowing the proceeds of fiscal fines to remain in Scotland. (S4O-01145)

I find that quite disappointing. I would have expected other parties in the chamber to support the efforts of the Government and the Green party to ensure that that money is used to fund anti-crime initiatives in Scotland. How does the amount of fine income that is removed from Scotland by Her Majesty’s Treasury compare with that taken from England and Wales?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Earlier in the debate, members were told to be here for the closing speeches. That is, quite rightly, the rule of the Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance. Does the same rule apply to Liam McArthur, who came in only 25 minutes ago and intervened in the summing up? Does the rule pertain to Tavish Scott, who came in at the very beginning, asked a question and did not return? [Interruption.]

I congratulate John Mason on securing the debate. To my mind and, I believe, to everyone’s mind the issue that we are debating is important, not only for those throughout the world who are interested in human rights, but for the many thousands of Sikhs who are fervently opposed to the death penalty—as was eloquently outlined by Fiona McLeod—and who face persecution and death in their thousands in India. That is reflected in the motion. I agree with members who said that the death penalty is abhorrent in any country, but I will focus my remarks on the motion, which deals with the death penalty in India. I record my thanks to the gurdwaras in Scotland, particularly in Glasgow, and to Charandeep Singh, for the absolutely fantastic work that they have done and the dedication that they have shown in bringing this injustice to the attention not only of MSPs and MPs but to many other groups. Without their lobbying and campaigning, many people would be unaware of what is happening in India today. Humza Yousaf mentioned the meeting outside the Parliament in March, which I and others attended. It just so happened that Sir Alan Haselhurst MP, who is on the executive committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, was visiting Parliament that day. I had a meeting with him and took a message to Charandeep Singh outside Parliament. I was able to hand Sir Alan a petition that had been handed to John Mason and me. I record my thanks to Sir Alan, who took the petition to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which led to further lobbying of the Indian Government. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office sent a thought-provoking letter to John Mason and me to say that it is vehemently against the death penalty and would have a meeting with the Indian high commissioner. When we think of the variety of people who have been lobbying in Scotland and around the world on behalf of the Sikhs, and who have been making representations about what is happening in India, we must give thanks to the Sikh community for raising the matter with us. As has been said with regard to the situation in India, the Sikhs are vehemently against the death penalty—in fact, I think that when the Sikhs were in Government many hundreds of years ago in the Indian provinces, they did not persecute and hang people or pursue any other particularly abhorrent way of treating people. We owe our thanks to the Sikhs for letting us know exactly what they feel, through their religion and beliefs. There have, as is absolutely right, been many good speeches tonight highlighting the fact that there is no way back from capital punishment. We have to say to the Indian Government that it is a member of the UN Security Council, as John Finnie said, and the UN Human Rights Council, and that it should act in accordance with international law. We in the Parliament, and people outwith it, appeal to the President of India to outlaw the abhorrent practice of capital punishment. As John Finnie said, the Scottish Parliament is a people’s Parliament and Sikhs are part of the Scottish community, so we should support Sikhs in their request for us to lobby the Indian Government to outlaw the absolutely horrific practice of capital punishment. I hope that the cabinet secretary, in any dealings that she has with the Indian Government and the high commissioner, will raise the issues that have been raised in the debate. We have had many debates in the Parliament on international issues in which the cabinet secretary has said that it would perhaps be good to send a copy of the Official Report to the country or Government involved. I suggest to the cabinet secretary that it would be a good idea to send the Official Report of this debate to the high commissioner or to the Indian Government.

Will the member give way?

I was going to begin my contribution in parliamo Glasgow, but I thought that I had better not, as even I have trouble understanding it. Perhaps the minister could try to use it in summing up. I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate. Like other members, I believe that expanding and delivering the opportunities to learn extra languages at a very early age will benefit our children and the whole of Scotland, and I welcome the working group’s recommendations on that in particular. As the MSP for Glasgow Kelvin, I am very aware of the large Gaelic community in the constituency; indeed, I think that the Gaelic community in it is the largest outwith the islands. The Glasgow Gaelic school is based in Berkeley Street in Kelvin, and it is a huge success. An overwhelming number of people want to go to the school. People do not necessarily only learn the language; they can learn about the way of life as well. Dave Thompson mentioned that. Whenever I visit that school, which I do often, it is a great pleasure to see the fantastic work that is done there. As I said, languages are important. When people go to the Glasgow Gaelic school and schools that teach other languages, there seems to be an ethos about the culture that shines through. I congratulate Donalda McComb and all the staff at the Glasgow Gaelic school, whose dedication knows no bounds. The minister mentioned Confucius hubs, which are excellent facilities not only for languages, but for understanding, trips and twinning with the Chinese community. I thank the staff in Hillhead high school, which is in my constituency, for the fantastic work that they do in the Confucius hub there. I visit schools and nurseries in my area. In fact, I visited Strathclyde nursery school just on Friday and saw a graduation ceremony for tots. They can speak French, which is fantastic. I was amazed to see children as young as three learning another language. The children learn through song and play. That is entirely different from my experience at school. I do not know whether other members had the same experience as me, but the only language that was available to me and others at that time was French. Basically we learned by rote and sometimes through song, but mostly through verbs, grammar and many hours of writing down conversations. It was not an enjoyable experience, which is why I am so pleased when I see the difference now in schools, where kids learn languages conversationally. They are interested in the language. They learn names, colours, flowers, books, magazines and films—Linda Fabiani mentioned watching a television programme in black and white, which I can also remember. All those things encourage kids to learn and keep their interest. Kezia Dugdale said that she did not have an ear for learning languages, but that she wishes that she had done, because it would have been useful in later life. Similarly, when I was 16 I decided that I would go and learn German. I went to Jordanhill College. I had never learned German in my life before, but I wanted to do something even though school had not encouraged me, or others. Perhaps if we had had the type of learning that we have now and which we will have in the future, we might not have been quite so frightened to learn other languages. There is a fantastic opportunity now and we are giving kids the chance to learn languages. Liam McArthur and others mentioned the economic benefit of learning languages and that is fantastic for Scotland as a whole. However, it is not only about the economic benefit; it is about the confidence that kids get from learning languages and the fact that it opens up a whole new world to them. In fact, my granddaughter was born in Barcelona and by the time that she was two she could speak Catalan. The extent to which kids can absorb information like sponges and pick up a language is unbelievable. That is why we should all welcome the Government’s forward programme. I am sure that the minister agrees that there may be issues that we have to look at; Elizabeth Smith and others picked up on some of those issues. However, it is worth looking forward to ensure that our kids have a great opportunity. The working group’s recommendation 18 states “that SQA keep under review the suite of languages offered”. Recommendation 19 states “that there be further engagement with the FE and HE sectors”. Recommendation 23 states “that universities work together as a consortium of university providers to support delivery”. Finally, recommendation 27 states “that Scottish Government and Universities work with Local Authorities”. I highlight those recommendations because they mention universities, the SQA and others but, as far as I can see, there is no mention of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Will the minister pick up on that when she sums up the debate? Without the Scottish funding council, the moneys to deliver languages in universities are not there. What role does the funding council have in the process? Maureen Watt and Kevin Stewart both mentioned the teaching of the Polish language. There is a fantastic course at the University of Glasgow in Czech, Polish and Slavonic studies, but its funding is being ended. The Scottish funding council is obviously involved in that situation, too. The centre for Russian, central and east European studies is the only one of its kind in Scotland. If the centre closes, people who want to continue their studies in that subject will have to go to London; that will be the only option left in the UK. It is imperative that the Scottish funding council considers the situation and ensures that the centre continues, given the good work that it does. Polish has been mentioned and there is also Russian. All countries should be involved. Kids should be encouraged to learn all languages.

I agree entirely with Hanzala Malik—we have raised that issue. A petition has been lodged about the course that I referred to, which the Public Petitions Committee is considering. When the committee asked questions of the Scottish funding council, the council’s reply was that it had conducted a review and that “Our review concluded that demand for Czech and Polish in Scotland is very low”. The committee continues to consider the petition. I ask ministers to look at the issues and the idea that Hanzala Malik suggested, which is for the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee.

I am grateful to be able to speak in the debate, given that I am not a member of the Health and Sport Committee. I want to look at the bill in a slightly different way. The health issues, which are extremely important, have been covered, but I want to focus on two specific issues: overconsumption of alcohol and availability of cheap alcohol, and the problems that they give rise to. As the constituency member for Glasgow Kelvin, I represent an area that has the greatest concentration in Glasgow—possibly in Scotland—of pubs, clubs, theatres and entertainment venues, which stretch from Byres Road in the west to Sauchiehall Street and the merchant city in the city centre. The area is the hub of Glasgow’s night life, where thriving businesses attract thousands of visitors—tourists and locals alike—at the weekend. They are what makes Glasgow famous and so vibrant. However, it would be remiss of me not to say that in some—but not all—areas we have problems that are caused by overconsumption of alcohol. Overconsumption causes problems not just for the consumer of alcohol, but for the police, medics and the public in general. The issue must be tackled. Although, as the cabinet secretary said, minimum pricing is not a panacea, we must do something to ensure that we no longer see people lying on pavements or in gutters absolutely drunk. We must do so not just for health reasons, but for the sake of the economy and of the people who visit Glasgow and other parts of Scotland. The pubs and clubs are not solely responsible for the problem; it is mainly a result of the so-called pre-loading of cheap alcohol that has been bought in supermarkets. In some cases, it is cheaper to buy a litre of alcoholic drink than it is to buy a litre of water. I have spoken to many people in the licensed trade in Glasgow. Paul Waterson of the Scottish Licensed Trade Association says that we need minimum pricing because there is no control over the drinking of people who buy alcohol from supermarkets at knock-down prices. He believes that some people drink for drinking’s sake. Pre-loading of cheap alcohol has become endemic. People who go to licensed premises drink in a controlled environment, but if they drink at home, there is no control. When people go out after getting tanked up on cheap supermarket booze, it is the pubs and the clubs that have to deal with them. We should listen to the SLTA. The Deputy First Minister mentioned the fact that the pub trade is struggling, and she is absolutely right. Once-thriving pubs, many of which used to be hubs of their communities, are indeed struggling because supermarkets are selling cheap booze. Local pubs that were once social meeting places for many people are closing. I think—I know that the licensed trade does, too—that the balance has shifted too far, so we need to look at restoring the balance. At one time, people would go out to pubs to enjoy the sociable atmosphere, but with the availability of cheap booze, that is no longer the case. I have some figures that illustrate that. Off-trade sales increased by 52 per cent between 1994 and 2010, whereas the on-trade experienced a fall in sales of 29 per cent. I am talking about the city centre of Glasgow and other areas that I represent; I am talking about pubs that are hubs in their communities and are social gathering places. It is time we listened to the licensed trade. I hope that we can resurrect some of those local pubs, which do so much for communities. As I have said, minimum pricing is not a panacea, but it is a start, and we should all fully support it.

The First Minister will be aware of the BBC trust’s rubber-stamping of the BBC’s job-cutting exercise, delivering quality first, and of the grave concerns that have been expressed about the potential impact of those cuts in Scotland. Does he agree with the BBC audience council Scotland’s submission to the process, which expresses serious concerns about those proposals and believes that the implications for services in Scotland have not been fully explored? Does he believe that there is a basis for asking the BBC trust to review its decision?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had since May 2007 regarding providing support for destitute asylum seekers. (S4O-00971)

The minister will be aware of the change of housing contract which, according to reports, could result in hundreds of families becoming homeless and destitute, despite UKBA assurances. That could put a huge strain on resources in Glasgow. Is the minister aware of those concerns and will she meet me to discuss the issue in more detail?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thought that I might have a little longer for my speech. I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing this historic debate and on lodging a motion that encompasses the injustice for the Miami five, who have been imprisoned in America since 1998. Serious doubts and concerns have been expressed around the world about the validity of their convictions. Even Jimmy Carter has said: “I believe that the detention of the Cuban Five makes no sense, there have been doubts expressed in U.S. courts and by human rights organizations around the world ... I hope that in the near future they will be freed to return to their homes.” Many in the Parliament and beyond echo that sentiment. I welcome to the Parliament the Cuban ambassador, the families of the Miami five and the others who are present. I know that the ambassador received a warm welcome this morning in Glasgow, my home town, when she was in Glasgow city chambers, which are in my Glasgow Kelvin constituency. I look forward to meeting her later with the cross-party group on Cuba. I congratulate all those who were involved in organising the beyond the frame art exhibition in the Lighthouse in Glasgow, which is the first such exhibition in Scotland. From what I have heard, it has been a great success. I will concentrate on two elements of the motion: the blockade and the cultural, economic and political co-operation between Scotland and Cuba. Elaine Smith described well the blockade and the history of the Miami five. My husband and I visited Cuba a couple of years ago—in case any press are here, I say that it was a holiday and not a freebie. I was most impressed by the vitality of the people and the resilience that they showed through the blockade by America. We must be honest about the fact that the blockade obviously affects Cuba’s economy. However, as I toured the educational establishments, including universities and colleges, and visited hospitals—the service there is excellent, particularly in the eye hospitals, which are renowned around the world—I was impressed by the facilities. As Elaine Smith said, Cuba is a world leader in its health service and its education establishments. We can all learn from that and we must tell the rest of the world that the blockade is absolutely insane, not just for Cuba but for the rest of the world and America in particular. I spoke to many officials in Cuba, who took me on tours of official establishments while my husband enjoyed the sun, sea and salsa. I was struck by the fact that, although Miami is only a couple of miles from Cuba, people in Cuba must get dried milk from Australia. That is unbelievable. People must take it on board that the blockade can go on no longer. Everyone must listen to that and ensure that America listens to that. When I was a member of the European and External Relations Committee, I raised the issue of cultural links with Mike Russell, who was the responsible minister at the time. He did not give a guarantee—I spoke to him about it this afternoon—but he said that he would welcome the idea of looking at Latin American and South American countries. We should look at having links with Cuba. We have the China plan and the North America plan, so why cannot we have a South America plan that covers not just Cuba but Venezuela and other countries in that area? We can learn a lot from the people of Cuba. Their vitality and what they do to deal with the blockade from America are awe-inspiring, and I take my hat off to them. I would salsa if it was allowed in the chamber—I may salsa later on with the Cuban ambassador and others. This is the first debate about Cuba in the Parliament and Scotland in particular should look towards having cultural and economic links with Cuba, to show the rest of the world that we can be world leaders as well and to help the fantastic people of Cuba.

I align myself with the remarks made by Annabelle Ewing—sorry, I mean Annabel Goldie. She has changed.

I accept Annabel Goldie’s explanation, given that we are talking about the performing companies. I align myself with some of her remarks, as I, too, have been told that I cannot sing, although I have sometimes been told that I can dance. As we have heard, the five national companies have done, and continue to do, a great deal to promote Scotland’s cultural profile throughout Scotland and around the globe. It would be remiss of me not to mention that four out of five of the national companies are based in Glasgow; indeed, three of them are based in my constituency of Glasgow Kelvin. The upgrading of the Theatre Royal and the Royal concert hall is welcome, but I make a plea for the Pavilion theatre in Glasgow, which is very short of funds and does not get any public funds at all. I agree entirely with the sentiments that are expressed in Patricia Ferguson’s amendment. I am glad that we have accepted her amendment. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring the widest possible participation throughout Scotland, as shown by the fact that NPCs must meet certain criteria set out by the Scottish Government. One criterion is that, to be eligible for central funding, NPCs must ensure that they perform to a wide and diverse audience in Scotland, that they have community education programmes and that they work with other NPCs. I have a revelation to share. I have discovered a composer through someone in my constituency and Creative Scotland. Last week, I had a meeting with Creative Scotland, which works closely with the national companies, to look at digitising the work of one of Scotland’s greatest composers, Thomas Wilson, who produced more than 100 works in a range of different styles, including orchestra and ballet. I met Mr Wilson’s widow to discuss her late husband’s work and the digitisation of his manuscripts. During a very pleasant afternoon, Mrs Wilson told me about the many requests and visits that she had received from people from outside Scotland seeking her husband’s work. Indeed, she told me about a Spanish teacher who had introduced schoolchildren to Mr Wilson’s work. I heard a small piece, which was a delight. The point that I am trying to make is that, as well as the national performing companies, organisations such as Creative Scotland and others can work together to help to produce great artists who some people have not heard of. That discussion led us to discuss the great effect and importance of widening the appeal of the performing arts to schools, communities and individuals that may previously have had little or no experience of them. The national and international importance of the national performing companies is undoubted, but it is equally important—if not more important—to use them to get as many people as possible involved in the arts. The Royal Scottish National Orchestra, which is based in Kelvin, does a huge amount of outreach work, such as its monster music concerts, which are aimed at three to five-year-olds. The cabinet secretary and other speakers mentioned those concerts, which involve well-known songs and nursery rhymes, encourage the kids to join in in whatever way they can, introduce them to basic musical concepts—high and low, fast and slow—and give them an initial interest. I hope that they will get some enjoyment out of that interest as they continue to enjoy music. That work is followed up by mega music concerts for primary 5s to primary 7s and maestro music concerts for secondary school kids. All those concerts give kids the opportunity to learn more about music. The orchestra also provides teacher training sessions and packs to be used in class. Although that programme of events is fantastic, I cannot help but think that there is something missing: what about kids in primary school up to primary 5? It could not be more important for them to get the same learning opportunities as others. Those years are formative and, as many studies have shown, will have a huge impact not only on the rest of the children’s educational lives but on their lives as a whole. Perhaps the cabinet secretary and the RSNO may wish to consider that small gap within primary school when they review its work.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that and look forward to seeing that strategy in the future. The link with education is important. It is great that the Royal Scottish National Orchestra runs an apprenticeship scheme along with the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland and that another NPC, Scottish Ballet, has set up a BA qualification in modern ballet, also along with the conservatoire. I have touched on some of the things that the national performing companies do and I congratulate NPCs that are regularly involved in similar work. Patricia Ferguson and Annabel Goldie mentioned audience numbers. We need to be careful that we do not judge performances simply by the number of bums on seats; it is important that we consider the performances themselves. I remember sitting on a committee when the 7:84 Theatre Company and other companies of that ilk had their funding slashed simply because of audience numbers. We must consider audience numbers carefully and weigh up not only bums on seats but exactly what performances offer.

I think that members will all agree that this is an important debate. The speeches have been excellent and have covered the commission’s recommendations well. Members have mentioned David McLetchie’s speech. I was not going to do so, but it is important that I, like others, distance myself from some of his remarks. I sincerely thank all those who produced the report. They have done an excellent job. As many members have said, we have been looking for such recommendations for a number of years, so I welcome the report. Women make up 5 per cent of the overall prison population. The vast majority are reoffenders who have addiction issues and mental health problems and have experienced terrible social circumstances. Most are certainly not a threat to society; as the cabinet secretary said, most of them are, unfortunately, a threat only to themselves. That is why I believe that the recommendations in the report—radical though they may seem to some people—are correct. Alternative treatment must be explored and offered to women who would benefit from that. When I was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee in the previous session of Parliament, I visited Cornton Vale along with other members—others have mentioned that visit—and saw at first hand the conditions in the prison. There was a lack of privacy: the women had to queue up for a shower, and the shower curtains were missing; and they had to ask to go to the bathroom, which had a half door that gave no privacy and was very demeaning. That issue is covered in the report. Sports facilities were practically non-existent and were unfit for anyone who wanted to get in any form of exercise. Unfortunately, the situation is still the same. We were also concerned by the lack of family visiting facilities and the very poor space where families could come to visit. We must bear it in mind that Cornton Vale is a women’s prison and that the women’s children visit them. That is the only contact that some of the women have with their school-age kids. That issue must be explored. Unfortunately, as others have said, very little support has been forthcoming from the Scottish Prison Service. I implore the SPS to create a visitor centre—perhaps the cabinet secretary could also implore it to do so. We obviously hope that Cornton Vale will not continue as it is now, but in the meantime some improvement would be excellent for the women. Many members have mentioned statistics and so on, but I will concentrate on the visit to Cornton Vale that the Equal Opportunities Committee undertook in the previous session of Parliament. The issues that I have raised were of concern, but of more concern were the women themselves and the experiences that they had gone through. We were, rightly, not allowed to ask what their crimes were, but the women were anxious to speak to us, individually or in groups, and tell us about their experience of life inside and outside prison. The majority of the women were in prison for low-level crimes. Margaret Mitchell mentioned the revolving-door situation, and many of them spoke about that, too, saying that they could not find a way out. Most of the women had suffered from domestic abuse and other forms of abuse, mental health problems and addiction. Margaret Mitchell and others will remember the woman who was in what I believe is called a silent cell—Alison McInnes mentioned that—with just a mattress on the floor. She was very much suffering from mental health problems. She could tell us all the medication that she was on and all the medical terminology for her condition, yet she was sitting on a mattress in a bare cell. She should never have been in prison; she should have been in a hospital, getting care. I was chilled to the bone when I spoke to a woman who would not be out of prison in time to see her four kids at Christmas. She had reoffended but what really got me was that she felt safer in prison than outside, because of the environment that she lived in. She was willing to risk not having Christmas with her four kids because she was terrified of what awaited her outside. That was chilling. We have to think about new ways of treating women in prison. Some of those women were institutionalised. It is quite chilling to think that someone felt safer in prison, with its lack of amenities, than they would feel outside. That is a damning indictment of the society that we live in. I endorse everything that is in the Angiolini report. I would have thought that anyone would rather be outside, enjoying Christmas with their children, than in prison, queueing up to go to the toilet or have a shower, yet those women said that they felt safer in prison. That is institutionalisation, and we have to do something about it.

I say to Mr Gray that, as someone who constantly uses the buses and the subway in Glasgow, I know about the people, including my constituents, who use the buses. I am one SNP member, back bencher or not, who certainly knows what the public think. In fact, in 2010, I held a transport summit in Glasgow in Partick burgh hall, at which the general public, SPT and First and other operators were present. We asked the people in what is now my constituency exactly what they wanted from transport. I know that we are concentrating on buses, but the motion is entitled “Transport”, so I could perhaps widen the debate out a little bit. People certainly wanted decent buses running at the proper times with a decent bus fare, but they also wanted joined-up thinking. I think that we have sometimes lost the point about the importance of joined-up thinking. If my memory serves me right, this is the third debate that the Labour Party has held in Parliament on transport and buses, in particular, as there was Patricia Ferguson’s members’ business debate and there have been two other debates since then. I welcome the debates, but I do not welcome the people we represent being used as political footballs because a council election is round the corner. [Interruption.] That may not be happening in Ms McMahon’s constituency but, unfortunately, in Glasgow we have now got to the stage that it is the only game in town, in that it is the only issue that Labour can produce. That is a sorry state of affairs. I agree with a number of the points that Patricia Ferguson made in her speech. I also thought that Jenny Marra’s speech, which concentrated on the people, was very good. I agree with most of Patrick Harvie’s amendment. We must look at every single issue. Following the transport summit that I held, I had meetings with the then transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, to try to talk to the bus companies. Members are basically saying that it is about this Government or that Government or previous Governments, and no one has talked about First, which is the bus operator in Glasgow. We must bear it in mind that the Government gives a substantial amount of money to First and other operators. Patricia Ferguson will be aware, as are other members in Glasgow—I do not apologise for concentrating on my own constituency—that the buses pollute Glasgow city centre. It is sensible to change the way that the money is being invested, because the approach that is being taken is more environmentally friendly. If members get a copy of the summit report, they will see that people in Byres Road, Great Western Road, Woodlands Road and other areas in my constituency, including Maryhill Road—part of which is in my constituency and part of which is in Patricia Ferguson’s constituency—complain consistently about emissions.

I am coming to that point. The changes in the way that the money is spent make bus companies more fuel efficient. Coupled with that is the Scottish green bus fund. I was astonished—as Gordon Matheson and others in Glasgow City Council appeared to be—that First did not apply for a grant from the Scottish green bus fund 2012. That grant could have improved the environment for the people who live in my constituency of Glasgow Kelvin and in Glasgow city centre. It could also have created jobs in Scotland, because these new buses are being built in Falkirk by Alexander Dennis Ltd. I would like the minister to raise with First the issue of why it did not apply for such a grant. We can argue in the chamber about the various issues, but we must ask the bus companies—particularly those in Glasgow—why, given the contribution that this Government and previous Governments have made, they did not apply to the green bus fund.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing this debate. I attended her excellent reception and certainly learned a lot about community radio. Having lived in Govan in Glasgow, I thought that I knew a wee bit about the issue, but certainly did not realise how vast its expanse is in Scotland. Jim Hume with his knowledge might correct me but, casting my mind back, I seem to remember that many years ago community radio was known as pirate radio. I remember listening to Radio Luxembourg, Radio Caroline and one that was quite close to my heart and possibly the hearts of others in my party: Radio Free Scotland, which was broadcast from under a pull-down bed in a single end somewhere in Glasgow. I will not tell the chamber whose house it was broadcast from. Those pioneers were very popular in their day, and I am so glad that we got round to giving such stations a licence and calling them community radio instead. A number of stations have already been mentioned, but I would like to mention two in my Glasgow Kelvin constituency. Radio Awaz is absolutely fantastic; in fact, I should give it a plug and say that I have just sent a letter of support for its licence to be continued for the next five years. It does an excellent job not only on cultural diversity but in tackling other serious topics. For example, only a couple of weeks ago, it tackled forced marriage and got Nicola Sturgeon on to discuss the issue. The other station in the Kelvin constituency that I want to mention is the fantastic Celtic Music Radio—[Interruption.] That was a slip of the tongue—I meant to say “Keltic”, not “Seltic”. They might well get some calls about that. The station broadcasts aspects of our culture as well as other serious issues, including politics. In fact, during the 2010 general election, it broadcast a programme on political protest songs with the suggestion that, instead of singing a protest song, people should just get out and vote. These two fantastic radio stations work very closely with the community. I cannot finish without mentioning Sunny Govan Community Radio. As Annabel Goldie will know, having appeared on it herself, most of us from the area affectionately call it “Sunny Go-Van”. It is very close to the hearts of the people of Govan and does fantastic work not only in broadcasting to and serving the community, but in creating opportunities for people by training them and steering them perhaps towards a career in radio. Indeed, Elaine Murray, Nigel Don and Jim Hume made the same point about the community radio stations in their areas. I am not sure, though, whether the people of Sunny Govan get to chase after lost dogs and reunite them with their owners. Finally, on opportunities, our Liberal Democrat colleague said that he knows a lot about radio—indeed, he does. If we can have an MSP who has such excellent knowledge of working in community radio, perhaps we can have people working in community radio becoming MSPs.

The minister mentioned using charrettes to involve communities better. What progress has been made in that regard? Will the changes that the minister outlined apply to small-scale developments?

I thank Jim Eadie for securing this debate and join others in welcoming the announcement that the Syrian authorities have agreed to the six-point plan that was put forward by Kofi Annan. Like others, I sincerely hope that that will go some way towards alleviating the tremendous suffering of the people of Syria, which Jim Eadie and Patricia Ferguson described eloquently. As colleagues have said, however, it is a short-term plan and we need a long-term plan. I hope that this debate will go some way towards helping to bring that to fruition. I want to concentrate on the humanitarian crisis that is unfolding as people flee Syria to many of the middle eastern countries, Lebanon in particular. Jim Eadie mentioned the Lebanese and Syrian people in the public gallery tonight. I met them earlier today, and they told me in couched terms about what is happening to the Syrian refugees who are in Lebanon. It has been said that something like 100,000 people have fled Syria. Some reports put the figure at 200,000. They have gone to other middle eastern countries apart from Lebanon, including Turkey and Jordan. From speaking to the Syrian people and some people who have had direct contact with Syrian refugees in Lebanon, I know that the problem is compounded by the fact that many of those who are fleeing are unwilling to register as refugees, so they are not counted as refugees. They are unwilling to register because they are frightened of being identified and of reprisals being carried out, not just against them, but against relatives back home in Syria. That is a real problem that we must look at. In Lebanon, where some 20,000 people have fled to, the situation has been exacerbated by the failure of the Lebanese authorities to recognise the rights of the refugees, which is leading to many of them being unable to access medical treatment or food and water. Even if they are treated in hospital, they are discharged in a day or two. They do not have basics such as shelter. As I said, I met some members of the Syrian community earlier. I feel that, alongside their efforts and the diplomatic efforts that are being made by our Government and others, we need to do something else to secure a peaceful solution to the current situation. I remind the cabinet secretary that, in the past, Scotland has always been ready to recognise when other people have needed our help. An example of that is our response to the Palestinian situation, when many organisations, MSPs, pharmacies and health boards got together to send medical aid to Palestine; I am sorry, but I get quite emotional when I think about what we did. I am talking about out-of-date prescription medication, tablets, equipment and so on, which we collected and sent to the Palestinian people. Perhaps we could show our solidarity with the Syrian refugees in Lebanon and elsewhere by starting a similar campaign, and I ask the cabinet secretary for her advice on that. Among the charities and voluntary organisations in Scotland is Aid4All, which has just been set up. It wants to help to establish a co-ordinated approach to the delivery of humanitarian aid. Perhaps a meeting could be arranged with the cabinet secretary to talk about what it would like to do. We need peace in the middle east. With that in mind, I invite the cabinet secretary to send a copy of the Official Report of the debate to her counterparts in Westminster and perhaps even to President Assad, to let them know how the Parliament feels about the treatment of the Syrian people, not just in Syria but in Lebanon.

6. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made in ensuring that the 2014 Commonwealth games are on time and on budget. (S4F-00545)

I am, indeed, pleased that the Commonwealth games are on time and on budget. The First Minister will be aware that, for the games to be truly successful, they must leave a lasting legacy. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that the legacy is not only for Glasgow, but for the whole of Scotland?

It is a privilege to open the debate to celebrate Commonwealth week 2012. I welcome all our guests to the Scottish Parliament, including Annie Lennox, our special envoy, who is to be applauded for the dedication and commitment that she has shown to the role since being appointed in 2010. She undertakes the role alongside other humanitarian work, such as the sing campaign, which I understand that we will have the opportunity to learn more about at this evening’s event. She might even be persuaded to sing one of my favourite songs, “Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)”—perhaps I will speak to her about that after the debate. I had the privilege of speaking in the members’ business debate to mark the Commonwealth’s 60th anniversary. The theme was—aptly—serving a new generation, given that the Commonwealth is moving into a new era and, when that debate took place, the Commonwealth covered almost 2 billion people, half of whom were under 25. Much may have changed in 60 years in Scotland and around the world, but the Commonwealth’s enduring principles, such as the promotion of democracy, human rights, liberty and world peace, are as relevant now—if not more so—as they have been at any time in the Commonwealth’s history. This year’s theme—connecting cultures—also resonates with the times. In a world of increased globalisation, increased communication through news and social media and increased awareness of the world around us as a result, it is essential that we gain a comprehensive understanding of and a healthy respect for the wide variety of cultures in the Commonwealth and beyond. The Queen’s message for Commonwealth day talks of the “extraordinary cultural tapestry” that makes up “this unique gathering of nations”. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma talks of connecting cultures as encouraging us to “explore how we can use culture to build bridges of exchange and understanding.” In a world in which, each year, there are new challenges and new uncertainties, by celebrating our cultural diversity while building on basic rights such as equality and freedom, we can turn those challenges into opportunities and overcome our uncertainties. The Commonwealth is an ideal vehicle for achieving those aims. During the past 60 years, Commonwealth countries have worked together to improve the rights of many of its members across the world. The changes have come about as the result of a collective approach and they have come about through the Commonwealth’s many programmes in a number of areas, such as women’s rights, democracy, education, and youth empowerment, amongst others. As we look to the future to see how such a collaborative approach can continue to deliver further positive change, CPA Scotland is playing its part. The convener of the Scottish Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee was recently invited to visit South Africa to address a conference about our positive committee. Many members and people in Scotland take the Public Petitions Committee for granted, but in many countries it would be unimaginable that people could write to Parliament and have it investigate and, where possible, offer solutions to issues, or that members could call Government ministers to account and bring debates to the floor of the Parliament. That is truly a wonderful achievement and we should share it. When I think about it, it sounds incredible, but the system works and many countries—not just those in the Commonwealth—want to replicate it. We should be proud of the positive contribution that we in the Scottish Parliament and the Scotland branch of the CPA make to the Commonwealth and beyond. Sarah Boyack MSP is currently in Bangladesh, speaking about our world-leading climate change legislation, which I hope will be used to inform and shape other nations’ responses to climate change. Scotland, and the CPA in Scotland, is sharing its knowledge and aspirations with many nations. Although they might have different cultures, they have at their hearts shared goals and a common purpose, and they are playing their part in connecting cultures. I have mentioned MSPs. They might be the ones who are getting out and about and talking to people, but I also thank all the staff at the CPA Scotland branch in Parliament for their hard work and dedication. Without them, the branch would not be as dynamic and successful as it is. I give a special mention to Margaret Neal, CPA Scotland’s secretary, and congratulate her as I believe that she became a gran at the beginning of this week with the birth of baby Sam. Special mention must be made of Malawi. We know that Malawi is experiencing difficult times at the moment, but the Scotland branch of the CPA retains a special relationship with Malawi, and we continue to work alongside elected members and members of the public there. Two interns from the National Assembly of Malawi are currently working in the Scottish Parliament. We continue to work with people in Malawi, and with elected members, with the help of the CPA Scotland branch secretariat. The 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow must have a special mention, and not just because I am a Glaswegian and I represent the Kelvin constituency.

Heaven forbid, as Christine Grahame says. The games will bring together people from all cultures and backgrounds, and will provide a fantastically positive opportunity to highlight all that my city of Glasgow can bring to the international stage, as well as what the other countries of the Commonwealth can bring to Glasgow and the rest of Scotland. We have many concerns about what is happening throughout the world, but the Commonwealth games is an opportunity to bring together all people of the world, and I look forward to playing my part. I believe that the Commonwealth will continue to be a great organisation for a long time to come. As we have said, connecting cultures is about celebrating diversity and sharing the goals that bring us together. Perhaps the words of my other favourite Annie Lennox song say it all just as well, although I certainly will not sing them: “Another day goes by Still the children cry Put a little love in your heart. If you want the world to know We won’t let hatred grow Put a little love in your heart.”

As someone who is not a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I thank the members of that committee for the report. I am also grateful to be able to speak in the debate. As the cabinet secretary said, how we care for our elderly and vulnerable people is a reflection of the society in which we live. If we cannot care for our older people, that says something about our society. The speeches that we heard from Duncan McNeil and others were excellent and raised some very good points. Malcolm Chisholm raised issues from his constituency and talked about the Elsie Inglis nursing home. However, I was disappointed in Jackie Baillie’s speech, as she seemed to use the committee debate as a political stage instead of trying to get to the nub of the committee’s report, which I understand was supported by all the parties that are represented on the committee—I commend them for that. Committee debates are important, and I look forward to the next one, in which I will also speak. It would be great if committee debates in the chamber were a regular feature so that committees had the opportunity to put forward what they have been looking at and the inquiries that they have been pursuing. I am the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing, and the issue of care homes—their treatment of people, their staffing and the frequency of inspections—is raised often in that group, not just by members of the group but by individuals. I go out into my constituency and try to visit care homes, not just as most MSPs do, but as the convener of the cross-party group. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has taken on board most of the recommendations in the committee’s report, particularly the recommendation on the frequency of inspections of care homes, which is an issue that individuals have raised on many occasions. It is important that visits are unannounced and that people know exactly what to expect. Duncan McNeil mentioned whistleblowing, and that is something that we have to look at. Many staff desperately want to tell people what is happening in some care homes and the nastier aspects of it, but they are terrified to say anything. That is an important point and we need to look into it. The training of staff is an important issue, and Mary Fee mentioned the need for fair wages. If we want decent staff, we have to give them a decent wage. We have to look at that also. As we all know, the percentage of older people is growing, unfortunately. Perhaps we will get more younger people in, particularly with immigration, but we know that the propensity exists for older people to form the biggest population group in Scotland, so it is incumbent on us to ensure that our older people are looked after and cared for properly. After all, we will all be old one day. That is why it is important that the care of elderly people is properly regulated, that care homes are properly inspected, and that the legislation is in place to provide what older people want. After all, they are the ones who have to live with the consequences. It gives me no pleasure to say that members would not want to live in, or even visit, some of the care homes that I have visited. We need to ensure that the regulations are watertight so that our older people can live in dignity. That is where the human rights issues come into the debate. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate. I look forward to the future and I thank the Scottish Government for taking on board most of the recommendations in the committee’s report.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I think that the time has gone from seven minutes to eight minutes, but I have made a couple of additions to my speech, so I hope that I can look forward to taking eight minutes. It has been an excellent debate. Like the previous debate this afternoon, it illustrates the breadth of issues and experiences with which parliamentary committees are involved. I congratulate the petitioner, Andrea MacArthur, on her tenacity in pursuing the issue and I thank the members of the Public Petitions Committee and the committee staff, as well as members of other committees, for their help and contributions. Vitamin B12 deficiency has become a serious issue that deserves our attention and action by all agencies. Like Nanette Milne, Dr Richard Simpson spoke on the issue, and I bow to his knowledge of it; his speech was excellent. Vitamin B12 deficiency is closely related to pernicious anaemia and is an illness that has confused many GPs, largely because its signs and symptoms are often linked to a number of other illnesses, such as multiple sclerosis. I commend John Wilson for raising in his speech the connection between MS and pernicious anaemia, the inconsistency of treatment and the fact that one size does not fit all patients. We need to consider that issue. Some health boards might produce a plan for a patient, but that does not necessarily mean that it will fit or suit all patients. We must highlight the fact that the testing for vitamin B12 deficiency has not been as accurate or effective as it should be. A number of members made that point in their speeches. As I indicated, the testing frequently results in misdiagnosis. The minister said that the Scottish Government wants diagnoses of pernicious anaemia to be made as quickly as possible. I welcome that view and I will return to the minister’s closing speech later. As the committee’s report indicated, the rates of vitamin B12 deficiency are far too high throughout Scotland. As the minister and Nanette Milne outlined, a number of groups are particularly at risk of vitamin B12 deficiency, including those over the age of 60, people with an auto-immune condition and those with a family history of pernicious anaemia. Such people may be in need of medical treatment for the condition. In Northern Europe in total, one in 10,000 people is at risk of suffering from vitamin B12 deficiency. Such an incidence is far too high, so we must strive to promote awareness of the illness and work towards a credible solution for dealing with it. As has been mentioned, a first step was taken in that regard by the debate in the Public Petitions Committee in November 2011, when Andrea MacArthur presented her petition on the issue of vitamin B12 deficiency and its treatment. Mrs MacArthur alerted me and a number of my colleagues to the issues regarding the identification and prevention of the disease. She has been a champion in the fight against vitamin B12 deficiency. In the committee, we touched on many topics to do with vitamin B12 deficiency. The convener of the committee has already mentioned the lack of attention that is paid to the issue. Mrs MacArthur stated: “Treatment of the condition is ... consistently bad”.—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 15 November 2011; c 228.] The convener of the committee also raised that issue. Such a statement brings to light the fact that there really is a problem that demands our immediate, utmost attention. Members have said that the committee received mixed responses from various health services. The response from NHS Highland—I think that Kenny Gibson mentioned it—was basically entirely different. It agreed that the issue deserved attention and that reform was needed, but Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board did not seem to sense the need to change the testing or medicine for vitamin B12 deficiency. It is rather strange that two NHS boards reached two different conclusions on a very important issue. I want to touch on something that Kenny Gibson and Nanette Milne mentioned—I think that another member mentioned it, too. The lack of testing and misdiagnosis are important. People can have multiple illnesses, but they can be misdiagnosed. In his closing speech, the minister mentioned people who suffer from vitamin B12 deficiency and pernicious anaemia and have to go outwith their doctor’s surgery and access vitamin B12 injections from another source. That is worrying and telling. The lack of acknowledgement from national sources prevents information from getting into the public domain and slows the spread of awareness about B12 deficiency. That is one of the key problems. As I mentioned to the committee—John Wilson raised a similar issue—one of my friends suffers from B12 deficiency. I do not think that she was aware of what was happening to her body and to other people. This debate is a fantastic first step in raising the issue of B12 deficiency and pernicious anaemia. I have much more to say, but perhaps only a minute and a half in which to say it. I will therefore touch on the Schilling test, which Dr Richard Simpson mentioned. He said that the test was mentioned on the website of the Royal College of General Practitioners, but that it should have been taken off because it is no longer used. No accurate test has been used as a replacement. I think that Dr Simpson also mentioned the active B12 test. We could use that, and it is much cheaper. NHS Highland said that that would be a better way of going forward and acknowledging the problem with the current testing process. It accepts that “the diagnosis of B12 deficiency is not foolproof”, but that we should use the active B12 test. It said: “The Active-B12 Test ... is clearly an interesting diagnostic test”. I want to pick up on some of the issues that the minister raised in his closing speech. I welcome his comments, the fact that the chief scientist office would look forward to having input into more research—the petition proposes that—and his comments on the Pernicious Anaemia Society taking part in that. Patients should be at the centre of treatment—I have mentioned that before—although some patients have worries about that. The minister raised that issue. I look forward to the updated guidelines. The minister mentioned that he would produce updated guidelines and speak to the Pernicious Anaemia Society. There is also the involvement of Healthcare Improvement Scotland. The petition urges the undertaking of a review of the current situation. The minister has answered some of the questions. On behalf of the committee, I ask him to consider the petition further, and I look forward to the review of the current situation.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what representations it has made to BBC Scotland regarding the proposed service reductions and job losses at Radio Scotland and what the outcome has been. (S4O-00750)

As the minister said, we will debate this subject tonight in my members’ business debate and the information that I have just received will be useful in shaping that debate. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that, if the cuts continue, the quality of programming will suffer?

I acknowledge the dedication and commitment of BBC staff across the country to delivering high-quality journalism. From television to radio broadcasting, they do a great job with what we have come to learn is very little. I make special mention of the poor souls at “Democracy Live”, who have the unenviable task of sitting through and sifting through every meeting of the Parliament and its committees. Our thoughts are with them. I cannot say it too clearly: the work that BBC staff do is terrific. That is why the proposals, how staff are being treated and what they are being asked to do are a huge kick in the teeth. The delivering quality first project—that is true Birtspeak—aims to cut £1.9 million, or 16 per cent, from BBC Scotland’s news and current affairs budget over five years. In the first tranche of the cuts, a third of BBC Radio Scotland production staff will lose their jobs, which is staggering. On top of that, programmes such as “Scotland at Ten” and “Newsweek Scotland” will be axed, which will lead to a reduction in overall quality, if not in the amount of politics coverage on Radio Scotland. The proposed cuts look bad enough, but the public are not being given all the facts. Four editorial posts have already been lost, which has led to a situation in which the programmes that we are told will replace “Scotland at Ten” and “Newsweek” are already seriously understaffed. We are told that the rationale behind the cuts is the licence-fee freeze that the Westminster Government imposed, and that Scotland is just shouldering its share of the overall cuts. That is simply not true; Scotland is being singled out for deeper and faster cuts than will be made anywhere else in the UK, which is worrying. BBC Radio Scotland’s budget is due to be cut by 6.6 per cent and the budget for the Gaelic radio service is due to be cut by 6.7 per cent. However, BBC Radio 4’s budget will not be cut, but will remain at £99.5 million. The budget for BBC Radio Wales will be cut by 3.2 per cent and for BBC Radio Ulster it will be cut by 1.6 per cent. BBC local radio in England will have a 4.2 per cent cut. I simply cannot understand why BBC Radio Scotland should receive larger cuts than BBC radio in any other part of the United Kingdom, especially at this time of unprecedented political debate on the future of our country. Although the political parties are unable to agree on which way to vote in the 2014 independence referendum, they all agree on the need for a full and frank debate on what independence will mean for the people of Scotland. The cuts will simply not help that. The way in which the BBC is carrying out the cuts is equally troubling. It has announced changes, but it has not said what the changes will look like, and has given no details on the new two-hour Saturday “Good Morning Scotland”. There are fears that other programmes will be scrapped or downgraded because of the reduction in resources. There is also concern over the fact that the cuts are being rushed through on day 1 of what is a five-year strategy that is inappropriately called delivering quality first. It is no secret that the National Union of Journalists believes that the cuts to BBC Scotland’s radio news are fundamentally at odds with the BBC Scotland management’s stated aims to “protect and enhance the quality of our core News and Current Affairs output across all platforms” during what we could call the “delivering quality second” process. I have received many letters from constituents asking the Scottish Government to make representations regarding the proposals and to ask the BBC to reconsider its current approach and proposals. For example, many people have questioned how axing a one-hour weekly show such as “Newsweek Scotland” could save much money when the proposal is to replace it with a two-hour “GMS”. Those questions are from listeners—the consumers—who are the very people that the BBC should listen to and serve. As John Boothman, the head of news and current affairs for BBC Scotland, proudly pointed out when he gave evidence to the Education and Culture Committee in January, the corporation’s radio news coverage has an audience of 450,000 listeners, which is up 30,000 over five years. “Scotland at Ten” is listened to by 100,000 people each week, but what thought has been given to the provision of public broadcasting for that large amount of listeners? The BBC has a duty to provide for those 100,000 listeners. By removing the programme, it is failing in that duty. To avoid further challenges, the BBC needs to issue clear evidence, at the earliest possible opportunity, of how the change does not contravene the guidance. At that meeting, Mr Boothman went on to laud the fact that BBC Radio Scotland broadcasts 63 hours of news and current affairs a week, which is well above the quota that is set by the BBC trust of 43 hours a week. For the life of me, I cannot see where those 63 hours come from, as that is a staggering nine hours a day. If Mr Boothman is tuning in or watching today, I would be grateful if he could let me and others know about that. My colleague Joan McAlpine, who will speak later in the debate and who is a member of the Education and Culture Committee, had some pertinent points for the head of news and current affairs. She asked him whether he had made any representations to the BBC nationally regarding the scale of the proposed cuts in Scotland, given the importance of the 2014 Scottish referendum on independence.

I am sorry, Christine, but I do not have time. In reply, a rather reluctant and unusually coy Mr Boothman eventually suggested that Ms McAlpine would be better off speaking to his boss, Ken MacQuarrie, implying that the issue was above his pay grade—which, incidentally is £200,000 a year. At the same meeting, Iain Macwhirter—I do not know whether he will like this, but I will say it—that sage and well-respected commentator, made the point that, when he raised the issue of the historical underfunding of broadcasting in Scotland, he was told that because Scotland has only a tenth of the population of the United Kingdom, programmes are made at a tenth of the cost. I was absolutely dumbfounded to hear that. It speaks volumes about how broadcasting in Scotland is viewed by senior executives in the BBC. To put it in context, what is being said is that, as Scotland has only a tenth of the population, programmes can be roughly a tenth of the quality. If I were to go to hospital or to access social services or any other public service, I would want the same service, no matter how much of the population there is in Scotland. Staff are concerned about their future, because cuts have been announced but they do not know who the cuts will fall on. As far as I am aware, the staff have been instructed to attend boards in Glasgow next month, but they do not know what those boards will do or what they will consist of. People do not know whether they will be pitted against one another, asked to explain why they would be better for the job than a colleague or simply told that they had better consider voluntary redundancy or possibly face a worse fate. They do not know. Unsurprisingly, that is having a huge impact on morale in the organisation. It is no way to treat the dedicated workers who have, time and again, shown their value and commitment to the BBC and to one another. The delivering quality first strategy is seriously flawed and we, in this Parliament, need to look seriously at what is happening in the BBC. If the higher up staff at BBC Scotland fail to listen to our views, we will need to look seriously at the role of the BBC in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate and I pay tribute to all those who are involved in the fight against the truly horrendous crime of human trafficking. As other members have done, particularly my colleague John Finnie, I put on record my concerns about the withdrawal of funding for the three specialist UKBA officers at Stranraer, which, as he eloquently said, is a strategic point. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of the close working among other agencies on the issue. The Palermo protocol to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime states: “‘Trafficking in persons’ shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs”. The removal of organs has been mentioned. Although the public and media perception of trafficking perhaps centres on sexual exploitation, it is clear from the convention’s definition that trafficking encompasses a wide range of exploitative practices. Trafficking is not a new phenomenon. For centuries, we have been blighted by the barbaric practice of slavery, which many people have put their lives on the line to stop. It is often mentioned as one of the great success stories of the modern era that, as a society, we confronted the issue and put an end to the practice. Unfortunately, as with many things in the modern day, that is simply not true. Perhaps we have done away with state-sponsored slavery but, more than 60 years after article 4 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights banned slavery and the slave trade worldwide, there are more slaves than at any time in human history. Conservative estimates put the figure at around 30 million, but many sources put it at 10 times that amount, which means a staggering 300 million people are being exploited in one way or another. Until we send a clear message to those who are involved in any form of human trafficking or slavery, the numbers will continue to rise and more people will have to endure that truly horrendous crime. That is why the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s report is a wake-up call in the fight against human trafficking. It is disappointing that, as my colleague Roderick Campbell said, despite the fact that we have specific legislation that is aimed at tackling trafficking, when the report was produced, there had been only one successful prosecution in Scotland, while in England and Wales there had been more than 150. In June last year, I asked the Lord Advocate why that was the case. He replied that, although there had been few prosecutions that were directly related to human trafficking, there had been other connected convictions for offences such as living off immoral earnings and fraud and for offences under the Identity Cards Act 2006 and the Immigration Act 1971. Although I do not doubt that any prosecution is to be welcomed, like my colleague John Finnie, I would like the prosecution service to give far more priority to gaining convictions for trafficking. We will begin to win this battle only through making it clear to those involved that trafficking is unacceptable and that they will face the full force of the law for their crimes. The report states that Scotland should “make it clear that it has established an environment which is totally hostile to trafficking and that” all bodies “are geared up to stamp it out.” I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of a summit to bring together relevant agencies to consider the policy and its delivery. Mary Fee, Jenny Marra and Graeme Pearson all mentioned the Commonwealth and Olympic games. If there is any movement towards trafficking at either of those games, will the summit address what we can do about that? I do not doubt the resolve and commitment of all those involved in the fight against human trafficking, but we must do better. We must do everything that we can to send out the clear message that Scotland does not tolerate any form of human trafficking and will use all the power at its disposal to convict those responsible. If that requires further legislation, as suggested by the report, I will welcome that legislation. I note the Scottish Government’s response that any bill would have to be considered alongside a wide range of other potential legislative priorities. I genuinely welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement that the Lord Advocate will consider bringing in a statutory aggravated criminal offence for trafficking. I hope that it is recognised that that should be a priority. We need to act now. Human trafficking is the fastest growing organised criminal activity in the world. The stories are horrific and harrowing, and it is happening here, today, in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. Legislation is the best way to tackle this crime and bring justice for the victims, and I would be happy to support, sponsor or introduce any consultation or legislation that might be required, should the Government be supportive of that approach. I will certainly support the Government on any legislation that it introduces to bring an end to this horrendous crime.

Although organisations such as the Association of Headteachers and Deputes in Scotland, the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, the National Parent Forum of Scotland, COSLA and others have welcomed much of the McCormac report, others such as the EIS and the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers have raised concerns. What work is being done with unions to reassure them that the changes will benefit teachers, particularly those at the end of their training and supply teachers?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his full supplementary answer to Sarah Boyack’s question. Does he believe that the proposed UK welfare reforms will have an impact on supported employment? What plans does he have to work with organisations that are providing supported employment to help to address the challenges that arise, not only with Blindcraft but with other employment opportunities, in the current economic climate?

The cabinet secretary will remember the many meetings that we have had about universities and particularly about the University of Glasgow, which is in my Glasgow Kelvin constituency. How will the plans that he has just outlined, such as those for electing the chairs of university courts, strengthen the system in courts and ensure transparency and accountability?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Neil Bibby agree that, regardless of any allowances that they receive, kinship carers ought to be entitled to child benefit and child tax credit?

The First Minister will be aware of the proposed cuts at BBC Scotland and, in particular, the axing of “Newsweek Scotland” and “Scotland at Ten”. Does the First Minister share my concerns about that, particularly about the effect on political debate in Scotland, especially at the current historic juncture when there is a need for a full and informed debate on our future? Does he agree that the only way in which to achieve that is to have control of our own broadcasting company?

I thank John Park for his thought-provoking speech, which touched on issues that concern me, too. I will talk about community involvement and community benefit clauses to ensure that local people are employed when employment is available. Like the cabinet secretary, I have lived in the centre of Glasgow, and I still live there. Members might not know that she and I shared a tenement building—perhaps she did not want to mention that. I am still there, but she is perhaps in a better place—I do not know. As the Deputy First Minister said in her foreword to the Scottish Government’s document “Scotland’s Cities”, “In their own right, our cities are recognised as centres of knowledge, innovation and culture.” Through working collectively, they can build on those strengths. Our cities are unique. As the cabinet secretary said, Glasgow is designated as a UNESCO city of music and Edinburgh is designated as a UNESCO city of literature. Scotland is the only country to have two UNESCO-designated creative cities, which is a unique and fantastic feat for which we not only in the Scottish Parliament but in Edinburgh and Glasgow should pat ourselves on the back. It is apt that, as we speak, musicians across Glasgow are tuning up their instruments and readying themselves for the start of Celtic Connections, which kicks off today. More than 200 artists from around the globe will come together at more than 300 events across the city. Celtic Connections has been very successful for more than a decade, and the key to its success is effective collaboration in different genres of music. An analogy can be applied to the Government’s approach. If we stretch the analogy, we could look at the Scottish cities alliance as a band with the Scottish cities knowledge centre, the action teams, the cities investment network and the leadership group all being members that feed into the final production, or the delivery group. The cabinet secretary mentioned the make-up of the Scottish cities alliance and the interactions in it to foster innovation and collaboration and drive economic growth. I think that all members would endorse her comments. Framework 2 in the cities strategy identifies the crucial role of capital investment in achieving sustainable economic growth. Central to that aim is the need to improve the ability to secure finance. The document goes on to state: “The Scottish Cities Alliance, supported by the Cities Investment Network will” work to “create and promote strong investment propositions aligned to distinctive City Visions”. It will also be charged with packaging and marketing those “in a coherent Scotland wide way that is clear and accessible for international investment funds”. Both of those points are undoubtedly welcome. That is a great example of the joined-up approach that I have already mentioned. We need to ensure that it runs through the Scottish Government’s strategy for cities. The Scottish Government proposes using innovative funding mechanisms to secure further access to finance. It proposes using mechanisms such as the national housing trust and tax increment financing—or TIF, as we normally call it—which I would like to concentrate on As a mechanism, TIF secures funding against future business rate income that will be generated by the resulting development. It was developed in partnership with the Scottish Futures Trust, and Scotland’s local authorities have estimated that it could be worth hundreds of millions of pounds and could generate more than 17,000 new jobs. I am sure that we would all welcome that. In Glasgow, a current example of TIF funding under consideration is the ambitious project for the Buchanan Galleries, which will see new retail companies and restaurants and vast improvements to Buchanan Street bus station and Queen Street station, all the way down into Buchanan Street. Things will be joined together all the way along to Cathedral Street. I know that concerns have been raised about that TIF and the proposal that has been put forward. One concern that business leaders have raised with me is the time that the proposal—or even a decision—is taking to come to fruition. Will the cabinet secretary indicate when she sees the proposed plans being settled?

It is not just the SNP group in Glasgow City Council. One reason why concerns were expressed was that there were three meetings with Glasgow City Council officers, and they could not produce the papers. I can speak to the member afterwards. If he speaks to Labour councillors, perhaps we will find out why the papers were not produced when they were supposed to be. There are genuine concerns, but I want to move things forward and find out when the project will go ahead and whether there is a date for that. I ask the cabinet secretary that question. Other issues have been raised with me, including whether there can be only one TIF proposal per city. Perhaps the cabinet secretary could say in summing up whether there can be only one TIF, or whether two TIFs can be applied for per city. Obviously, there is great interest in that. I have asked the cabinet secretary how we can ensure local community involvement in the cities strategy. She replied: “The detailed criteria for the fund will be finalised after consultation with the six city local authorities and with COSLA.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 12 January 2012, S4O-0567.] I would like to know when the consultation process will be finalised, and when we will hear about the detailed criteria. I mentioned the areas that John Park spoke about—I wonder whether, in the cities strategy, we can ensure that there is room for communities to be involved. I got the answer that there would be room, but I wonder whether community benefit clauses will be put in for any jobs that are created through the cities strategy, to ensure that—as John Park mentioned—local people will benefit by being able to get those jobs. I think that my time is up; I am being nodded on. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can answer some of the issues that I have raised.

I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on her new post and wish her well. I am probably one of the people she referred to when she mentioned people who play hockey or netball at school and then give it up. I used to do that many years ago, but I do not think that I could do so now—although perhaps we could set up a Parliament team. I recently had the pleasure of visiting the new Commonwealth house in Glasgow’s merchant city, which is in my constituency of Kelvin. I was extremely impressed by the dedication and professionalism of the staff there and by the building itself, which, as well as embodying the ethos of the games, with its beautiful portrayals of all the 17 sports, is a great example of how the games will help ordinary people and businesses. It is a great testament to the organisers that they made extensive use of Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries, a social enterprise that employs disabled people to make high-quality furniture. They are also to be commended for employing veterans of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq to work on the renovation of Commonwealth house. The veterans were recruited through Glasgow City Council’s helping heroes campaign, which assists former soldiers in finding work. In addition, more than 40 young apprentices were employed as part of the renovation of Commonwealth house. As the minister said, on top of the physical legacy of the games, there will be an economic regeneration and job creation legacy. Glasgow has a long history of events that have been intended to deliver a lasting legacy to the people of Glasgow and the city itself. Many members—with the exception, perhaps, of our younger members—may remember the Glasgow’s miles better campaign back in 1983, which was the year in which the internationally acclaimed Burrell collection opened. The Glasgow’s miles better campaign was one of the best and most successful promotions ever launched, and it won a New York international film and television award no fewer than four times between 1983 and 1987. The campaign was launched in response to a lingering negative stereotype of Glasgow as a dangerous place that tourists did not want to visit, which ordinary Glaswegians were not particularly proud of. I remember the campaign well and the amazing effect that it had on perceptions of the city. Almost overnight, there was a tangible new buzz in Glasgow, as local people began to feel proud of their city and, internationally, people began to look at Glasgow as a vibrant modern city that embraced the future rather than looking to the past. The campaign acted as a launch pad for a lot of rejuvenation in Glasgow and a new confident outlook. The garden festival that followed built on the campaign’s success and enhanced Glasgow’s reputation internationally. That was not the festival’s only legacy. The site, which is known as Pacific Quay, now houses the Glasgow science centre, the IMAX theatre and the BBC’s headquarters. Two years after the festival, one of the city’s most transformational events took place—Glasgow was named European city of culture 1990. Those celebrations showcased the very best of what Glasgow had to offer the world. Glasgow had been transformed and the recognition that it received throughout the world was phenomenal. The 2014 Commonwealth games are the next step on the road. Once again, Glasgow will showcase itself to the world and deliver a lasting legacy for areas of the city that have not always benefited much from previous projects. The minister said that Glasgow 2014 will bring benefits not just for sport but for the economy. I am pleased that she announced an extension of sports hubs, in particular in the school estate. Such an approach is long overdue. People have constantly said, “We have school playing fields on our doorstep that should belong to the community, but we cannot access them.” The minister’s announcement is positive. There will also be benefits from the building and renovation of sports grounds and buildings—I talked about Commonwealth house. I commend the partners who are involved for their collaborative approach to projects, but I ask them to reflect on the improvements that can be made to the surrounding areas. The minister is looking at me, so I will give a couple of examples. Thousands of visitors will travel through Kelvingrove underground station, in the west end, because many events will take place at Kelvingrove park and in the Kelvin hall. The station is in dire need of a significant facelift. Its entrance is in a bad state of repair, but that will be the first view that visitors get of the west end. Partick, which is also in the west end of Glasgow, was the site of the first international football match, which took place between Scotland and England. The event could be celebrated during the Commonwealth games, perhaps by erecting a plaque—or whatever commemoration the community would like. George Square is another example. Thousands of people will pass through the square and, to my mind—and to many Glaswegian minds—a makeover for the square is well overdue. A while back, the Glasgow Evening Times ran a competition to redesign the square, and readers submitted their ideas. Perhaps the paper will run the competition again. I applaud the joined-up approach that agencies are taking to delivering a legacy for Glasgow and Scotland, which is paramount. Perhaps the minister will take on board and report back on some of my suggestions. We have a fantastic opportunity in Glasgow and in Scotland as a whole. We can go for gold, but in Glasgow we always reach further than people say that we will. With the Commonwealth games, Glasgow can reach for the stars.

I will start by putting on my hat as convener of the cross-party group on older people, which I think is the longest running cross-party group. As members can imagine, the subject of integrated care comes up constantly at our meetings and has much exercised us in our discussions, so I welcome the debate. The group had a meeting yesterday at which there was excellent discussion of the issue, as others who were there have said. Although it is unfortunate that Mary Fee referred to supposed cutbacks in the number of nurses, the debate has otherwise been constructive and members have focused on improvements and reform, regardless of our political differences. As Jackie Baillie said, the issue is people and we should not forget that. I have long questioned the community health partnership situation in Glasgow, and other Glasgow MSPs have referred to it, too. My concerns in that regard are well documented, so I will not reiterate them, but I will give an example of what happened to one of my constituents. I am sure that other members can talk about similar examples from their constituencies. An elderly gentleman was taken into hospital and it was decided while he was there that, because care services could not be provided for him, he could not go back to his home and should go into a care home. The family and others duly rallied round and looked for a suitable care home near them that met the gentleman’s needs, but it took months to find a suitable one. Not even a letter from the doctor, stating that the man’s health was deteriorating while he was in hospital, helped in getting the local authority to reach a decision on finding him a place in a care home. Last week, Richard Simpson referred to a charter for whistleblowers. I found out that Glasgow City Council had a moratorium—or, I should say, ran a quota—on admissions to care homes every month only because someone in the health service told me about it. It is really important that we look at integrated care services and I entirely agree with Hugh Henry, who made an excellent speech, and other members that the biggest challenge that we face with the proposed health and social care partnerships is getting rid of the attitudes at the top. People at the bottom desperately want to help and integrate social care and hospital services but the problem lies with those at the top. The various partners have to work together because we simply cannot allow people to languish in hospital; that is costing the health board a fortune and it is happening only because some local authority wants to save money from its budget. Who is suffering in all this?

Absolutely. Indeed, in the case that I highlighted, the doctor wrote a letter saying that the health of the man in question was deteriorating in hospital. However, if we can bring budgets together, we can secure the best for patients and older people. Far too much empire building is going on in the NHS, local authorities, social work and so on and, as Hugh Henry and others have pointed out, the people at the bottom are suffering as a result. I have cited one particular case, but I am sure that members can mention many others. I agree with most of those who have spoken that the Association of Directors of Social Work’s briefing is most unhelpful. I hope that the ADSW will get round the table and share its concerns. I am sure that the cabinet secretary has met its representatives and that it will come to the table and work in partnership. As others have pointed out, we need legislation to ensure that the reforms are carried out. That will not happen overnight—this is not some magic wand—but, although it might take some time, we desperately need to make the approach work, not just for the people whom we represent but for all our sakes. We should give our all to ensure that people such as the gentleman I mentioned do not languish in hospital; that doctors do not have to keep writing letters to local authorities or social work or social care departments; and that what we do in here is for the good of the people we represent, not for social work departments, local authorities or health boards. I am pleased to have been involved in this debate on the reforms. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on what she has done and look forward to seeing what she—and indeed all of us—can achieve with this. The job will be hard but we have to get it done for everyone’s sake.

I have just noticed that the number of the motion is 1223. I think that I have a record in the Parliament because in each of the past two to three weeks I have secured a members’ business debate. I am grateful to the business team for giving me the opportunity. I think that this is the third motion that I have had debated in the same number of weeks. To be ranked number 1 in any shape or form is always of great satisfaction, but to be ranked number 1 in the UK by students from around the world is a truly great result. Indeed, when it comes to numbers, the University of Glasgow, in my Kelvin constituency, is hard to beat. It is the fourth-oldest university, having been established in 1451, and is currently ranked among the top 100 in the world. The University of Glasgow is also a member of Universitas 21, which is an international network of universities that was established as an international reference point and resource for strategic thinking on issues of global significance. The vision of Universitas 21 is indeed an ambitious one as it seeks to be the leading international network of research-intensive universities, working together to foster global citizenship and institutional innovation through research-inspired teaching and learning, student mobility, connecting students and staff and advocating internationalisation. It is only fitting that the University of Glasgow should be a member of such a forward-looking and influential group, because the university was at the forefront of social change in the past as a major centre of the Scottish enlightenment in the 18th century and a pioneer in the 19th century in extending education to those outwith the upper classes. Not only should we be proud of that tradition, we should not lose sight of it and should ensure that it is at the core of not just the University of Glasgow’s values but those of other universities as they strive to grow in the 21st century. Being part of the Universitas 21 group gives the university worldwide reach and appeal, as evidenced by the results of the international student barometer. Indeed, 96 per cent of international students agree that Glasgow is a good place to be, which is something that I, as someone who comes from Glasgow, could not agree with more. The university was also voted as having the number 1 online library in the UK and the number 1 sports facility. The University of Glasgow is also a member of the Russell group, which is a collaboration of 20 UK universities, of which 18 are in the top 20 in terms of research funding. In addition, in the international student barometer the university was voted as having the best learning experience in the group and was ranked first in terms of quality of lectures. Taking all those figures together, we see that the University of Glasgow is number 1 in the United Kingdom and third across the globe. That is something of which we should be proud—and something which, of course, brings clear economic benefit not only to the city of Glasgow but to the whole of Scotland and the UK. Such success not only brings economic benefit but adds to Glasgow’s diversity and cultural richness. The west end of the city has always been viewed as a diverse area, playing host to events such as the west end festival—which, with 600 events, is Glasgow’s largest—and the largest mardi gras outside London. Byres Road was shortlisted as a finalist in the greatest street in Britain awards—and I am sure that we will win that award next year. That success is partly due to the role that students and, indeed, international students play in making the area so vibrant, so rich and so cosmopolitan and we must do everything we can to ensure that it remains so. I now wish to raise a few issues to which I hope the minister will respond in summing up. Although I believe that the future of Glasgow’s—and indeed Scotland’s—universities remains bright, I am concerned about the actions of the UK Border Agency and the effect of its changes to tier 4 visas on international students and, in turn, Scottish universities’ hard-won reputation as centres of excellence. It has been estimated that the placing of restrictions on foreign students could be costing universities £1 billion in fee income alone. To make matters worse, the UKBA, which advises the Home Office on how to impose the restrictions and cap such immigration, is itself deeply critical of the figures on which it relies, estimating that net immigration is probably more like half the figure stated in the international passenger survey. We need to look at that issue because those ill-thought-out and ultimately erroneous plans are harming Scottish universities’ ability to attract and retain international students and Scotland’s economy, and I ask the minister to address that issue in summing up. Higher education in Scotland is worth £1.9 billion, employs 35,000 people and exports more than £400 million-worth of services. It is, therefore, one of Scotland’s biggest service sector exporters. People do not realise that fact; we talk about universities as places of excellence and learning, which they are, but we should also be proud of the fact that they are one of our biggest service sector exporters—and exporters of knowledge, at that. Given their rich history and contribution to Scottish society throughout the centuries, Scottish universities must be protected and enhanced to ensure that they continue to deliver for Scotland and help to shape future learning throughout the world. That is what Scotland—and the University of Glasgow in particular—is renowned for and I am very pleased to have secured this debate in Parliament.

That was an interesting exchange between the questioner and the Deputy First Minister. Will the proposed charter be extended to local government, particularly Glasgow City Council, where people are certainly not encouraged to report—and are terrified to report—any incidents?

I thank all the members who have stayed behind for the debate, as I know that we are running late and that many members have other business. It is important to see young people in a positive light. They are not all bad. In my speech, I hope that members will hear comments from one youngster that prove that young people are ambitious for not just themselves, but the country as a whole. Young Scot is the national youth information and citizenship charity for Scotland. It provides young people between the ages of 11 and 26 with information, ideas and incentives to become confident, informed and active citizens. I congratulate it on its work and its undoubted success as an organisation. The breadth of the information and help that it offers people is truly staggering—it ranges from how to set up a band, to advice on housing, relationships, getting a job and knowing legal rights. The organisation is a great resource. The national entitlement card for young people, which offers them discounted travel and other discounts at more than 1,400 outlets throughout Scotland, has of course been popular. The card is part of the European youth card network, which provides more than 100,000 discounts in more than 40 countries. That is also popular. Much of Young Scot’s work is about empowering young people, providing them with the necessary information to make informed decisions and choices and giving them the necessary tools to turn their ideas into action and to take advantage of the opportunities that are available to them. All that together helps young people to grow into confident and aspirational young adults. Members might remember that we debated youth unemployment last Thursday. In the debate, I was keen to stress that many of the young people whom I meet in my constituency of Glasgow Kelvin are aspirational, ambitious, passionate about what they want to do and keen to participate fully in their communities and larger society. However, they sometimes feel that, rather than being listened to, they are pigeonholed at a young age, which has a negative impact on their confidence and outlook. If we are to tackle some of the issues that young people have to deal with—be they unemployment or a feeling of being pigeonholed—we need to engage the young people, listen to them and help them to achieve what they want. The truth about youth project sets out to do exactly that. It aims to engage young people in highly practical activities in their communities that will make a great difference to those communities and to the young people involved. Truth about youth is run by Young Scot and supported by the Co-operative Foundation, which I congratulate on and thank for its support. The project focuses on challenging negative perceptions of young people. It is being undertaken in Glasgow, but the negative perception that people sometimes have of young people is certainly not confined to Glasgow. The project sets out to challenge such perceptions by supporting workshops that are created and delivered by young people, in which young people and adults can come together to gain a better understanding of the positive things that young people do. The workshops have been highly successful in bringing together young and old to gain a better understanding of one another through identifying stereotypes, encouraging understanding between generations and sharing stories of positive involvement in the community. A blogging site called The Patter—“patter” is a good Glasgow word—has been set up to give everyone the opportunity to blog and share their thoughts on young people. A recent entry by Anon—a media studies student at Cardonald College—hit the nail on the head. Anon said: “One common word used to describe young people nowadays is ‘lazy’. I bet you, if you are young, will have been called this word one time or another by older folk. But the question is, is it the truth or a complete misconception? For one, it is slightly unfair, as although there are a fair many young people who are genuinely lazy, a lot of them just have nothing practical to do. With the lack of jobs and lack of social activities in towns (e.g. ruined football pitches, closed sport or entertainment facilities etc), the only thing in my opinion which is available to young people now is chatting to each other on the internet, such as Facebook, or playing their games consoles all day. Or resort to becoming a NED which is sadly becoming more commonplace. So, while a lot of us are lazy, many of us are still called ‘lazy’ very unfairly. If we have nothing to do, what can we do?” That young person feels that young people are being painted in a negative light and the blog identifies the fact that we need to provide more opportunities for social and other activities. I would like the lessons that have been learned and the experience that has been gained by the project to be extended across Scotland, and the Scottish Government to work with Young Scot to see that that happens. Perhaps the minister will look favourably on my request in summing up, as I believe that he understands the challenges that face younger people. Angela Constance once said: “I probably didn’t really engage with education fully until I was about 14. Prior to that, I was a little disengaged. Not problematic, but disengaged.” That probably sums up the feelings of some young people today. I ask the minister to look favourably on Young Scot and its projects. As I said in my opening remarks, it is time for someone to stand up for the youth of this country against the negative publicity that they always get. A lot of good young people are out there and we should be praising from the rooftops Young Scot and what it brings to young people. If anyone from the media is in the gallery, I hope that they will pick up on that and engage with young people. Perhaps the minister will tell us whether he will meet representatives from Young Scot and its projects in Glasgow, particularly in the east end, and look to rolling out that experience across the country. We want positive, aspirational and confident young people. We have such young people, but we just have to ensure that other people know that young people are not all lazy. I look forward to the rest of the debate.

I commend the Opposition for highlighting an issue that we all see as very important. When I saw that the title of the debate was “Scotland’s Future”, I thought, “That’s quite easy. I can sum that up in one word.” Members can all guess that that one word is “independence.” The issue that is being debated is complex. The motion is quite right to point out that all parties must work together to put forward the best solutions available to us at this time. The Scottish Government has to an extent recognised this important issue and it is taking positive steps to address it. I welcome the First Minister’s announcement of a minister for youth employment. That is absolutely fantastic and I look forward to meeting and working with that minister. As has already been said, provision was made in the spending review for a record 125,000 new modern apprenticeships over the next five years. We are committed to delivering 25,000 a year. It is important that, as the First Minister said, those apprenticeships will be linked to jobs. At the SNP conference in October, the First Minister announced—I think that Iain Gray raised this point—that any new Government contract or grant will have an apprenticeship or training plan attached to it. We should all welcome that as it is essential for the future success of Scotland and its young people. Chic Brodie mentioned the opportunities for all initiative. That is the commitment, which the First Minister mentioned, that every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland who is not in a job will be offered a place in education or training or a modern apprenticeship. It is important to recognise that. The Smith group began its report by welcoming the initiatives that the Government has put in place. It said: “education and training must only be viewed as a means of gaining the skills that take a young person nearer to fulfilling employment.” We must acknowledge that important point. The report suggests that we should not just consider statistics, temporary outcomes and piecemeal initiatives but have a fully joined-up approach. When we offer a training or college place or other initiative, we tend to forget that it might not necessarily suit the young person. We need to remember that one size does not fit all and that a young person might not want to go down a particular road. We should listen to what young people tell us about what they want to do. I feel positive about the future, because the Scottish Government’s curriculum for excellence is designed to enable young people to identify what they want to do and to develop at their own pace the knowledge, understanding and skills that will meet their needs and aspirations. Members on the Opposition benches said that some young people who leave school at 15 or 16 do not have the necessary skills. That is perhaps a failing that the curriculum for excellence will address. Many young people do not want to stay on at school; they want to take a different direction, and that is up to them. The curriculum for excellence is in its infancy, but I think that it will be hugely successful if we listen to the right people—that is, to young people themselves. For too long, many young people have not been given the opportunity to explore their potential. They have been pigeonholed and written off at a young age. That is sad, and it cannot be allowed to happen. Members of the Opposition talk about a “lost generation”.

I think that the member took the wrong message from what Mr Mason said. Mr Mason did not say that young people do not want to work; he was talking about a young person whom he had employed. If the member speaks to Mr Mason after the debate, I am sure that he will explain what he meant. Perhaps if Jenny Marra had taken Mr Mason’s intervention, he would have explained exactly what he meant. Young people do not want to be pigeonholed. There are aspects of some young people’s lives that make things difficult for them, and we must listen to what they say and ensure that what we offer is what they want. I do not particularly want to use the phrase “lost generation”, which the Opposition uses. However, perhaps if we look back 10 or 15 years we can see that the lost generation is the result of the policies of not just Scottish Administrations in previous sessions of the Scottish Parliament but UK Governments that tried to pigeonhole kids without asking them what they wanted. We need to consider the challenges that young people face in the modern world. They perhaps see the challenges differently from how we see them. We must listen to them and ensure that we provide proper training and education—training and education that they want—so that they are able to get jobs. Unemployed young people in my constituency tell me that they have the ambition, aspiration and passion that they need to get a job, but they do not have opportunities to explore what they want to do, so they have lost their confidence. We must build up young people’s confidence. In my constituency in Glasgow there are opportunities in the renewables sector—on the Clyde and elsewhere—and in the financial sector, which is coming along fantastically. Drew Smith and I talked about the financial district when we met on the march in Glasgow yesterday.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. There are fantastic opportunities out there for our young people. We just have to ensure that they are trained and ready for the jobs that we have to offer.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The First Minister will be aware of the situation in Glasgow regarding arm’s-length external organisations. What discussions has the Government had with Glasgow City Council on the review of arm’s-length companies, and on how it will impact on front-line services?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has taken regarding the recent increase in parking charges at Glasgow royal infirmary. (S4O-00405)

The cabinet secretary is aware that I met staff outside Glasgow royal infirmary. Since then, I have received confirmation from Impregilo that “We are therefore reviewing our options, including introducing additional/season tickets with further discounts on the revised tariffs.” I have written again to Impregilo to request a meeting of all the concerned parties. Will the cabinet secretary also write to Impregilo or request a meeting with it to resolve the situation?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to address unemployment in older people. (S4O-00365)

The cabinet secretary may be aware of the recent announcement by Glasgow City Council, offering cash incentives to companies to employ unemployed people over the age of 50, which is a very good idea. Will he look into that scheme with a view to extending it throughout Scotland?

I thank the cabinet secretary for holding this debate. As a previous MSP for the Glasgow region and as the current MSP for Glasgow Kelvin, I, like my colleague Adam Ingram, have a lot of experience of regeneration issues. As I have said previously, I fully support the Government’s commitment and the aim to put regeneration at the top of the agenda. I do not dispute that Duncan McNeil spoke from the heart or the sincerity with which his speech was delivered. He is absolutely right about the neglect and lack of ambition that there have been. We have spoken about them before. That neglect and lack of ambition have been visited on communities for generations, but he must be aware that there were Labour Governments during those 40, 50 or 60 years—decades and generations. That happened not just in Scotland, but at Westminster. However, I appreciate Duncan McNeil’s sincerity.

I thank the member for his intervention, but I remind him that this is not the end of the URCs. I think that the cabinet secretary mentioned that, and I am sure that he will have to something to say about it in his winding-up speech. Obviously, it is not only Inverclyde that has suffered high levels of deprivation; many areas in Glasgow have suffered them, too. Despite the money that has been invested—we have already spoken about that—those communities still have the same problems. There have been generations of unemployed in those communities, and there is no hope. Things are getting better, but as Duncan McNeil said, there have been generations of unemployed people, which is a problem that we must consider. I believe that the cabinet secretary and the other ministers in the Government are looking at innovative approaches. We cannot continue with the old ways in which money is spent in areas that are still deprived. That is why we need to consider innovative approaches, and I welcome those that the cabinet secretary outlined. I do not want to make the debate very political, although, obviously, I raised a political issue, which Duncan McNeil acknowledged. However, I was pretty disheartened when I read the Labour Party’s amendment. As I said, the Labour Party has been in power in Glasgow and in other areas, but it has failed to successfully regenerate areas and communities, particularly in Glasgow. As even Alex Johnstone mentioned, we must work together to regenerate those areas. I would have thought that we would want to work together on the Government’s ambition for regeneration, but, unfortunately, Michael McMahon seemed to take the same downbeat and pessimistic tone. I am sorry to say that he was bereft of fresh ideas or clear direction. I will take an intervention from him if he wants to intervene.

I put it to the member that perhaps the Labour Party needs to be regenerated.

I sincerely hope that the Labour Party will work constructively with the Government and others to ensure that future generations of people are not treated in the same way that people were treated decades ago. We must consider regeneration optimistically, as we can regenerate areas. We all know where those areas are, and a real change would benefit their communities. They want change, and it is up to us as elected members to give that to them. I want to touch on a couple of issues that are obviously important, particularly in the Glasgow area. The Commonwealth games will be a real catalyst for regeneration, not only in Glasgow but across Scotland. I hope that the minister will say something in his closing speech about community benefit clauses, which are being inserted into public contracts to ensure that local communities benefit from them. I fully support that interesting and innovative approach, but I would like to see more meat on the bones in relation to how it will work in practice. As the minister knows, because I have raised the issue on numerous occasions, I am particularly interested in the community empowerment bill. I agree with him that community empowerment must come from the bottom up, not the top down. I heard what Alex Johnstone said, and, yes, we all need to work together. However, if communities are not involved and engaged, regeneration will not work. For too long, things have been thrown at communities—such as the sunshine industries that Duncan McNeil mentioned—without anybody asking the people on the ground what they wanted and how they would get involved. The community empowerment bill is one of the most important bills in this session of Parliament. I look forward to seeing more meat on the bones of the bill and to working with the Government and with local communities on it. Tax increment financing provides a golden opportunity for cities. The Glasgow Kelvin constituency, which I represent, covers the city centre, the merchant city and the vibrant west end area of Glasgow. It could really benefit from that finance. Glasgow City Council is putting forward a business case—I think it is for £80 million—for such funding for the Buchanan quarter. I do not say this lightly, but there have been some concerns about that TIF scheme. I plead with the council to listen to those concerns. I also hope that they will have no adverse effect, regardless of what the council proposes to the Government, because we desperately need such finance to be put into city centres, as it will raise areas up. Duncan McNeil mentioned Inverclyde docks; I would like something to be done about the waterfront area on the Clyde as well. We should bring such derelict areas back into use so that all the communities can use them and businesses can locate there. I would like that to be considered for a future TIF scheme, if not the one that Glasgow City Council is proposing now. I am pleased to speak in the debate. Regeneration is at the heart of communities as well as being at the heart of business. It is also at the heart of cities, including Glasgow, which is obviously the greatest city in Scotland. I want to ensure that regeneration works. That is why I appeal to all parties to work together to ensure that we get decent regeneration and a decent Scotland for the people who matter—the people who live here.

The member mentioned constituencies and nurses. My case load from nurses is to do with the car parking charges at Glasgow royal infirmary, which the Labour Government implemented under a private finance initiative. That is my biggest case load.

I have taken part in similar debates in previous sessions of the Parliament, and the issue does not seem to move on. Jean Urquhart mentioned that we have to be careful to take time when putting kids into adoptive families. Surely it is unacceptable that a child can be put out to foster care at three weeks old, still be with the same foster carers at four years old, but not be able to call them mum and dad. That, too, is surely harmful to the child.

It is important that everyone understands the severity and humanity of the case that is behind the motion. My colleague Bill Kidd will concentrate on the nuclear aspect and I will concentrate on the humanitarian and human rights side. It is a great honour and sadness to bring the motion before the Scottish Parliament. It is an honour to highlight the enormous courage and conviction of a man who put aside thoughts of his own personal safety to expose to the world the true extent of Israel’s secret nuclear arsenal. It is a sadness to note that 25 years have passed since Vanunu’s conviction for treason, in which time he was held in solitary confinement for 11 years, and that he still suffers persecution in Israel today, not being allowed to speak to anyone outwith Israel. Obviously, the present restrictions on him were put in place simply because he happened to speak to someone who was not an Israeli citizen. Since his release, Vanunu has been subjected to harassment, intimidation and restrictions on his freedom that Amnesty International has described as cruel, inhuman and degrading and that have been condemned by not only the European Union but the United Kingdom Government. His treatment breaches his fundamental human right to freedom of expression and movement. It also breaches the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which includes the right to leave one’s country, alongside the right to freedom of expression. Let us not forget that the state of Israel is a party and signatory to that treaty. It is our duty, not only as members of the Scottish Parliament but as honest, decent people, to support those who have suffered a breach of those fundamental rights and those who have been persecuted, and who continue to experience persecution, regardless of where they are or the state that is persecuting them. Scotland and its people have a proud history of standing up against injustice and speaking out without fear in defence of those who need to be defended. The people of Scotland want those traditions and values to be reflected in this, their national Parliament. Although what we say may not immediately lead to an end to the persecution of Vanunu and others, it will reinforce Scotland’s empathy with those who suffer and our long-held traditions of equality and justice very far into the Parliament’s future. If some of us—perhaps those who are not in the chamber—were not to recognise that fact and to believe erroneously that, as a devolved Parliament, we cannot speak out on such matters, it would be a great shame and a disservice to those whom we represent, who firmly believe in equality, human rights and freedom of speech. We cannot reserve or devolve the right to speak out against injustice, and no one body has the moral authority on what is right or wrong. It is for us all to be guided by what we know to be right and to speak out when we know that something is not right. It is right for Vanunu to be allowed to leave Israel and live peacefully in one of the numerous countries that have offered him residence. It is also right for us to speak out against his treatment. As the motion says, Mordechai Vanunu has been nominated for the Nobel peace prize 17 times. His only desire is to be allowed to leave a country where he is being persecuted and to live a peaceful life free from persecution. We in Scotland and people throughout the world share and support that desire.

I am not a member of the Education and Culture Committee, although I know that a number of members in the chamber are. However, like all members and the public, I believe that it is important that we take forward the issues of attainment and confidence in our young people. Early intervention starting from a very young age is important. I hear what Ken Macintosh says about the nurture groups that Glasgow City Council has provided. I agree that they are fantastic, and I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has also praised them. We do not always disagree on aspects of work that is done by councils. We did disagree with Glasgow City Council when, while other councils were reducing class sizes, it was the only council in Scotland that did not do that. I was disappointed about that, because nurturing and educating the kids of our country is one of the most important duties that we have as elected politicians. I agree with Mr Macintosh on certain aspects, but I cannot agree with him on others. Both the minister and Derek Mackay mentioned parenting, which is critical in influencing how children approach not just education but their later years in life. I think the minister has got it right. She mentioned all-encompassing parenting classes. It is not a question of interfering, because it is a fact that many parents want to be looked at not as separate entities but alongside their kids, and to be helped to educate their kids. I reiterate Derek Mackay’s point about early intervention. As far as I am concerned, early intervention is the key, particularly in the earliest years. That point has been made by John Downie of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and by Sally Ann Kelly of Barnardo’s Scotland, who said: “It is only through effective early prevention work that we can avoid poor outcomes for Scotland’s children and young people in later life.” If the acting director of Barnardo’s Scotland says that, I think that we are doing something right. Statistics from the Scottish household survey show that parents’ satisfaction with their children’s education is high. When people were surveyed about schools and the attainment of their kids, more than 90 per cent of parents said that they were very satisfied with the education that schools provide. We may criticise certain aspects, but in some areas we are getting things right. I am not saying that everything is perfect, but things are improving. We have to work harder to push forward, but we are getting there and we are getting on with it. I am not asking for praise, but the Minister for Children and Young People and her team are working hard to push forward the education system in our country. I want to veer away from the education aspect and look at other forms of attainment and ambition in a slightly different way. We could do with more positivity and encouragement, particularly from the Labour benches. I do not particularly want to be political, but I have to agree with my colleague George Adam. It is important that we encourage our kids, but if all that we get from politicians is negativity, it does not do much to encourage attainment and positivity. Perhaps members on the Labour benches should look at themselves—not just members who have spoken in this debate, but those who spoke in last night’s debate, as well. If we want to encourage our kids to be positive and to do well, we must lead by example. Constantly running them down does not work at all. Of course, it is not just politicians or Opposition parties who are to blame; the media play a role in this respect. Not all young kids are bad; in fact, many contribute greatly to society. For example, I am proud to say that Glasgow is the only part of Scotland to have picked up the cudgel of the Co-operative Foundation-funded truth about youth programme, which aims to challenge people’s perceptions of young people and to make it clear that not everything about young people is negative and that they actually make a positive contribution to society. Education is, of course, very important, but we must consider how young people are perceived in the media and by the general public. Indeed, more emphasis should be put on that in, for example, the good citizenship programme. Nevertheless, the fact is that young people sometimes get bad press. We are doing our best through education to ensure that young people can meet the challenges that face them, but perhaps certain people in the media and elsewhere should be educated in the good things that young people do. It is not all bad. The debate has generally been good. Of course, we will never agree on everything, but it is important that we work together to ensure that our young people are encouraged to attain their full potential. If they cannot look to elected members for that, I do not know where else they can look.

The Scottish Government announced recently that carers will be included in the energy assistance package. Can the minister tell us what effect that will have on carers?

In her opening remarks, Jenny Marra mentioned the Scottish fuel poverty forum. Does the minister agree with what it says about energy? It states: “while it is our remit to work within existing resource levels, it should be recognised that in light of rising energy costs, it is difficult to see how sufficient progress can be made within these constraints.”

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the issue of increases in car parking charges at Glasgow royal infirmary has not yet been resolved and that it is still causing great financial hardship to staff. I have written to the various organisations concerned, including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, but have not yet received a reply. Can the cabinet secretary give me an update or any information that she has received that may help to alleviate the hardship that the staff and people who visit the infirmary face?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it is considering changes to the law governing the holding of court cases in closed session. (S4O-00224)

I am interested in the term “compelling reasons”. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Solicitor General will be aware of a recent case in Inverness that resulted in criticisms from many in the legal profession. In that case, the media were permanently banned from reporting any details of the trial. The ban could have been contested, but only at a cost of several thousand pounds. Does the Solicitor General agree that the use of such super-injunction powers sets a dangerous precedent and that, in the case in Inverness, the process was not used for the purposes for which it was intended, which she mentioned?

Is the First Minister aware of the proposal by the parking management at Glasgow royal infirmary to raise parking fees by 62 per cent, which will have a severe impact on health service workers there?

6. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met with Strathclyde partnership for transport and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00127)

I am pleased to hear that the subway is open at a decent hour for the people of Glasgow and beyond. I do not know whether the minister is aware of the legislation that means that SPT pays for bus infrastructure and park-and-ride facilities, the benefits of which are accrued by the private sector. I find that quite hard to believe, but I was told about it last week at a meeting with SPT. Will the minister look at that legislation with a view to amending it?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is question number 6, actually. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in tackling human trafficking in Scotland. (S4O-00067)

I thank Mr Mulholland for that comprehensive answer. I know that he and the cabinet secretary will be aware of the recent Glasgow operation Andronicus, which has so far reported good success in the fight against human trafficking. I am sure that, like me, he will want to congratulate the great work done by Strathclyde Police in the operation. However, given the apparent difficulties in bringing such cases to court, will the Scottish Government consider launching a review of current guidance and legislation to ensure that, first, good practice is shared and, secondly, conviction rates are increased?

The cabinet secretary started by talking about the current challenges and the need to work in partnership. He was absolutely correct. There are certainly challenges in further and higher education. There are particular challenges at the University of Glasgow and the University of Strathclyde, in my constituency of Glasgow Kelvin. I will concentrate on the situations at those universities. The cabinet secretary is aware of the concerns that have been expressed about the institutions and I thank him for the work that he has done and is doing on the matter. He has met me on numerous occasions and he has met students and staff. I think that we are moving on and things are happening, but I hope that we can push on and that the cabinet secretary can update me on what is happening. I sincerely welcome today’s announcement, which came as a real surprise, of a wider package of reforms in higher education—in particular, the very welcome setting up of a panel to review governance in universities. The issue has been at the forefront of all my discussions with university students, staff and principals at Glasgow, Strathclyde and elsewhere. I ask the cabinet secretary whether the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will be involved in the review. I know that I have sprung that question on him, but I think that the funding council has a great role to play in the courses that the higher education sector offers and I would like to know where it fits into the review. On the situation at the University of Glasgow, I have met staff, students and the principal and I think that we are making some progress. However, there is still great concern about courses in Slavonic languages. The university court will sit on 22 June, when it will make a decision. I know that it is not in my remit or within my power to demand that courses not be axed, but I make a plea to the court to listen to all the concerns that have been expressed, not just by me but by staff and students, and to consider sincerely any changes that it is thinking of making in relation to Slavonic languages. As Scotland pushes ahead in the world with an international outlook, and given that we are one of the worst countries in the world for learning languages, it seems to be perverse that the university is talking about cutting a course that is held in high esteem. The only other such course is in London. I cannot make this plea to the cabinet secretary, but if members of the university court are listening I urge them to give serious consideration to all the issues that have been raised and not to axe the courses about which concern has been expressed. Members have mentioned the University of Strathclyde. I have met all concerned parties—staff, students and the principal—on numerous occasions. I felt completely educated last week, because I had a meeting at the University of Glasgow on the Monday and at the University of Strathclyde on the Tuesday. As is the case with Glasgow, I think that things are moving on at Strathclyde and that partnership is developing. I sincerely hope that we move in the right direction. However, there remain concerns about proposals to cut courses; geography and sociology were mentioned, and the faculty of humanities and social sciences is under threat, as is the community education department, which reaches out to the more deprived areas of Glasgow and beyond. We really need to look at that. Maybe I am putting the cabinet secretary on the spot, but I wonder whether he can give us an update on what is happening at Strathclyde. As I said, I have spoken to everyone involved and we are moving in the right direction, but it would give comfort to people who are taking or applying to take courses to know what is happening. An area that has not been covered in the debate is the situation to do with visas for overseas students, which has a direct effect on funding for our universities—I think that Liz Smith mentioned that. The UK Border Agency’s actions are having a detrimental effect on the ability of overseas students to come to our universities. As I represent Glasgow Kelvin, which contains more universities and colleges than any other constituency in Scotland, I ask the cabinet secretary whether he has had any talks about the matter with the UK Border Agency or the relevant UK ministers. The principals have told me on many occasions that they are suffering because of the position of the UK Border Agency and Westminster, which means that some foreign students cannot get visas to study here. I hope that the cabinet secretary can respond to the questions that I have raised when he sums up.

The First Minister will be aware of the announcement by Trinity Mirror to axe 90 jobs at the Daily Record and Sunday Mail newspapers in my constituency. Does he share my concerns about these further attacks on the newspaper industry and, in particular, on the investigative journalism of those two newspapers? I further ask the First Minister whether he or other ministers will meet me and others to discuss this serious situation about the newspaper industry.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on and thank him for his excellent and informative speech, which got to the nub of the debate about health and wellbeing. I also congratulate you, Presiding Officer, on your new position. It is good to be here making my maiden speech as the constituency member for Glasgow Kelvin. [Applause.] Thank you. I intend to make a positive speech, but I must say that I was pretty disappointed by Jackie Baillie’s speech and, to an extent, by Patricia Ferguson’s speech. Perhaps the Labour Party should remember that it did not win the election, and perhaps there should be a label that says, “Labour is bad for your health.” It was Labour’s negative campaigning that lost it the election. I pay tribute to the SNP’s team and I pay tribute to the cabinet secretary for her commitment and positive attitude to the wellbeing of the people of Scotland. The cabinet secretary said that she is new to her role as cities minister, so perhaps she has not got round to looking at some of the issues that I will mention, but I hope that she will pick up on some of my suggestions in the debate that we will have on the cities strategy. As I said, I am the constituency member for Glasgow Kelvin, which is a hugely diverse area. It includes Glasgow city centre and areas that continue to grow and flourish, bringing improvements in health and wellbeing, as many members have said. Alongside those areas are areas that perhaps have not had the same opportunities, and I look forward to working with the cabinet secretary to improve those areas and to bring them up to the level that should be achieved, not just in Glasgow Kelvin but throughout Scotland. We have heard about tangible issues to do with health and wellbeing, which we can measure, such as waiting times and alcohol abuse, but there is more to health and wellbeing than that. It is about having flourishing communities in which local businesses can grow and in which people can take pride in their neighbourhoods and have a say in the future direction of the community. That is important for people’s health and wellbeing. The question is how we achieve such flourishing communities. One of the most powerful ways of doing so is through community empowerment. The Scottish Government proposes to introduce a bill on community empowerment and renewal, to achieve just that. The cabinet secretary said that the details are still to be worked out, but will she tell us whether the bill will play a part in her strategy for the regeneration of our cities? In “Building a Sustainable Future: Regeneration Discussion Paper”, the Scottish Government said that as a priority for 2011-12 it will “Continue to support our Urban Regeneration Companies” and “Continue to invest in vacant and derelict land”. Such investment is fundamental to improving communities and thereby improving health and wellbeing. I am sure that if I asked members around the chamber whether they could think of a piece of land in their constituency that is underused or derelict and could be put to better use, they would immediately be able to think of a number of examples. I can certainly name a number of them, but I will not do so because of time constraints. However, there is an example in my constituency that some people may know of, particularly Patricia Ferguson—the old public baths building at the bottom of Byres Road, which has been raised as an issue on many occasions. It is in a well-known area of the west end and has been left to fall into a disgraceful state of disrepair. That has had a huge adverse impact on people and small businesses there—not just on older people who remember it as the baths—because it is a small part of the bottom of Byres Road that is lying derelict. I undertook a survey during the election period and afterwards to see whether we could do something about this eyesore, because it is driving away investment in that area of Glasgow Kelvin. Businesses and people in the area say that they would love it to be regenerated, perhaps for housing or a community facility. People also ask why they cannot have a huge market there, with fresh food and vegetables, and so on. People all say that the building detracts from that area of the community. The bottom line is that people there desperately want something to put in its place. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary, who is responsible for cities strategy, can let me know in her summing up speech whether communities could take ownership of such buildings or land. In May, Scotland’s six cities—we hope that there will soon be seven—signed a joint statement of their shared vision for Scotland’s success. It pointed to the fact that our cities need innovative finance and investment models—I think that Patricia Ferguson touched on one of them—such as tax increment financing and social impact bonds. We will hear more about the borrowing powers in the Scotland Bill when it is debated. I hope that such areas will be looked at. I think that Bob Doris also mentioned the JESSICA fund. I want to be positive about this issue; I do not want to make negative comments about it. All parties must work together and recognise, as Patricia Ferguson said, that our cities, particularly Glasgow, are the powerhouses for generating the economy and employment. We need to ensure that we get extra monies, such as tax increment financing and social impact bonds, into our cities to ensure that they create employment for the people who live there and that not only Glasgow but Scotland as a whole flourishes.

On amendment 1, I sympathise with Pauline McNeill’s views, as I did at stage 1. I also recognise the public nuisance provision in the 2006 act. I thank the minister for making himself available to all members to talk through the bill and the amendments. Will he provide clarification about section 17 of the bill, to which I think Pauline McNeill referred? That section will give local authorities the power to serve a statutory notice on the landlord of an overcrowded house when that overcrowding is having “an adverse effect on the health or wellbeing of any person” or on any “amenity of the house or its locality.” That will allow enforcement action to be taken to deal with adverse effects on occupants, neighbours and others in the locality. I ask the minister for clarification of whether section 17 covers what Pauline McNeill’s amendment 1 would cover. I am not too clear about that. Like her, I have read the bill. I spoke to her about the issue just after lunch time. I have sympathy with her, but I feel that her proposal—and I would like to hear from the minister about it—is covered by section 17 and by the 2006 act, which will come into force in August. I would like clarification before I make up my mind on whether I fully support Pauline McNeill’s amendment 1.

I think that the First Minister said that universities and their practices have been very much in the news recently—the University of Glasgow in particular, but also other universities throughout Scotland. Does the First Minister agree that universities cannot remain static? They need to change, and they must respond to the concerns raised, becoming more accountable and transparent. As I think that the First Minister said, they are, after all, public institutions.

I welcome the minister’s comments about the many qualities that are needed in teaching and the recognition that it is a vocation that can inspire staff and pupils alike. Does she therefore agree that comments by Michael Gove, the Tory Secretary of State for Education, that graduates with third class degrees should not be allowed to be teachers, are unwarranted and do nothing to encourage partnership working?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote and support sustainable growth in cities. (S3O-13179)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his expansive reply. He will be aware of the publication today of the Sustainable Development Commission Scotland’s fourth annual assessment of progress by the Scottish Government, which notes: “This Government has set out a much clearer vision than previous administrations”, which has “created better structures for promoting sustainable decisions.” However, the report also notes that, to build on those achievements, greater emphasis on empowering communities to improve their neighbourhoods is needed. Will the cabinet secretary expand on how the Government’s proposed community empowerment bill would achieve those aims?

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to support universities. (S3F-2918)

The First Minister will be aware of proposals by the University of Glasgow to cut many courses, including foreign languages, adult learning courses and nursing. He will also be aware of the enormous opposition to those cuts from students and academics alike and from Mario Conti, the Archbishop of Glasgow, who has expressed concern that education could end up being confined to “some particular and narrow end”. Does the First Minister agree that universities have a duty to be all-inclusive and that the proposals to which I have referred would be detrimental not only to the University of Glasgow but to Scotland as a whole?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what legislation is in place to protect wildlife corridors in urban areas. (S3O-13061)

I thank the minister for her comprehensive reply. I understand that she cannot comment on individual planning applications. However, in the north and west of Glasgow, we face two developments that will encroach on wildlife areas, in Otago Lane and on Kelvin meadow in Clouston Street. I am heartened by the minister’s comments. Does she agree that, under the consolidated Scottish planning policy that she mentioned, which refers to cities and green networks, local developers and councillors should work together with all in the community to ensure that consolidated planning policy and their aims are presented to local communities?

I thoroughly enjoyed Professor Harvie’s speech, which gave us another insight into record keeping, so I thank him for it. As members have said, the bill is the legacy of the historical abuse systemic review, and I fully support the aims of the bill in that regard. I in no way want to dilute or take anything away from the bill but, like Ted Brocklebank, I believe that the bill could be a precursor to legislation on other matters. I want to raise the issue of common good funds, on which the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee took evidence. Paragraph 79 on page 16 of the committee’s stage 1 report states: “The Committee received a small number of submissions suggesting that the Bill offered an opportunity for Scottish Ministers to legislate to provide for the establishment of a common good asset register.” That mentions “a small number” but, at a meeting that I attended in Glasgow city chambers, a large number of community council representatives—about 200—were present from throughout the region. On all their lips was the point that they cannot find out anywhere exactly what common good assets their councils have or which assets have been disposed of. There was overwhelming anger at that meeting regarding common good funds and the lack of accountability or information on common good assets. It is not only community councillors and members of the public who are saying that; members of all parties have raised the issue in the Parliament. I have raised it, as has Robert Brown of the Lib Dems. Mary Scanlon has raised it on numerous occasions. Her most recent contribution was to ask about guidance that has been issued to local authorities on common good records and funds. The answer that she received from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth stated: “the Scottish Government wrote to all local authorities in 2007 to remind them of their responsibilities under accounting codes of practice, best value guidance grant conditions and statute in respect of their management of common good funds and assets.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 12 February 2010; S3W-31278.] Even today, people still do not know what assets are held and what has been disposed of. Paragraph 83 of the committee’s report states that the bill is not the proper place to deal with common good funds, but it also states: “The Committee would expect, however, that local authorities’ RMPs established under the Bill would include information on how existing records relating to common good assets were to be managed.” I ask the minister to consider that recommendation. Do ministers intend, as part of the process of the bill, to issue further guidance or even to monitor the RMPs that are established under the bill, in relation to common good funds and assets that are held by local authorities? I have received a huge list of the assets that local authorities have declared, although they do not have to declare them. It is amazing—it includes streets, shops and bailies’ chains. Every year in Glasgow, we have a pensioners Christmas party, which is paid for out of the common good fund. I found that out only because I asked, but most people do not know that. It might be simple, but the public want to know exactly what common good assets their councils hold, what they have disposed of and how much money is held in common good funds. I do not want to dilute the bill in any way and I fully support what it stands for. However, I want to put down a marker regarding common good funds. We need legislation on a register, either through amendments to the bill—although I do not think that that will be possible—or through future legislation.

I thank Joe FitzPatrick for securing this debate. As everyone else has said, science centres are fantastic. All the science centres that have been mentioned—Dundee Science Centre, Our Dynamic Earth, Satrosphere in Aberdeen and the Glasgow Science Centre—do a wonderful job of not only ensuring that science is available to school children, the general public and tourists but making science interesting and fun. That encourages young people, in particular, to attend classes in the science centre. As Willie Coffey said, Glasgow Science Centre does outreach work, and I know that other science centres do the same. Many a time I have wandered through George Square when Glasgow Science Centre has been doing outreach work and it has been queued out with young people wanting to see the experiments. That is an important part of the work that science centres do. The staff show great enthusiasm when the schoolkids and others come along. Given such enthusiasm, I hope that the young people who visit Glasgow Science Centre—some are from schools, and some are so young that they are from nurseries—will look upon science as a career. Pupils and teachers who recently travelled to Geneva to visit CERN—the European Organization for Nuclear Research—to see top scientists in action said that they found it very rewarding. I mention, in particular, a pupil, Alison Tully, and Clare Hayes, the head of the faculty of science at Hyndland secondary school in Glasgow, who were fortunate enough to attend CERN along with eight other pupils and Mike Russell, who thought that it was a fantastic opportunity for them. Alison is now going to go on to study physics at university. That tells us something about the joy that they got from not only the science centre but the outreach work that science centres do. I also praise Mike Russell, who has been very good at pushing science forward. I have often visited Glasgow Science Centre with my family and friends, and I have to concur with everything that Willie Coffey says. The centre offers a unique experience and is very welcoming. He is very knowledgeable on the subject, and will know that Glasgow Science Centre works closely with Ayrshire. Indeed, Glasgow’s £50,000 share of the science centre transport fund has a caveat that 50 per cent of it must go to Ayrshire to ensure that people from that area are brought into Glasgow Science Centre. The caveat also states that some of the rest of the fund has to go to deprived areas. Willie Coffey is right that it is important that everyone gets the opportunity to visit the science centre. It cannot just be for people with money; everyone must be able to get involved. I believe that the transport fund may be increased to £80,000 now that the budget has been passed. I look forward to the minister confirming that—perhaps not today but later. Every school-age child should be able to visit a science centre, so I urge all local authorities, science centres and the Government to get together to ensure that every school-age child has a chance to do so. I will raise a couple of issues with the minister and perhaps she can get back to me on them. This is not the case at the other science centres, but Glasgow Science Centre has responsibility for the cost of the quay walls in the Clyde and for opening up the Millennium bridge. Whenever a boat needs to go under it, the science centre is called and has to open it up. Those anomalies have existed for a number of years, and I would like someone to have a look at them. I raised the issue with the previous Government and have done so with the current Government. I spoke to the people from Glasgow Science Centre today and those two anomalies, which cost time and money, still exist. I do not want to end on a negative note, because the science centres do a fantastic job—

Okay, I will wind-up on that note.

I thank Mary Mulligan for her positive response. It has been noted. I also pay tribute to my colleague Bashir Ahmad, who felt strongly about the issue—I think that we all know that—and who led a Government debate on the subject in this very Parliament in 2008. He was clear in his speech in that debate and in the many conversations that I had with him about the issue that arranged marriage with the consent of all is not to be confused with forced marriage. That message has come across well in today’s debate. I congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee, of which I was a member for a number of years, on its work on the bill. As other members have pointed out, the issue is very emotive. It is not always easy to put emotions to one side when considering legislation, but the Equal Opportunities Committee has managed to do so very successfully. One thing that we must remember is that although, as the minister has said, the problem predominantly affects women, it can also affect men. Indeed, I was reminded of that fact by a number of young men who spoke to me after a debate on the subject in which I participated in Glasgow city chambers. Abuse in forced marriages can take many forms: rape, domestic violence, beatings, forced slavery and the victim’s inevitable feeling of helplessness. Perhaps the worst aspect is that the helpless people who are subjected to that continual violence and abuse are also cut off from the outside world and from help; basically, they have been abandoned by the vast majority of the community. I simply do not know how they manage to cope with having to live in such a terrible atmosphere. Anne McLaughlin was very articulate in highlighting the situation that was faced by one of her constituents, but there are many more such people out there. We need to get what is a very forward-looking bill right for the victims. I sincerely hope that it gives people the courage to come forward to get the help and guidance that will be provided. I note and welcome the minister’s comments in that respect. The UK forced marriage unit has stated that in 2009 it dealt with 375 actual forced marriage cases. Up until 2009, approximately 10 per cent per year—or, under the 2009 figure, 40 cases—involved people from Scotland. As Malcolm Chisholm and others have pointed out, that might not seem like a huge number, but given the population differences between England and Scotland, that 10 per cent is quite a large number for a country the size of Scotland. As a result, I ask the minister whether during the bill’s passage and when it comes to fruition, the number of cases, which I hope will not rise, will be monitored. Finally, with regard to section 2(3)(g), the Law Society of Scotland has said that, “given that forced marriage legislation is already in place in England and Wales it would suggest substituting ‘United Kingdom’ with ‘Scotland’.” Is the minister seeking to amend the bill to follow that recommendation or will it be up to members to do so? I think that we all agree that we need to do something about forced marriages, and I welcome the contributions that have been made by members of all political parties. I look forward to the bill going through Parliament and coming to fruition to give justice to the people in this country who are suffering in forced marriages.

Is the First Minister aware of concerns that have been expressed by Scottish Women’s Aid regarding the effect that alcohol has on domestic violence, including the perception that being drunk can somehow be seen as an excuse for committing such appalling crimes, and the fact that violence is likely to be more severe when the perpetrator is drunk? Does the First Minister agree that it is imperative that we tackle and reduce overconsumption of alcohol if we are to have a serious reduction in those terrible figures?

I am pleased to speak in support of the bill at stage 1. I have long campaigned for and supported the tightening up of HMO licences, as other members have done. Like other members, I deal with a great number of cases relating to the granting of HMO licences and the problems that that causes. Pauline McNeill eloquently set that out. Glasgow has a vast proportion of HMOs, particularly in the Hillhead area and in other parts of the west end, so we desperately need to deal with the issue. Page 11 of the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing on the bill mentions that three quarters of HMOs are concentrated in four local authority areas—Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Dundee and Glasgow. Those are all university cities. The city that I represent, Glasgow, has three universities and numerous colleges and it has many HMOs and private lets. I will return to that issue, but first I will mention the tenancy deposit scheme, which John Wilson talked about and which will come into effect in March this year. That is welcome, and I know that the National Union of Students welcomes it very much. I have had many representations—as have other members, I assume—from tenants who have had their deposits withheld by letting agents but have been given no good reason for that. We have challenged that head on. I hope that, in future, such tenants will get their money back. I have long campaigned for such a scheme. Away back in the 1999 election and in the election preceding that, I and other members who are present campaigned to get a tenancy deposit scheme. I thank the minister for pushing forward the scheme, which I am sure will be welcomed in various areas. Some members have criticised the bill for not going far enough. I agree that we have to consider it at stage 2, and I am sure that amendments will be made. As members have said, the landlord registration scheme is to be welcomed. However, other members, including Mary Mulligan, representing the Labour Party, have said that the bill does not go far enough and is not good enough. Mary Mulligan will have a chance to lodge amendments at stage 2. I certainly look forward to seeing the amendments that she lodges. We should not completely rubbish the bill at stage 1. The debate has been consensual and the speeches from members have been good. Basically, we are trying to work together with all parties, so perhaps Mary Mulligan was a wee bit out of synch with the other members who have spoken. The bill should be welcomed. After all, the current Government has not been in power for long, but her party was in government long before that and did not propose various measures. I am not being disingenuous, but the member should think carefully when we are having a consensual debate. The bill is the right move and members can lodge amendments at stage 2. I look forward to seeing those amendments—I might lodge some, too. To return to the subject of HMOs, all members will have visited such properties. I certainly have, and I have seen good ones and bad ones. We need new legislation to tighten up the link between planning and licensing of HMOs. I have met councillors in Glasgow and officials in the council planning department. As Pauline McNeill said, we need an assurance that councils that do not grant an HMO licence will not be taken to court. Will the bill tighten up that link? Will potential HMOs need planning permission before they become HMOs? We also need to look at how we deal with HMOs that were granted a licence previously. We need assurances on that. Patricia Ferguson and Pauline McNeill mentioned the petition. I add that some properties cannot be partitioned viably. I have been in a property that we in Glasgow would call a room and kitchen, but which is being advertised as a two-bedroom flat simply because the main room has been partitioned down the middle to make space for two bedrooms. What I would have called, many years ago, a hole-in-the-wall bed, has been turned into a kitchen. The landlord is charging £600 or £700 a month for what is basically one room rather than a two-bedroom flat. We have to look at situations such as that in order to protect not just the tenants who move into HMOs, but the other residents of the buildings. We have heard about numerous complaints—Jim Tolson mentioned Hillhead community council, charities and others. Sometimes people’s lives are made absolute hell when an HMO is right next to them and that property’s kitchen is next to their bedroom. The occupants of the HMO might be cooking, or up all night, when their neighbour is trying to sleep. Patricia Ferguson mentioned building control, which is an important part of the picture. We need building control, planning and the licensing teams of local councils to work together to ensure that tenants have a decent home to live in and that residents can also live in peace. As others have mentioned, we need to look at making enforcement robust. I look forward to the issues raised by members being lodged in amendments so that we can consider them at stage 2.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in response to the annual report of the Chief Medical Officer for Scotland 2009, in particular regarding the promotion of a salutogenic asset-based approach to future health creation. (S3O-12692)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive response. The chief medical officer’s report cites many examples of the roles of healthy living centres in empowering communities and promoting health and wellbeing. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the difficulties that some HLCs are experiencing with funding, particularly in Partick, in relation to the work of the area’s community health and care partnership? Would it be possible for the cabinet secretary to contact Greater Glasgow and Clyde Health Board and Glasgow City Council regarding the issue? Can the cabinet secretary inform us exactly what powers and support can be given to HLCs in the future?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Glasgow City Council is responsible for more than a quarter of the fall in teacher numbers while also being the worst-performing council in terms of attainment levels. Does he agree that, instead of playing politics with our children's education, Glasgow City Council, in particular Labour Party members on the council,  should work constructively with the Scottish Government to ensure that Scotland's education system remains world class?

I thank the minister and welcome his announcement of continued funding for the many groups who do fantastic work on behalf of women and children throughout Scotland. Today's debate coincides with the 20th anniversary of the 16 days of activism against gender violence campaign, which begins on the international day for the elimination of violence against women and ends on international human rights day. That is very telling because, as has been mentioned, the issue is one of human rights. Before I discuss the issue from a Scottish perspective, I want to draw to members' attention some chilling facts in relation to violence against women on a global scale. One third of women are affected by violence globally, in some cases on a scale that is simply unimaginable. Violence against women encompasses all forms of violence, not only domestic violence. It is perpetrated, especially in the form of rape, to destroy communities, discourage any form of resistance and—as in the war in Yugoslavia—to conduct ethnic cleansing. In Liberia, it is estimated that a staggering 75 per cent of women were raped during the conflict. In Rwanda, between 250,000 and 500,000 women were raped during the genocide, and a decade later, 67 per cent of the survivors are HIV positive. A number of members have raised the issue of trafficking, which is another form of violence perpetrated against women in which there has  been a huge increase in recent years. The harrowing stories of women who have been trafficked and forced into prostitution and servitude are truly horrific. Although we are doing something about that, I do not believe that enough is being done to tackle trafficking. We must do more to educate people not only in this country, but in the countries from which the women are trafficked. We must inform society that the trade in human suffering cannot be allowed and is not acceptable. Violence against women has many different forms and origins, but the perpetrators share a similar perception: that violence against women is in some way acceptable. The aim of many campaigns is to change that perception, and Johann Lamont touched on that in her contribution. If we are to change that perception, we need to have a serious debate about how it is formed in the first place and tackle it at the root, before it manifests itself in violence. The Scottish Government states in "Safer Lives: Changed Lives" that its approach is informed by the definition that was developed by the national group that was set up after the United Nations declaration on the elimination of violence against women. It defines violence against women as "a function of gender inequality, and an abuse of male power". As a result, the definition encompasses "actions that result in physical, sexual and psychological harm or suffering to women and children, or affront to their human dignity". Interestingly, the definition includes sexual exploitation through prostitution and pornography and acknowledges that activities such as prostitution, stripping, lap dancing, pole dancing and table dancing are forms of commercial sexual exploitation. I and others have raised those issues time and again in the Parliament and we will continue to do so. Many believe that such activities do not lead to direct violence against women, but that is not borne out by the facts. In a UK survey of 240 prostitutes in Leeds, Glasgow and Edinburgh, 50 per cent of those who work outdoors and 26 per cent of those who work indoors reported some form of violence by clients in the six months preceding the survey. It might not be good to say this, but it is the truth. Among prostitutes who work outdoors, 81 per cent had experienced violence by clients. Of those women, 33 had been beaten, 30 per cent had been threatened with a weapon, 25 per cent had been choked, 27 per cent had been raped in a form or manner that I do not want to mention in the chamber, and 9 per cent had been slashed or stabbed. It is horrifying to think of that.  Any debate about the roots of violence against women needs to examine those activities and understand how they contribute to the way in which women are viewed and how that relates to violence against women. The national group's definition goes on to state: "These activities have been shown to be harmful for the individual women involved and have a negative impact on the position of all women through the objectification of women's bodies." We must remember that. I welcome the fact that we are here today to take forward the national strategy to address domestic violence in Scotland and to look at the progress that has been made, but today's debate must also serve as a wake-up call to look more deeply at the reasons behind violence against women and, if necessary, to tackle the issues that we have been reluctant to look at in the past. If we do not have the courage to seriously explore the reasons for violence against women, the cycle will continue.

Will the member give way?

The minister says that there will be no negative impact on the delivery of training places, and we should all welcome that. Will the delivery of training places and the workings of SDS be monitored during and after the voluntary severance scheme?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing this evening's debate. I have visited kinship carers and I know that they hold her work in great esteem. I take this opportunity to recognise the invaluable work that kinship carers do in some of the most trying of circumstances. I also recognise the great work of the many support groups that do their utmost to provide advice and assistance to kinship carers. Recently, I visited one such group—the Family Addiction Support Service, based in Glasgow. I put on record the fact that the service is doing a fantastic job. Some of the stories I heard—especially, but not only, from grandparents—at that meeting were absolutely harrowing, but they showed people's great desire to ensure that their families are kept together. We should all be eternally grateful for that. The benefits system has been highlighted in my meetings with kinship carers. Other members may raise that issue. We must look at it. I do not want to be political about the matter, but in some instances people are worse off if they can access kinship care. I hope that the Minister for Children and Early Years will speak to his Westminster counterpart about the benefits system. The overarching theme of the meeting was the clear need for information and guidance to maximise the effectiveness of current Scottish Parliament legislation. As Johann Lamont said, that theme is reflected in the motion. It is also reflected in petition PE1365, which calls for a meeting of all parties that are involved in the legislation for and provision of kinship care. Johann Lamont has already mentioned what a postcode lottery kinship care can be. All members of the Public Petitions Committee, from all parties, were supportive of the petition. I understand that the committee is continuing the petition, with the aim of facilitating a meeting between stakeholders. I hope that that approach will be successful in addressing carers' concerns and the concerns that are expressed in the motion. I invite the minister in his summing up to provide us with an update on whether meetings not just with kinship carers but with local authorities and other authorities that deal with kinship care have been arranged. Some of the accounts that I heard were harrowing. Johann Lamont has already alluded to some of the issues that are involved. For one reason or another, grandparents have had to take in their grandkids. They may get kinship care  support for one grandkid but not for another. That anomaly should not be allowed to continue. Johann Lamont mentioned the issues that arise in relation to payment. I was struck by the differences in access to services. If a child is looked after—for example if they are in foster care—they will have access to facilities such as child psychiatrists; if a child is in kinship care they are not denied access to such facilities, but they are nonetheless unable to access them. That issue, along with anomalies in payments, was highlighted to me in my meeting with kinship carers. Neither the postcode lottery that has been identified nor the other difficulties that people face should be allowed to continue. People open their houses to look after not just grandchildren but nieces, nephews, brothers and sisters. They put their family first, but it is difficult for them to cope with young kids who have some horrifying backgrounds. Sometimes, people have to give up their beds or to move out of the house because they do not have not enough room. Johann Lamont mentioned the political aspect of the issue. I do not want to go into that as I agree that we really need to work together, no matter what political party we belong to, and to put the interests of carers and children first. They deserve no less from us.

I congratulate Anne McLaughlin on securing an extremely important debate. We all know that Glasgow has received the largest number of asylum seekers and refugees in the UK. As a Glasgow MSP since 1999, I have dealt with hundreds of asylum seekers and refugees. Labour members might not want to hear this, but the Labour MPs who have been predominant in Glasgow would not deal with such cases. We were the people who picked them up. That is the honest truth, which we must get on the record. I pay tribute to the many groups and individuals who have worked tirelessly to ensure that we have the knowledge and expertise to deal with asylum seekers and refugees. Without that knowledge and expertise, we would not have been able to point them in the right direction or to help them get the right lawyers. They would have been floundering and so would we. Glasgow is a beacon. The work that it has done is held up by other areas of Great Britain as something that other people should emulate and follow. I seriously wonder if UKBA decided to send out the letters because the integration of asylum seekers and refugees in Glasgow is so great. They have great community spirit. They are welcomed in Glasgow and people work to help them. I seriously wonder if that is why the letter was sent out. We are talking about human beings and human rights. For someone to receive a letter that informs them that they will be forced to move within three days and with no idea where they will be moved to is unacceptable, no matter who the person is. To be told that they cannot take any possessions is barbaric, and I have already talked in a previous debate about people being told to take only two pieces of luggage. It is quite harrowing; it brings up memories of a darker era in European history. It is appalling that a UK Government agency should act in that way, but unfortunately it is not surprising. The way in which UKBA has operated under the previous Labour Government and now under the Con-Dem coalition means that it has been out of control for many years. Successive UK  Governments have sanctioned the illegal detention of children and dawn raids, used every means to circumvent the law and denied many asylum seekers their basic human rights. The way in which the UKBA interacts with elected representatives and local government is equally revealing. It does not want to speak to Glasgow City Council, other groups that I have referred to and elected members. As an elected member, I have dealt with hundreds of asylum seekers. I challenge the Westminster Government and the UKBA to say what I should do if someone comes to my office who desperately wants help, and I have to say to them that I cannot help them. They are constituents who have arrived in the country and are staying in Glasgow, so they are entitled to the representation that we can afford to give them. We have built up expertise: why should we lose it? We have built up so much expertise that I, and other elected representatives, can pick up a phone and get people housing and some kind of money and put them in touch with groups or expert lawyers who can help them. It has taken years to build up that knowledge and, all of a sudden, we are now being told that we cannot act. I used to be able to phone the immigration office in London and get direct contact, but in the past few years, we have needed a PIN number. I have to ask what the Westminster MPs are doing. Why are they not saying that we should be treated as equally are they are? It is as if they are protecting something and they do not do any work on it. If an asylum seeker, refugee or whoever comes to me for advice or help, I for one am going to give them it, regardless of what Westminster says.

The debate has been informative. As other members have said, the Lisbon treaty has a direct impact on areas that are devolved to the Scottish Parliament. In recognition of that, the committee undertook an inquiry into the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland. I join with other members in thanking the committee clerks for all their hard work in preparing the report. I thank the convener and admire her tenacity in pushing the subject and securing this welcome chamber debate. Irene Oldfather mentioned in her opening speech that the committee’s recommendations look to the Government taking a much more proactive approach—having an early-warning system, if you like—to identify legislation that has a direct effect on the Scottish Parliament. It is important to get that right.  I turn to some comments that were made in the debate. In her first speech, Fiona Hyslop raised the issue of subsidiarity, as did Ian McKee, albeit that his comments were in a different vein. Subsidiarity is important. Like other committee members, I believe that it allows the Scottish Parliament greater opportunities to become involved. That is why we must have in place a system to ensure that we monitor the memoranda that come forward and other European areas that affect Scotland. I also welcome the recognition of the need for closer working with Westminster and the revised explanatory memoranda management system. The minister also referred to that in her first speech. Pauline McNeill spoke about what the EU means to the public. I agree with her on the light bulb issue. I also know where to buy old-style light bulbs. I can give her the name of the shop where I have just bought about 40 old-style light bulbs. I wanted to do that before they were taken off the shelves. Pauline McNeill made an important point when she said that we may talk about light bulbs and other such issues, but the key point is what the general public takes out of Europe and what the Parliament can get across to them. As parliamentarians, we must ensure that the public  knows exactly what is happening in Europe and how Europe affects them. That important point may have been missed by some. Pauline McNeill also mentioned freedom, security and justice, as did Helen Eadie. They were absolutely right to mention the uniqueness of the Scots law system and why it must be protected. We have to be very vigilant on the issue. Ted Brocklebank outlined many areas of the treaty. Like other members, he reiterated the need for vigilance, in particular on the CFP, in which he has a special interest. That is probably why he has been on the European and External Relations Committee for so long. He is absolutely right to say that we have to keep an eye on that one. Iain Smith was right to remind us that the treaty is about reforming the institution of Europe. That point was well made, because it is sometimes missed. As ever, Chris Harvie brought new insights to the debate. In particular, he highlighted the significance of energy to the European Union and the importance and uniqueness of Scotland’s position and development in the area. We must monitor and pay close attention to that issue. Today’s debate is about the Lisbon treaty, but Frank McAveety mentioned Lisbon in another context. He made an important point about the influence that the Scottish Parliament should have in Europe. That issue had not been mentioned before, although it has been thought about. He referred to our relationship with MEPs, which is an important point and is discussed in the committee’s report. The committee was right to raise the issue. Neatly, the member finished on the subject of sport, as he had begun. Bill Kidd reminded us that the Lisbon treaty has had a rocky road. I am pleased that Pauline McNeill and others recognised the late Professor Neil MacCormick as a great proponent of Europe and a very good statesman. Having participated in an earlier debate with Jackson Carlaw, I can say only that his summing up was as entertaining as ever; I will leave it at that. Iain Smith and Pauline McNeill made positive contributions when summing up and reiterated the need for co-operation. That is what it is all about. It is important to stress that, if we co-operate, we can get things right. Sometimes when we talk about Europe, people do not quite understand what we are talking about. It is our duty to ensure that they do. I have been a member of the European and External Relations Committee for between 10 months and a year, but I must admit that I am still getting my head around  some of the acronyms that it uses. We are Europeans, so we should behave like Europeans and engage with the European Community. It is a good move for the Scottish Parliament that recognises that Europe plays a huge part not just in the lives of Scots but in the Scottish Parliament. I commend the committee’s report to the Parliament.

I congratulate my colleague Bill Kidd on securing the debate. Jackson Carlaw made what was probably the best speech for independence that I have heard—lots of people will now be joining the SNP and even Marlyn Glen might change her mind from what she said in opening her speech. Jackson Carlaw basically said that, if we want to blow up millions of people and spend billions of pounds, we must remain a member of the UK, so I am glad that I am a member of the SNP. I look forward to a nuclear-free independent Scotland. I have never been called an anarchist before. Jackson Carlaw’s speech was the best recruitment message for the SNP and I hope that he will make more such speeches. People will have an independent nuclear-free Scotland. I return to the subject of the debate. Some people might look on the zones as a grass-roots initiative and might be a little sceptical—Jackson Carlaw is obviously more than that. I will put the situation in perspective. We have heard that nuclear weapons-free zones have been established throughout the world. Wales, which has been mentioned, was declared a nuclear weapons-free zone in 1982, after all 22 of its local authorities announced their support for the measure. We should pursue the initiative. I suggest that we write to ask all our local authorities about it, and publish their answers, with the aim of registering Scotland as a nuclear weapons-free zone. In the USA, some native American nations—they are not states—such as the Shoshone have declared their land to be a nuclear weapons-free zone because they objected to it being used for missile bases or radioactive waste dumps. That is the grass roots for us. Cities such as New York, Chicago, Oakland and Berkeley have joined the  growing movement. More than 17 million Americans live in nuclear-free zones. That is people power again. The continent of Antarctica is a de facto nuclear weapons-free zone under the 1959 Antarctic Treaty. The earth’s orbit and the moon and all other celestial bodies are also de facto nuclear weapons-free zones under the 1967 outer space treaty. The list goes on—more than 4,300 nuclear-free zones exist in 37 countries. Let us be clear that, although the initiative might have started at the grass roots, it is a global movement that is gathering momentum hour by hour and day by day. It is time that we aspired to join it. One inspirational aspect of many of the movements is that they have gone from the bottom up, as I have said, rather than from the top down. That process has been achieved by people working on the ground with grass-roots movements and listening to what people want. People want nuclear-free zones and no nuclear weapons in their countries. We as representatives of the people should listen to that growing voice and do everything that we can to support the initiative. We as parliamentarians should do everything that is in our power to help Scotland to join the growing movement, to add our voice to the global desire and to declare our country nuclear weapons free, in the hope that we will one day live in a nuclear-free world. I was going to say that we all share the aspiration, but we have heard otherwise from other members and, unfortunately, no Lib Dems are present. We should all share the aspiration, which we will achieve only if we all—I include Jackson Carlaw—join together to push the initiative as far as possible to ensure that Scotland becomes a nuclear weapons-free zone.

I, too, congratulate Patricia Ferguson and thank her for introducing the bill. As one of the original signatories to the bill proposal, I am pleased to speak in this debate and to support the bill at  stage 1. Like other members, I have no doubt that some—not all—factors do not give a good service. We have heard from many organisations on the issue. David McLetchie mentioned the Office of Fair Trading, which carried out a study of factoring that revealed that a substantial number of people were not satisfied with the service that they received. Patricia Ferguson gave the example of a case that she has encountered. All of us deal with a huge number of cases that relate to factoring. As someone who stays in a factored property, I know at first hand just how difficult it is to get any service from factors, although I will not name any of the factors that were involved. I will give some examples of issues that I have encountered. Duncan McNeil mentioned cases of light bulbs costing £30, but I will highlight one issue that is raised with me and, I think, all other members. People get really frustrated, upset and angry when they receive a bill that is not detailed; when they phone the factors to ask for details, they are told that they must pay the bill as it stands, although they do not know what they are paying for. There is a particular problem with factors using preferred contractors. Even when tenants and residents look for contractors that can do the job more cheaply, factors will not accept a quote from them; basically, they go for the highest price. In some cases—not all—a percentage of the costs goes to the factor and not to the contractor. Another issue is competitive tendering. When people ask their factor whether it has sought tenders from three contractors, they are told that it has not, because it has its preferred contractor. However, when people look around, they may find that the contractor that they wanted could do the work for half the price that their factor's contractor is offering. Issues of that kind really frustrate and annoy the people who are required constantly to pay such bills. As has been said, people may be sent letters with a charge of £30 or £35 to say that they are two days behind in paying their factor's fees. There is absolutely no understanding of how people have to live and of how angry they get when they are trying to get repairs done. When people have bought flats in properties that include residences that have been let privately, it is very difficult for them to get the factor to contact the landlord, to ensure that they pay their share of any bills. Although I am very supportive of the bill, there are some issues that I want to raise. Patricia Ferguson will understand that my points are not intended as a criticism of the bill. However, like other members, in the limited time that I have I would like to explore some issues further.  The most important section in the bill is that which provides for a code of conduct. I am pleased that the minister and Patricia Ferguson have agreed that we must get that right and that a lot of work has been done on the issue. I look forward to seeing that, because if we get the code of conduct right we can move forward in the proper manner. I have some concerns about the registration charge of £750 to £1,000 per factor. In the bill as drafted, it is not clear how that will apply. Will houses be banded by council tax or will the charge apply to groups of properties? Clearly, it will affect private factors, but will it also affect social factors, which have been mentioned and include councils and housing associations? Will there be checks and balances to ensure that the charges that factors pay to register are not passed on to tenants? I would like us to look at that issue at stage 2, as the current provisions in the bill on registration do not address it. The issue of dispute resolution has been raised. The bill will establish a home owner housing panel and home owner housing committees similar to the private rented housing panel and private rented housing committees. I do not know how much that will cost, as it is not costed in the financial memorandum to the bill. I would like more information on that provision to be provided at stage 2. The fact that staff will receive specific training is mentioned, but does that mean that more staff will be employed? Will the president, chairmen and committee members come from the existing panel, or will they be appointed or elected? We need to be clear about that. A question was raised by the Property Managers Association Scotland regarding complaints procedures relating to property managers. Will the procedures be deemed obsolete if the bill goes through? There are further issues that I would like to raise; I hope that we can get them ironed out at stage 2 through amendments. By raising these issues I am not being critical—I am trying to be constructive—and I genuinely look forward to stage 2, when we can ensure that we get the bill right for the good of all the people who, like me, live in factored property.

I thank the minister for that reply. I am overjoyed that we can go back to our constituencies and tell the people who have been asking us about the issue that their funding is protected. As the letter from the minister states, the area is an important priority. Does the Scottish Government intend to sponsor a debate on violence against women as it and previous Governments have done in the past? If so, does he have a date for that?

To ask the Scottish Government what educational and economic benefits the new City of Glasgow College will bring for students and Glasgow. (S3O-12093)

I know that the college will be a huge boost to the economies of Glasgow and of Scotland as a whole. It has been stated in the merger proposal document that two out of every five students will come from the most deprived postcode areas in Scotland, which is to be welcomed. How will that be achieved?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to tackle fuel poverty. (S3F-2742)

I welcome the help that is being given to people by the Government and echo what the First Minister says regarding fuel prices. I am sure that he shares my frustration that the biggest factors affecting fuel poverty—which he has already referred to—are energy price rises and welfare, both of which are reserved to Westminster, and that rises in energy prices and cuts in benefits will result in more people living in poverty in Scotland. Does the First Minister also  agree that removing moneys from the most vulnerable will lead to many more being at risk of fuel poverty and that Westminster's too-far, too-fast approach to cuts will have a devastating effect on the very people we should be protecting?

As Mary Scanlon said in her opening speech, there are 943 care homes for older people in Scotland. Some 174 of them are run by local authorities, 637 are private and 132 are run by the voluntary sector. Issues relating to care homes, their standards and costs have been raised with me as convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing on numerous occasions. I attended the care conference that the minister mentioned with Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson. Many issues pertaining to the care of older people were raised at it, and it was very good. I think that 450 providers attended it and they were very aware of the changing demographics, the need to consider different care models and the need to work in  partnership with all providers, such as local authorities and health boards. I was impressed by the range of ideas that came forward. Some, such as on telecare, which Mary Scanlon mentioned, were innovative, and some were based on plain common sense. People knew exactly what they were talking about and wanted to provide good care for older people. The issue of the disparity of costs rumbled about the hall while we sat in it. I am sure that Richard Simpson and Mary Scanlon will remember that the issue came alive during the question-and-answer session. At the time, I said that it was the elephant in the room that people did not particularly want to address. Mary Scanlon's motion concentrates on the issue, and she spoke about it in her speech. I want to pick up on it. We were asked questions at the conference and I offered to consider the comparisons between local authority and private provider costs. I have looked at some of the figures, and will refer to them. There is not so much disparity in the average gross weekly charges in care homes for older people figures as some people might think. The Aberdeen City Council charge has been £440 on average per week, whereas the independent figure in the area was £477. The Glasgow City Council charge has been £453 on average per week, whereas the independent figure in the area was £448. The City of Edinburgh Council charge has been £523, whereas the private provider figure in the area was £567. I have more figures and could go on, but I simply want to give members a taster. Things are not as clear-cut as they seem to be. We need to consider the figures. When I said that I would consider the comparisons, I was told that the Local Government and Communities Committee had taken evidence on the subject. Therefore, there is evidence. I hope that we can look at that evidence and that it can provide a basis for seeking further evidence. It has been said that there is a lot more to the matter than simply providing care homes for older people. Homes can be used for things such as respite. As our population gets older and in need of care, it is our duty to provide it. I emphasise that we must work together to do that. Health boards, local authorities and others need to work in partnership. I am sorry that things have broken down in Glasgow City Council, but I hope that we can get back to working together. People cannot be admitted to hospital simply because there is no suitable accommodation for them with their family, in the community or in a care home. That is an example; I will not give a name. Admitting such people to hospital is not good for the person or the family, and it is certainly not good for the health service. Older people cannot be left to languish in a hospital because a local authority has quotas, as  Glasgow City Council has, and they cannot get into a care home or even a house. I know that Jackie Baillie had such a situation in her area. We cannot have such situations, which is why we must ensure that we work together. Doing so is good for the older person, the community and, obviously, the health board. It is obvious that, if someone is languishing in a hospital, they could pick up an infectious disease; indeed, things could be worse for them. I think that Jackie Baillie mentioned that this is not just about care homes; it is about other things that they can do. We must consider different models. Care homes can be used for respite and other things. The debate has been consensual and very good. We have explored various avenues. If we explore such avenues and get together with providers, we can look for better care for older people and better care in care homes in future.

I welcome the announcement that the elderly and the most vulnerable will be protected by the continuation of free personal care and concessionary travel. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that those services are delivered by the health services and local government?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of Glasgow City Council and what was discussed. (S3O-11701)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the situation in Glasgow with regard to free personal care and care home admissions? Targets are being set to remove people from free personal nursing care and reduce admissions to care homes, which is resulting in the most vulnerable people suffering, and in some cases languishing in hospital.

All of us agree that more can always be done, but the Scottish Government is to be applauded for officially proposing a target and for the work that it has done so far. Members from all parties have mentioned a number of positives. Of most  relevance is the Scottish Government's sustainable procurement delivery plan, which was published only last week. Delivery activity 13 of the plan states that, by November 2010, the Scottish procurement directorate "will develop an implementation plan for buyers to achieve" the objective of "awarding at least one contract to a Supported Business". I look forward to seeing that objective being achieved. All members, regardless of political party, will share that wish. I was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee a number of years ago, and Bill Kidd referred to our investigation during the committee's inquiry on disability. One thing that came across loud and clear from the people from whom we took evidence and from the businesses that we visited was that, regardless of their disability, people wanted to be treated absolutely equally and absolutely the same as any other worker in the workforce. That is the premise on which we have to start not just this welcome debate but any strategy that is pursued. The debate is not just about getting people back into work and the associated economic benefits of that; it is about improving their quality of life. Working results in improved self-esteem and a feeling of usefulness. Work and being part of a working community can result in physical benefits as part of an active life. The general improvements in physical and mental wellbeing are plain for everyone to see, but there are often worries that some people will be worse off financially. That comes across in every part of the workforce. People who return to work sometimes worry about loss of benefits and so on, but I looked at studies that North Lanarkshire Council carried out, which showed that, on average, people are £124 better off as a result of returning to work. We should consider that premise, too. As well as wanting to be treated equally, people are better off physically and in their pockets if they are working. It is clear for all of us to see that supported employment provides both an improved quality of life and clear financial benefits. There is a further, equally important benefit, especially in these difficult economic times: the saving and gain not just for people but for the public purse, as a result of fewer benefit payments being made. In mentioning that added benefit, I am aware that I am straying into issues that are outwith the control of this Parliament—into issues that are reserved to Westminster. Lewis Macdonald touched on that in his speech when he mentioned ministers in other places. The fact that the powers on this issue are reserved to Westminster limits this Parliament and whatever Government is in  power from using every means at our disposal to ensure that supported employment has every opportunity to flourish and succeed.

I see Helen Eadie shaking her head, but I think that we should consider every single possibility.

I absolutely agree with Helen Eadie on that. I bought a bed from Blindcraft, not just because it was from Blindcraft but because it was of a better quality. I can certainly ask ministers about that if Helen Eadie wants me to, but I also suggest to her that we should not bring party politics into it. Her party was in power for eight years, and she can ask her former ministers, too. I will leave it at that. I spoke earlier about how we can encourage growth in supported employment. I few ideas have come to my mind, which I believe should be given serious consideration. Lewis Macdonald spoke about creating a people's champion, and I think that someone else picked up on that idea. That might be a good idea, and it certainly should not be ruled out, but there are barriers to it, as several members have mentioned, which we should be aware of. Like Bill Kidd, I might be flying a kite that is not going anywhere, but I have various ideas that I think we could bring into the process. First, in creating employment, supported workplaces take people off benefit and increase tax revenue. Would it not be worth considering lowering national insurance contributions for such enterprises so as to increase their profitability and allow them to expand with greater ease, given that that extra public revenue is already being accrued through increased personal taxation and a reduced extension of benefits? That is one idea. Secondly, could we not consider providing VAT relief for such companies to improve their competitiveness? Could we award certain tax breaks for companies that enter into partnership with supported-employment enterprises? That might even be within the competence of the Scottish Government. It is important to put forward such ideas, and I do not think that Bill Kidd and I are just flying kites.  We are presenting our ideas, and they should be listened to. As regards the future of supported-employment workplaces, we are working within certain rules that tie our hands behind our backs, but we should consider every possibility that might help to achieve the desired aim of everyone in the chamber, regardless of their political party. Bill Kidd and Frank McAveety mentioned Blindcraft. Have representatives of the City of Edinburgh Council spoken to their counterparts in Glasgow City Council? They should perhaps do that. Blindcraft Glasgow seems to be very successful—it is making a profit just now and it is working well. Perhaps that could be reciprocated in Edinburgh. We must remove the barriers that are faced by people who go into supported employment. The aim of public bodies having contracts with supported workplaces is really worthy. I agree with Helen Eadie that many companies could work with them, and we should leave no stone unturned in that regard. The aim is worthy, and I hope that we achieve it sooner rather than later.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in encouraging the growth of green cities. (S3O-11545)

I thank the minister for her extremely comprehensive reply, in which she mentioned various projects. She will be aware of the project called grow your own in Glasgow—in particular, in the Anderston and Partick areas—which encourages local communities to take  ownership of derelict land to create gardens and allotments that can be enjoyed by all residents. Will that project be included in the green network? Will she consider visiting it?

To ask the Scottish Government what legal requirements regarding equality legislation local authorities have to take account of when considering changes to services for vulnerable groups. (S3O-11467)

The minister will be aware of the statement by United Kingdom equalities bodies that they may seek judicial review of the UK budget should it fail to comply with equality laws. Will that apply to local authorities, too?

Does the minister agree that, rather than the private rented sector or the public rented sector, it is people who will suffer greatly because of these so-called welfare reforms? Does he share my fears that we will be creating ghettos in areas where rent is too high for people to afford, particularly in the private sector? Does he also agree that, instead of knocking people, we should say that some do a very good job? For example, the Glasgow Rent Deposit and Support Scheme helps people in these increasingly difficult times.

I thank Bill Butler and I congratulate him on securing the debate, and I thank the Evening Times for working  in partnership with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, the GHA and Glasgow City Council to improve the health of every Glaswegian. It is a real worry and a blot on our record that for many decades Glasgow has had the worst health record of any city in Scotland. Each and every one of us, regardless of our political parties or thoughts, should think about that. A lot has been done in Glasgow not just in recent years but even under the previous Government, and we still have the reputation for being the most unhealthy city and people in Scotland. We are trying to change that, and along with the Evening Times and the Glas-goals campaign I hope that everyone will join in. I have certainly tried to join in. Last Sunday, I joined in the family race around Glasgow Green. It was a good day not just because I had my granddaughter and others with me on bikes, but because everyone enjoyed themselves. It was very much a community and social event—I think that it was sponsored by milk companies, too. Bill Butler mentioned the tea dance, which lots of people took part in, particularly from areas such as Partick. It was a great success, too. The key to the success of such campaigns is that they do not push people to run miles or become really fit in a couple of weeks; they make things enjoyable. Last Sunday, the Singing Kettle put on a show on a stage, and all the young kids thoroughly enjoyed it. Things like that bring people out to enjoy not just the keep-fit part of events but the atmosphere. That is something that we have to consider. I do not want to be controversial on this point, but I ask Bill Butler and others to speak to Gordon Matheson of Glasgow City Council to ask him not to stop the free fruit for children in schools in Glasgow. We have just had a debate on fruit and other Scottish produce, so it is fitting that we now have a debate on keeping fit. However, I plead with everyone, particularly Labour colleagues, to tell Gordon Matheson not to stop the free fruit. It would be the most vulnerable people and the ones who need it most who would be affected by that aspect of Gordon Matheson's policies in Glasgow City Council. I was going to ask Bill Butler how many miles he has managed to run. I know that he told us how many steps he has taken, so perhaps Patricia Ferguson or somebody else will be able to say how many miles that is. The challenge is to do a lot of miles. I think he said 96 miles, so it is a lot—I would not like to do it in one day. I have tried to do my best through the healthy living centres, and Bill Butler mentioned the fact that we have healthy living centres and health walks. A lot of voluntary groups organise health  walks—I know that some do an hour's walk every week in the Maryhill and Woodside areas around the sights in their areas. Indeed, the Annexe healthy living centre in Partick organises walks that go into the communities in Anderston, Partick and Townhead. The last walk I did with that group took us up to the necropolis, which was wonderful; lots of people in Glasgow have not seen the necropolis. There were people from all walks of life. We have to ensure that people in Glasgow are fit and healthy, but we cannot force people to take part, so the Glas-goals campaign, because it is different and people will join in, must be welcomed. As Bill Butler said, perhaps other areas will take it on board and use it as a blueprint to get their citizens fit, too. I thank Bill Butler once again for securing the debate, and I look forward to the day when Glasgow is not at the bottom of the league in health.

I suggest to David Whitton, who unfortunately has left the chamber, and Richard Simpson that we should be more worried about who does not appear in "Recipe For Success". I notice that there is no picture of Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister. As the cabinet secretary and others have said, it is fantastic to celebrate Scottish food and drink fortnight, and Scottish food and drink overall. I am happy to celebrate food and drink, especially when it is Scottish, on any occasion—some people might say that at times I celebrate it too much. I come from Glasgow, where we have excellent access to fantastic restaurants that serve Scottish produce, which is fantastic. I want to highlight a number of areas, the first of which is farmers markets, which many members  have mentioned. It is wonderful that the Government has pledged £200,000 to support and expand farmers markets. I do not know whether the Deputy Presiding Officer will agree with me on that, but I see her at the farmers market in Partick, so we certainly have something in common. Partick farmers market is fantastic. It is held right in the middle of Glasgow and you can get any produce under the sun there, including fantastic home-grown farm produce, meat produce and wine. That is a plug for farmers markets in general, but particularly the one in Partick. I should also mention the one that is held on the south side of Glasgow, in Queen's Park. Another issue that I want to raise is the need to encourage the use of fresh, local produce, particularly in the public sector. I could not agree more with the sentiments of the minister and others on that, and with David Whitton's point about employability and apprenticeships. We must look into and support the use of local produce. For too long, local producers have not been able to get into the public sector market, if members will pardon the pun. They produce fantastic food that is much better for the people who eat it and for the environment.

I fully agree. I know that the Government is looking at that; there might be an issue to do with legislation. I ask the minister to mention that when he sums up. The use of local produce is good for the people who buy it, the producers and the environment—because less transport is involved—and the produce itself is fresher. That must be looked into. I move on to supermarkets and the stocking and supply of local goods. I note that the Government is looking into that area, too. Unfortunately, some aspects of it might be reserved, as they relate to procurement. However, the Government is pushing hard and is meeting the supermarkets and the Westminster Government to discuss it. We must tell the supermarkets that if we have local produce on our doorstep, it should be used. As my colleague Stewart Maxwell said, smaller producers should be involved as well as larger producers, and they should get a fair price.

Members are saying, "Who?" The behaviour of supermarkets has been looked at by the Scottish Government and, to be fair, was looked at by the previous Executive. It is not just a recent issue; people have been concerned about it for years. I remember standing outside certain supermarkets—I will not name them—several years ago to protest about the fact that they did not sell Scottish produce such as Scottish fish and Scottish cheese. The situation has changed a lot since then, but we must still ensure that supermarkets use local produce and that farmers and everyone else get a fair price for it. I will digress slightly from the subject of Scottish produce. At Christmas, I was in one of the big supermarkets when a gentleman came in with a list that his wife or his partner had given him. He was looking for a turnip and he said, "I can't find turnip anywhere." I pointed and said, "They're there," but because they were labelled "swede" the man did not have a clue what to buy. That sort of issue needs to be looked at. I turn to allotments. I am sorry to bring the Deputy Presiding Officer into things again, but I have been to see her allotment. It is very nice and produces great food, and I know that she enjoys working in it. I am sorry about that, but I could not mention allotments without mentioning the Deputy Presiding Officer's; I will not say where it is, though. I am pleased that this Government, like its predecessor, has supported allotments—it has given £700,000 to the grow-your-own community and food projects. As Elaine Murray has already said, it is not just about people growing their own food, it is about getting exercise, showing community spirit, and general wellbeing for everyone. There is a demand for allotments and other areas for growing. I stay in a built-up area in Glasgow, and people there cannot get access to an allotment, but there are great projects going on just now. The Annexe Healthy Living Centre in Partick is looking at community gardens in the Anderston and Argyle Street areas. I congratulate the centre on its work. If people cannot get access to fresh produce and exercise, we need to be a wee bit more innovative, particularly for those who live in built-up areas. I congratulate all those who are involved in grow-your-own-food projects and who are pushing for more allotments. Everyone is proud of our Scottish produce, and we are selling it well, but we have to ensure that we can say to supermarkets that they have to stock it and pay the producers a fair price for it. It has been a great pleasure to take part in this debate.

Does the member agree that, to encourage people to exercise and eat better, they should be encouraged to have more allotments, or councils  should be encouraged to provide more allotments?

To ask the Scottish Government when the next meeting of the joint ministerial committee will take place and what issues will be discussed. (S3O-11348)

At the next meeting in October, will the minister raise the subject of the £185 million fossil fuel levy, which is important to Scotland? If that was returned, it could safeguard up to 20,000 jobs in Scotland.

Does Patricia Ferguson agree with her colleague Malcolm Chisholm that in the budget, the allocation of money to housing must come before the allocation of money to transport?

Does the member agree that the changes in housing benefit that are coming from Westminster will have a skewed effect on the private rental sector, perhaps creating a situation in which people can afford to live in one area but not another?

The cabinet secretary is aware of the new oil fields that have been found in Scotland, and he will be aware that the Nobel prize winner and former chief economist of the World Bank, Professor Joseph Stiglitz, said that it is imperative that an oil fund be established. Can the cabinet secretary give the Parliament details of how such a fund would affect Scotland's budget?

I will concentrate on free personal and nursing care, and the Government's absolute commitment that it will continue and be protected from cuts. However, I must comment on the continuous calls from the Opposition—particularly from Labour—to bring forward a draft budget. Those members know only too well that the variance in the factors that affect the Barnett formula is so huge that it would be totally irresponsible to do so; even more so when we will not know until 20 October what the block grant will be. If my memory serves me right, members decided in July that they did not want a budget to be brought to the Parliament; all parties voted down an early budget. We should think about that aspect. It is irresponsible to talk about bringing figures forward at an earlier stage when we do not know what the knock-on effects on the Barnett formula will be. Tom McCabe spoke about local government and others, and like local government we have a responsibility. However, with all due respect, he seems to forget that it was the previous Labour Government in Westminster that said that the drastic cuts that were coming—not only to Westminster but to the Scottish Parliament—would be greater than those that Thatcher made. He should remember that and dwell on it—those were not my words, but the words of the previous Labour Government in Westminster. Free personal and nursing care is delivering real benefits to tens of thousands of older people. It is—or was—supported by all the political parties in the Scottish Parliament. I remind those parties  what they said about free personal care only a few months ago. A motion from Ross Finnie of the Liberal Democrats in June said that free personal care "has widespread support and continues to deliver real benefits for tens of thousands of Scotland's most vulnerable older people, allowing them the dignity and independence of growing old in the comfort of their homes". Murdo Fraser of the Tories said: "The Scottish Conservatives are proud of the policy of free personal care, which was introduced with our support in 2002 ... Free personal care is a policy that we support but which is not supported by our UK counterparts, and it is therefore one of a number of areas of difference between us."— [ Official Report , 24 June 2010; c 27683, 27684.]  I would like the Tories to confirm that there are still differences between them. Jackie Baillie of the Labour Party said: "I am proud that it was the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive that introduced the policy of free personal care ... There is no doubt that free personal care is greatly valued by those who receive it. We on this side of the chamber are clear in our view that free personal care should remain."— [ Official Report , 24 June 2010; c 27686.]  Contrast that with the leader of Glasgow City Council, Gordon Matheson's comments. Just a couple of weeks ago, he said: "What I am saying is that these kind of issues must be on the table. We look at the challenges we now face and that includes universal free personal care." Questioned on "Newsnight Scotland", Andy Kerr said: "Secondly, free personal nursing care, well bluntly I'd want to look more." The Labour Party must come clean on the issue and clarify its position on free personal and nursing care. Does it agree with the leader of Glasgow City Council and Andy Kerr that the issue should be put on the table and looked at more? The people of Scotland should be told. In fact, when we consider the statements from the leader of Glasgow City Council, Gordon Matheson, one of which was to put up the council tax—

I am talking about people staying in their own homes. I will get to residential care, which I know is a hobby horse of Mary Scanlon's; I am sure that she will raise it later.  The point that I am trying to get at is what the Labour Party stands for. We need clarification on the issue.

I am glad. That is another commitment—the Labour Party is supportive, but will it cut it? The people of Scotland need to know that Labour will not cut free personal care and that it will protect it. When we consider what Gordon Matheson—

No. I am sorry. Gordon Matheson of Glasgow City Council, with the agreement of some members of the Labour Party, has said that he wants to put up the council tax—a call backed by Iain Gray. We are talking about an end to the McCrone agreement, and now free personal and nursing care is up for grabs—backed by Andy Kerr. We have to ask ourselves, who is running the Labour Party? Is it Glasgow City Council? God forbid. Is it Iain Gray? We need answers.

It could well be. Without free personal and nursing care, particularly at home—a point that I wanted to make to Mary Scanlon—an increasing number of elderly people would be forced to move into care homes. That would deprive them not only of their home comforts but of the dignity and independence of living in their own homes. We all admit that we face difficult times. That is the very reason why we must protect our most vulnerable citizens. I ask Opposition members to vote with the Scottish National Party and ensure that free personal care is not cut and is protected.

To ask the Scottish Government how it envisages the regional growth fund announced in the United Kingdom budget operating in Scotland. (S3O-11150)

It is sad that the regional growth fund will not operate in Scotland. The cabinet secretary mentioned the Scottish investment bank. In Tyne and Wear, the metro will possibly be upgraded with money from the regional growth fund, which cannot operate in Scotland. The cabinet secretary will be aware that Strathclyde partnership for transport wishes to modernise Glasgow's subway. Will he speak to Scottish Enterprise and look into whether the Scottish investment bank can provide funds to SPT for the much-needed modernisation and upgrade of the subway?

I honestly did not want to bring politics into the issue—I am sorry that James Kelly did so—and I do not want to go on about the politics of it. My reason for lodging amendment 198 is plain and simple. Some local authorities are quite happy to have lap-dancing and pole-dancing venues, but other local authorities are not. By dealing with a gap in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, the amendment would enable local authorities to decide to have zero lap-dancing clubs. That is the reason why I lodged amendment 198. In answer to Margo MacDonald's question, I think that telecommunications are a reserved matter, but I do not want to go into that. I have done research on lap-dancing clubs with other people, such as reporters, and what I saw makes me feel that women are being objectified and used as sexual objects. That is my belief, whether other people agree with me or not. It is also the belief of Glasgow City Council, which is why I lodged the amendment today. I have also received a letter from Steve McDonald threatening to take me to court. All I did was repeat what I heard in a lap-dancing club from a group of young men who called the girls slappers, and said that they would not like their girlfriends, sisters or wives to be doing it. I was repeating what they said. I still believe that lap-dancing clubs are not a great way to make a living. I have not met any girls in the lap-dancing clubs who think that it is a great way to make a living. I am sorry that Labour, the Tories and the Liberal Democrats do not feel that it is appropriate to support the amendment. I have not lodged the amendment because of the Government. I have been fighting for this legislation for about eight or nine years, so I can say to James Kelly that it is not just a flash in the pan, and I am not the only one who has been pushing for such changes. I will be very sorry if the amendment falls, because local authorities have a duty to the communities who vote them in. Glasgow City Council wanted to reiterate what the communities have been saying to it, but now democracy has been taken away from local authorities. All they want is to be able to choose to represent their communities. I will press the amendment.

I thank the officials and clerks for their guidance. I also thank the Justice Committee for devoting time in its busy schedule to discuss my original stage 2 amendment and for outlining its concerns. I return with a new amendment that deals with those concerns. To avoid any confusion, I reiterate the statement that I made to the committee: the amendment would not ban lap-dancing clubs. It is about the serious issue of ensuring that local people can control what takes place in their communities. It is about ensuring that local authorities have at their disposal the tools to do what their communities ask them to. My amendment would enable local authorities to license venues that offer sexual entertainment—in other words, lap-dancing clubs. It would be an optional scheme. It would be for a local authority to decide whether it was appropriate to apply it in its area. It would not be mandatory. It would always be a local authority's choice to apply the legislation if it so wished. The amendment would enable a local authority to control the introduction or expansion of lap-dancing premises. It would allow the authority to specify the number of such venues that it considered appropriate for the relevant locality. That number could be zero. Local authorities would also be able to apply operating conditions to, monitor and take action against premises if they did not operate as required.  The new amendment has been significantly redrafted to offer protection to the arts. It specifically excludes licences for hosting theatrical productions and entertainment. The definition of sexual entertainment is explicit and there is provision to extend the exclusions, should that prove necessary. I note the submissions by Scottish Ballet, the Federation of Scottish Theatre, the Festival Fringe Society and others, but I believe that the redrafting covers the concerns that they raise. This is intended to be a dual licensing regime, separate from and additional to alcohol licensing. Some premises may require both a licence for alcohol and a licence for sexual entertainment, but I am sure that no member would disagree that this activity deserves more scrutiny and control. I also note the submissions by the Law Society of  Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, and COSLA's comments that very few premises fall into this category. I believe that that answers any questions raised by the organisations that I mentioned previously. By licensing sexual entertainment venues separately, we also ensure that the fact that a premises does or does not have a premises licence under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 is no longer material to whether it requires a sexual entertainment licence. I will address one of the issues that Robert Brown, I think, raised at stage 2. Where there are existing lap-dancing clubs and local authorities wish to impose a zero limit, it would be for the local authority to justify why that approach was appropriate and in the public interest. It would also be for the local authority to demonstrate that the interference with property rights could be justified in the public interest. I think that that answers the concerns that the committee raised. The amendment is about ensuring that individual local authorities are given the powers and the freedom to take the action that they deem appropriate in delivering for their local communities. I move amendment 198.

I say to people in the public gallery and others who have been affected by knife crime that I sincerely sympathise with them and offer them my condolences. However, I rise to support the amendment in the cabinet secretary's name. It is wrong to politicise this very sensitive issue. As a Glasgow MSP, I know only too well the knife culture that is associated with areas of Glasgow. It is shameful and shocking that the majority of knife crimes are committed in Glasgow. As all members have said, the problem must be tackled and stopped, but mandatory sentencing is not the answer. There is no evidence that mandatory sentencing will reduce reoffending. It does not matter what the Opposition Labour Party says, there is no evidence to support that claim. We must consider alternatives and ask why people carry knives. We must look at education, work with young people and support initiatives such as no knives, better lives, working with local communities. Surely spending £500,000 on initiatives such as no knives, better lives is much better than automatic jail sentences that will achieve nothing for the victims of knife crime or for the perpetrators. The cabinet secretary and others have quoted at length John Carnochan, from Strathclyde Police's violence reduction unit. I have a great deal of respect for John Carnochan, who is at the coalface. He says: "What we should be looking at is not mandatory sentencing, but mandatory rehabilitation." That is what it is all about. We have a great deal of respect and sympathy for the victims of any knife crime, but we cannot have a knee-jerk reaction. Steve House, the chief constable of Strathclyde, states: "We have to deal with the possession and use of knives sensitively and intelligently, rather than in a dramatic, headline-grabbing way that sounds like the obvious answer."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 26 May 2009; c 1911.] We should listen to the victims and their families, but we should also listen to the experts. Mandatory jail sentences for carrying a knife will not work. People will go in, come back out and learn nothing. We must look at initiatives such as  no knives, better lives and work with communities, groups and victims.

I remind Helen Eadie that her party told the Scottish people that they should vote Labour to keep the Tories out. They voted Labour, and they got a Tory Government, so the Labour Party has some explaining to do. I congratulate Ross Finnie on his contribution, which was moving and sincere. As convener of the cross-party group on older people, I, like others, was delighted when the legislation on free personal and nursing care was passed. The cross-party group was very involved in the legislation as it went through the various stages, and I saw it as democracy in action on the part of Lord Sutherland and others. Without free personal care, particularly at home, an increasing number of elderly people would be forced to move into care homes. Not only does that deprive them of their home comforts, but the cost of care homes is greater than that of home care. It is estimated that home care costs £5,754 per person per year, whereas care homes cost around £23,000 per person per year. Despite what some members may say—and have said—free personal and nursing care, particularly at home, saves money in the long term by reducing the cost to the NHS and to the whole country. I will expand on the issue, and give an example of what I am trying to get at. Without free personal and nursing care, older people may put off receiving treatment, which increases their chance of having accidents or of health conditions worsening. That would only add to the £1.4 billion price tag for unplanned emergency hospital admissions, 31 per cent of which—the largest percentage—is already spent on older people's care. In the long term, free personal nursing care  saves Scotland and its NHS money, and I certainly do not believe people's claims that caring for older people is too costly. Yes, we have to be realistic but, as Ross Finnie so eloquently put it in his speech, what kind of society are we if we cannot look after our older people? As members have acknowledged, there have been problems with the delivery of free personal and nursing care, not least because of how some—though, I point out, not all—local authorities have interpreted the provision of services, in particular food preparation. I welcome the Scottish Government's move to introduce secondary legislation to clarify that issue because, as other members have made clear, free personal and nursing care cannot be subject to a postcode lottery. Clarity is also needed on entitlement, and a common framework must be implemented to ensure that people throughout the country are not affected by yet another postcode lottery. Local authorities must get together on all those issues and move towards implementing a system in which everyone in the country, no matter where they live, receives the same free personal care. The withdrawal of the attendance allowance from Scottish pensioners, which Christine Grahame went into in great detail, is scandalous and, indeed, discriminatory. My mother and father, others' mothers and fathers, relatives and so on worked and paid their taxes all their lives, but these pensioners are now being told that because they have benefited from the Scottish Parliament's progressiveness—and we all agree that free personal and nursing care has proved to be a fantastic way forward and that it is wonderful that people can now stay in their own homes, be more comfortable, be nearer their relatives and so on—they will not be able to access that money. People can call that whatever they like, but I believe that it is discriminatory and that those older people are being penalised just because they are Scottish pensioners. If it had happened in any other country in the world, the Government would be taken to court, and I sincerely hope that the issue will be raised in the new partnership—I think that that is what we are calling it; it is not yet a concordat—between the Scottish Government and the new Government in Westminster. The issue desperately needs to be clarified. The money has been taken away from Scottish pensioners just because they are Scottish and because the Scottish Government is progressive in its approach to health, and we need to get it back. A tenth of our older people rely on free personal and nursing care. Although, as members have pointed out, certain areas need to be reviewed, clarified or simplified, under no circumstances should such provision be reduced.

I thank Pauline McNeill for securing this important debate on the future of Glasgow's subway. Like many members, I have visited and used the subway many times. Indeed, I have walked the line on a Sunday night at 9 o'clock—I think that other members have done that, too. We all agree that Glasgow's subway system desperately needs modernisation. It was built more than a century ago in the 1800s and its last major modernisation took place more than 30 years ago in the 1970s, as Pauline McNeill said. The subway is at risk of becoming seriously outdated if the problem is not addressed. The subway has a major need for improvements, such as better access for disabled passengers. As members know, the subway does not have sufficient disabled lifts, which discourages many people from Glasgow and outside Glasgow from using public transport. Improvements are needed across the board to deliver the Glasgow subway system into the  future. As members will agree, extending the subway's opening hours would greatly benefit the city. Closing the subway at 6 o'clock on a Sunday and at 11 pm during the week in a city such as Glasgow is unacceptable. Providing further public transport after 11.30 pm throughout the week and at weekends would be desirable and would serve as a safe option for members of the public who were returning home from socialising in the city centre. Redevelopment is needed at stations such as St Georges Cross, whose platform extends for barely 4m. More frequent trains are needed in peak and off-peak times. As members will know, waiting times change drastically throughout the day from four minutes to more than 10 minutes. One day, I waited for 15 minutes at Partick for the next subway service, without notification of the delay at the station. The implementation of a smart card would boost the use of all public transport in the Glasgow area and would be most welcome. All those measures can be implemented only if SPT is reformed from its foundations. That means no more lavish expenses for councillors' luxury trips and travel at a time when subway services are becoming worse. That situation has angered the people of Glasgow. Reviving and improving the subway could bring benefits to Glasgow and improve inner-city transport, but SPT must be trusted to do the job. Openness and accountability must be SPT's top priority. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has a president and vice-presidents from different political parties and different local authorities. SPT must adopt such a stance if progress is to be made. It is not in the interests of democracy or the travelling public that only Labour councillors hold senior positions in SPT. SPT must be aware of that. I recognise that Pauline McNeill said that we must all work together, but SPT and Labour councillors must work with other authorities and other political parties to deliver a decent subway for all the people of Glasgow. As I said, reform of SPT remains essential. At First Minister's question time on 25 February, the First Minister said: "we will press SPT to reform itself ... if that reform does not materialise, we will consider amending the existing order that defines its constitution".— [ Official Report , 25 February 2010; c 24033.]  Reform is needed in SPT and evidence of change is needed, instead of the mass spending that I mentioned on overseas restaurants and trips to European final football matches. I genuinely ask members to work together, but we cannot reward people who were given senior positions in SPT and who went on foreign trips. I will not name councillors, but some have been given further senior positions in the council.

Despite our many differences, one thing that we all share—I mean this sincerely—is a desire to tackle poverty and income inequality. Regardless of which party has been in administration here in Scotland, tackling poverty has always been and, I think that it is fair to say, will remain, a priority. Given that we share a desire to tackle poverty, it is disappointing that some seem to want to use the issue to make political gain at the expense of engaging in a constructive approach towards tackling it. As we listen to the debate, I hope that we can work together towards an agreement on the practical measures that can be taken to address the problem. [ Interruption .] If Mary Mulligan wishes to intervene, I am quite happy to take her intervention. I believe that the fairer Scotland fund, to which other members have referred, has delivered, and is delivering, real results in the fight against poverty. More than £400 million has been earmarked to tackle the social and economic disparities that exist in our most deprived communities and I agree, as I have said many times before, that we should monitor the outcomes and where that money goes. For more than 50 years, my area of Glasgow has suffered extreme poverty and, although money has been ploughed into certain areas, we have never seen an improvement. Therefore, I believe that we need to monitor where the money goes and what the outcomes are.

I remember a number of voluntary organisations coming to talk to me, and they are right to say that we should be looking at monitoring. However, the Labour Party, and Johann Lamont in particular, should stop scaremongering when they speak to the voluntary organisations; some of the organisations are quite worried, and they are being told that their funding will be stopped or limited when that is not quite the  truth of the matter. I ask Johann Lamont to think that over, because our voluntary organisations must have faith in the Government and the communities that they serve. It is unfair to scaremonger. On deprived communities, it is important to remember that inequality and poverty are not uniform throughout Scotland. They are different in different areas and any strategy must have at its heart the unique local dynamics of the area. Jeremy Purvis touched on that earlier. It is important to recognise the need and expediency to enable local authorities to analyse the reasons behind the inequalities that exist in their areas, and to work constructively with the communities to implement local policies that will best benefit the most needy. The concordat is important to the delivery of those aims. The Labour Party amendment mentions concerns raised by anti-poverty organisations. It might be worth noting that the concordat promotes a framework of evaluation and response that allows any concerns or suggestions to be taken on board and used to inform and mould agreements with individual local authorities that reflect recommendations from such organisations. It might also be worth noting that the Poverty Alliance document recommends that in "future revisions and negotiations on the concordat between the Scottish Government and Cosla opportunities are created to allow for large scale national demonstration projects to tackle address poverty and social exclusion." I am sure that the minister will take that into consideration during any such negotiations. Such suggestions are welcome in this debate, and they highlight the need to be constructive rather than to criticise any approach that has, at its heart, the elimination of poverty. The Poverty Alliance also recommends that further work be done to ensure that all P1 to P3 pupils will be able to access free school meals; I hope that the Labour Party will support that recommendation. The Poverty Alliance's recommendation 7 asks that "All parties in the Scottish Parliament work together to ... reduce the burden of the council tax" on those who are on low pay. As we know, it is disappointing that the Labour Party does not support the Scottish Government's action in freezing council tax for the past three years, which has undoubtedly helped thousands of families throughout Scotland.

I take on board what Jeremy Purvis said, but it is not necessarily absolutely true. Plenty people who live in larger houses are poorly off as well. I point to some of the houses in the area of Glasgow that I represent. People seem to think that everyone in the west end of Glasgow is well off, but I am sure that Robert Brown, who is sitting next to Jeremy Purvis, can tell him that many who live in such houses are not that well off. The council tax freeze has been better for everyone throughout Scotland. I ask the member to remember that. The Poverty Alliance's criticism of the current local taxation system is that it is "fundamentally regressive, particularly for those in low paid work". It goes on to say that it hopes that all parties will "find a suitable way of reforming the current system". We all know that when the Scottish Government proposed the introduction of a fairer local taxation system, its proposals were unfortunately dismissed out of hand and everything was done to ensure that they would not gain parliamentary support or be the subject of reasoned debate.

I am sorry that I am being cut short, Presiding Officer.

The member talks about national projects and policies and working together. What does she say about the green paper on the national project proposed by the Westminster Government that would have taken money away from carers? That is neither national nor local; it is disgraceful.

If the one-stop shop, which for a number of reasons is a very welcome initiative, proves to be successful, will the minister consider expanding its role to help small businesses and sole traders and allow them to continue to take on young people beyond this summer's student intake?

The legislation that established VisitScotland makes it clear that personnel issues are to be dealt with by the public body itself. Does the minister agree that, as he and others have previously pointed out, any employment matters in this respect are for the chief executive, the chairman and the board of VisitScotland and that the kind of misleading comments that we have heard, not only today but on other days, damage Scotland's tourism industry?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to improve the legal protection of wildlife corridors in the urban environment. (S3O-10814)

I thank the minister for her interesting reply, which I will pass on to the people who asked me to raise the question. The minister might be aware of the proposed development of Otago Lane in Glasgow's west end, which is opposed by residents because of the effect that it will have on the character of the area and the wildlife corridor of the River Kelvin. Unfortunately, Glasgow City Council has refused to undertake an environmental impact assessment. What avenues can residents pursue to ensure that such an assessment is undertaken?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the First Minister agree that recent election results clearly showed a tale of two countries, with only one Tory member of Parliament being left in Scotland? Does he also agree that, although any of the extra powers set out by the Calman commission would be welcome in this Parliament, the only way in which we can create a fairer society in Scotland and ensure that the people of Scotland prosper is through having an independent Scotland?

When the minister speaks to the UK agencies, will he raise the subject of MSPs representing asylum seekers in Dungavel and outwith? When I phoned the Home Office about a case yesterday, the officials told me that they do not deal with MSPs and hung up the phone. The issue is causing great distress to the asylum seekers whom we are representing. Will he raise that subject?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has plans to meet the new United Kingdom Government regarding Scotland's role in Europe. (S3O-10631)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive answer. Is it her intention to press for Scottish ministers to be given parity with UK ministers when dealing with the European Union on matters of importance to Scotland, especially renewable energy, given that today's offshore evaluation study highlighted that Scotland is the offshore energy capital of Europe, which we would all agree demonstrates the huge potential of the industry to Scotland?

I apologise to Jackie Baillie for not signing her motion. I said that I would sign it but, unfortunately, due to an oversight I was not able to do so. I congratulate her on lodging the motion for debate. I was intrigued by the EDGE programme, so I did some homework and research on it and I met and spoke to Jackie Baillie to go over exactly what the programme has delivered. I looked through various papers, because I had some trepidation about exactly what it does deliver. Having done that research and having spoken to various MSPs, I found that EDGE delivers a very good programme. I was rather concerned to hear Scottish Enterprise say that, because of "budget constraints", to use the phrase that its representatives used when speaking to me about it, it could not continue the 2010 programme. I have some questions, which I hope the minister can answer. I am sure that I asked Jackie Baillie these questions previously. Perhaps my speech will contain more questions than answers. As Jackie Baillie's motion mentions, the programme has projected outcomes of £24.6 million in turnover, £1.1 million in cost savings, £3 million in profits and 264 jobs created. Do we have the figures behind that, showing what the programme has actually delivered? The motion says "projected outcomes". I spoke to Jackie Baillie about this. How many students from Scottish universities take part in the EDGE programme? I know about the involvement of the University of Strathclyde and Dumbarton academy. Following my research, I note that students from Columbia University in New York, from Simon Fraser University in Canada and from  the University of Warsaw came over here to participate in the programme. It is a very good programme, but we must consider the facts, and I want to get some more numbers. In considering what the costs are, we find out from the Columbia University centre for career education that the EDGE programme involves "pre-departure training", which there absolutely should be, and a "£150 per week stipend for the duration of the program" for students who come over from Columbia. "Housing for eight weeks" is also mentioned. I am not saying that we should not contribute to that, but I have done some research into Columbia University, and most students there are quite well off. If we are talking about saving some money, I wonder whether they might contribute a wee bit towards the costs of the programme. It is fantastic when we think about what entrepreneurs achieve, but the nub of the matter, for me, is to find out exactly what Scottish university students get from EDGE. Do the figures that I have quoted from the website that is cited in Jackie Baillie's motion add up? Have those 264 jobs actually been created? I would like to see evidence of that.

I thank Jackie Baillie. That is the type of evidence I am looking for. As I said, it is important that we encourage our university students and young people to mix with the rest of the world, and that we bring entrepreneurial skills to Scotland and the rest of the world, but we need evidence of exactly what the programme delivers. How many students from abroad come here and how many students from Scotland participate? I am happy to look at the findings that Jackie Baillie has. I hope that Scottish Enterprise or, perhaps, Skills Development Scotland will find the extra money. We should be looking at that, although I would want to see the evidence first to ensure that we are getting value for money from Scottish Enterprise. I was shocked by the figures that Jackie Baillie gave for bonuses and salaries. Perhaps we could save some money on them in order to continue the programme. I congratulate Jackie Baillie on the motion. The debate opens up a whole new realm of how to look at education. I did not know about the EDGE programme, but I have been happy to learn as I have gone along, and I look forward to reading  Jackie Baillie's contribution and the investigation into the outcomes of the programme.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the many on-going difficulties in community health and care partnerships, in particular in Glasgow. Last month, the British Medical Association said that CHCPs are "expensive talking shops which have achieved very little." What safeguards are in place to ensure that CHCPs are fit for purpose?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, not only to raise the profiles of the European and External Relations Committee and the European Commission but to highlight the workings of the EU, which not that many people outwith the Parliament know about. It is shameful that there are no media representatives in the press gallery. I had hoped that the debate would open the media's eyes to the fact that the EU is an extremely important part of the governance of not only Scotland but the UK and Europe. I had hoped that media reports on the debate would have gone some way towards giving people out there an understanding of what Europe is all about and how important it is to Scotland, the Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government. As Irene Oldfather pointed out, it is important that the Scottish Government engages with the European Parliament at all levels. It should engage with rapporteurs, commissioners and MEPs—and basically anyone else in Europe, particularly the Scottish Parliament's European officer. It is important to get in early and find out exactly what is coming out of Europe, and in her evidence to the committee, the minister has confirmed that that is basically what we do. It is important for us to keep an eye on what is happening in Europe. If the press is not going to tell everyone what is happening, it is up to individual MSPs and the Parliament to let folk know what is going on in Europe. Does the minister have it in mind to hold a meeting with representatives of the new coalition Government at Westminster to discuss the importance of Europe for the Scottish Government and the Scottish people? Perhaps she can answer that in a letter. I will concentrate on a couple of areas in the short time that I have left: combating poverty, and renewable energy and the energy grid. Reducing poverty is one of the EU 2020 targets, which I very much welcome. However, the European and External Relations Committee and the Scottish Government need to monitor closely what comes out of those targets. We need to do that not to ensure that poverty is eradicated—although I hope  that it will be eradicated throughout the European Union eventually—but to ensure that the developing European member states get as much from the targets as others member states do. We sometimes overlook the developing member states that have come in, which contribute a lot to the European budget although they do not always get a lot out of it. Many members of the public do not seem to realise that. I want to keep a special eye on the target of combating poverty, to ensure that people who are in real, severe poverty actually benefit from that target. On renewable energy and the energy grid, everyone knows that Scotland has a significant proportion of Europe's renewable energy in the form of wind and tidal power. Scotland is at the forefront of pushing through the energy agenda, and it can lead the rest of Europe, as has been said not just by me and other members but by eminent professors in Europe. Scotland had already reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 19.2 per cent in 2007; in 2008, the emissions reduction percentage across the whole of the UK was just over 19 per cent. Scotland carries the rest of Britain when it comes to climate change and renewable energy. We need to remind ourselves that we are world leaders, and European leaders in particular. The Scottish Government must work with the new Westminster Government—as it had to work with the previous one—on the subject of renewable energy and the energy grid. I am concerned about transmission charges for the energy grid. Under current transmission charging systems, the remote areas of northern Scotland pay as much as £42.13 per kilowatt, whereas people in the south-west of England pay £6.98 per kilowatt. That is a direct disadvantage. I hope that we can get together with the new Westminster Government and the European Commission to iron that out. I would have liked to speak about the national grid, but my time is running out and I need to finish. We need to consider poverty, transmission charges and the energy grid. Scotland is a world leader on renewable energy, and we do not want to be penalised because of high transmission charges.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member says that Labour is not clear about the purpose of the clause. Was it not clear when it signed off the exact same franchise before 2005?

I welcome the union members in the gallery and I welcome the opportunity to take part in today's debate. I hope that it will shed some light on the facts behind this dispute. I thought that I would have been able to take part in a conciliatory debate, but I am afraid that Elaine Smith's speech has made that impossible. Elaine Smith and others wish, whether unwittingly or disingenuously, to give the impression that the current Scottish Government is responsible for the current franchise agreement with ScotRail. I point out that question S3W-29329 was submitted in the name of Charlie Gordon, inquiring as to whether the franchise agreement includes provision for indemnification in the event of financial loss as a result of industrial dispute. In his reply, the minister makes it clear that the current franchise was signed off by the previous Labour/Liberal Administration.

I am sorry.  Elaine Smith mentioned that the agreement was inherited in 2005. Labour was in power in 2005—why did it not do something about it then? This is sheer hypocrisy. It is very unfortunate that certain parties have neglected to mention that important point but have, instead, deliberately misled the public into believing that this provision was introduced by the current Administration. I hope that those who are speaking in and listening to today's debate, although perhaps not on the Labour benches, will take due note of that. Like Elaine Smith and other members, I had a number of questions regarding this provision and I wrote to the minister detailing them. In fact, I even mentioned them at the meeting with the unions, which I attended with Elaine Smith and others. In his response, the minister said: "No money has been paid to ScotRail. No claim has been made and there is no commitment that payment would be made". He further stated: "Any claim would be critically scrutinised and would include seeking the views from third parties including the STUC". Once again, I hope that members take those facts on board in considering their response to the issue. As for the safety concerns about drivers operating train doors, such arrangements have been in operation for two decades. Indeed, instead of criticising them, one of the previous Administrations—Elaine Smith's Administration—was in favour of them, so much so, in fact, that it lauded them as a centrepiece of its transport policy. Iain Gray, the then Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, who is sitting in the chamber this afternoon, said: "Improving access in our urban areas will improve ... prosperity, allowing more people to access jobs, education and training ... we are investing in a rail link between Larkhall and Milngavie ..." providing "a new metro-style high frequency train service", while putting in place the very same arrangements that Labour members seem now to be so against.

I am sorry, but no. Although Elaine Smith's motion talks about "public funds" being used  "to support private companies such as First ScotRail", I note that there has been no mention whatsoever in any motion or any letter of First ScotRail's donations of money to the Scottish Labour Party. I  find that deeply disturbing and I ask the minister to look into the issue for me. [ Interruption .] Members can look it up in the Electoral Commission's report. It is on the commission's website—I looked it up myself. Finally, I thank Elaine Smith for welcoming the Scottish Government's positive contribution in this dispute and recognising its willingness to speak to the affected parties to reach a negotiated settlement—unlike her colleague Gordon Brown, who told Unite that its dispute with British Airways was "unjustified and deplorable". Perhaps the tide is turning. Perhaps other unions will soon realise that there is only one party that, unlike the Labour Party, will work with them rather than against them—and that is the SNP.

It is a fact that Glasgow City Council has the worst recycling rate in Scotland and it is projected that it will spend £13 million in landfill tax alone, an issue that is reserved to Westminster, as we all know. Have any representations been made to the United  Kingdom Government to ask it to consider suspending landfill tax, which could deliver capital spend of £130 million in Glasgow?

Organised criminals, drug barons, crime lords—call them what we may, they cannot be allowed to run amok, maiming, killing, terrorising and threatening communities. Therefore, I congratulate the Government and previous Governments on their moves against organised crime. The Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, cashback for communities, the serious organised crime task force and additional police on the beat all contribute in the fight against the criminals and are proving to be successful. The SCDEA has seized £43.5 million-worth of class A drugs and the community cashback initiative has invested £13 million of seized money in our communities. They are all very good initiatives and are welcomed by not just me, but all members and everyone in our communities. Nevertheless, criminals are still operating throughout Scotland, bidding for and winning lucrative contracts, and that is what I will concentrate on. Several members, including Richard Baker and Hugh Henry, have mentioned Graeme Pearson. I met him on Monday at the crime summit, along with Patricia Ferguson, Bob Doris and the cabinet secretary. I echo the praise that we have heard for Mr Pearson, who this week said that councils and public authorities face a growing threat of corruption and bribery. We must remember that the public sector has massive spending power,  amounting to £8 billion over the whole sector. Various members, including Bill Aitken, have mentioned procurement contracts, which we need to look at carefully, especially those regarding the security industry. When I was a councillor in Paisley—Hugh Henry will remember this, as he was the leader of the council at that time—Renfrewshire Council had a terrible time with a security firm that was run by the Gillespies, called Ferguslie Park Community Business Security. It is not as though such problems have just arisen; they have been happening for a long time, but it is difficult to pin the firms down and sort them out. The Gillespies' firm was eventually sorted out. I will move on to the contracts that security firms have with other councils—including Glasgow City Council, because I am a Glasgow MSP. It is frightening to hear what has been happening in the security industry in Glasgow. We have all read about it in the newspapers and seen it on television; some of those security firms have been allowed to run amok. We put in extra checks and balances with regard to procurement for the Commonwealth games, but it was unfortunately too late for some of the firms to take part. One security firm took great umbrage at not being able to get the security contract for the games, and—although the firm denies this, so I use the word "allegedly"—one of the areas was fire bombed. The firm denied all involvement, but it still holds the contract for the velodrome for the Commonwealth games, which I find very worrying. I hear perfectly well the views of the cabinet secretary and the crime summit on procurement. There is EU law on that, in which Lord Mandelson has a say, and I thank Cathie Craigie for her commitment to join us in writing to Lord Mandelson to try to rectify the situation. However, companies have an obligation to ensure that the public are safe. The situation with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and Network Private Hire has already been mentioned—

I am sorry, I do not have time. The police told the health board that they would provide evidence against Network Private Hire and go to court, but NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde declined that help. The health board must have some responsibility in such a situation. When someone goes to a licensing board they are asked whether they are a "fit and proper person". Where does that fit in with the case that I have just mentioned? If the police are providing the evidence on the activities of that cab firm, it is clear that the people who run it are not "fit and proper" persons. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can comment on where we stand with regard to  the licensing law's test of whether someone is a "fit and proper person"—it just does not seem to work. It is known that the security firms that I have mentioned are not "fit and proper" persons, but they still hold the licences for running the security for one of the most prestigious events in not only Glasgow, but Scotland. We need to get real. The council and other public bodies such as health boards—and the BBC, which I have been told has a contract with Network Private Hire—have a responsibility to the public. Public money is funding not only those security firms, but the criminals who are associated with them. It is incumbent on us as MSPs and legislators and on councils to ensure that the people who are awarded contracts are fit and proper persons.

I begin by sending the warmest of welcomes to our distinguished guests from around the Commonwealth who are in the Parliament for today's debate. They would have been in the public gallery, but I believe that they are meeting the Presiding Officer. In this debate, we will celebrate Commonwealth day 2010 and the invaluable work that Commonwealth associations throughout the world undertake in fostering better relations and understanding between our nations. As we all know, last year, the Commonwealth celebrated its 60 th anniversary. Karen Gillon led the debate that we had on that occasion and stressed the enduring importance and relevance of the Commonwealth 60 years after its inception. This year, the world faces new challenges and opportunities, and it is therefore entirely fitting that, as we move forward into the next 60 years, we focus on the huge potential for positive change that science and technology can bring to the Commonwealth nations. As we know, the success of the Commonwealth is also marked by its huge diversity. It includes some of the world's richest nations and some of the poorest, which presents us with a unique  opportunity to share disparate experience and expertise in many areas. Those sentiments were echoed in "An Uncommon Association—A Wealth of Potential", the final report on the Commonwealth's conversation, which was published last Monday to coincide with the annual Commonwealth day. I recommend that members get hold of a copy of that document as it makes excellent reading. It is very truthful and to the point. It is entirely appropriate that the Commonwealth should focus on the benefits that can be brought about through greater shared use of science and technology. As we go away from today's debate, let us reflect on the fact that one of the major findings of the report was that, although people are inspired by the values and principles of the Commonwealth, they are frustrated that we do not always uphold them. I believe that upholding the moral and ethical considerations that have brought us together and shaped us and which bind us will be the greatest challenge of the 21st century. If the Commonwealth is to take its place as an important international organisation, it must hold to its core values and beliefs, have the courage of its convictions and speak out on behalf of the many nations within it that feel increasingly disfranchised in a world that is increasingly bereft of ethical and moral guidance. I hope that many other members share my view that it is time to define and carry forward those moral and ethical considerations for the 21 st century. Although the report recognised that the Commonwealth has all the necessary ingredients to be a leading, effective and influential association in the 21 st century, it pointed to the fact that the Commonwealth family must adapt and make more strategic use of its many assets in the 21 st century. Through a greater recognition of science and technology, more can indeed be done with less, for those two disciplines have been fundamental driving forces throughout the past century in redefining how society operates by making knowledge and innovation tangible to all societies, wherever they may be. That, in turn, has helped society to develop in myriad ways, be it through better health care and a better understanding of how to live sustainably or, indeed, through greater knowledge of an individual's human rights. Although we recognise the genius of Scots such as Alexander Graham Bell, John Logie Baird and Alexander Fleming, it is incumbent on the many organisations that are involved in science and technology to work with developing countries to strengthen their expertise in this area. I believe that that is what the Commonwealth is all about and that that is what the many countries that are part of the Commonwealth—developed and  developing—wish. I wish the debate well and I wish the future of the Commonwealth well.

The minister knows of the concerns that unions and others have expressed about the merger. At the beginning, Stow College supported co-location, but it now has grave concerns. Has he met or does he plan to meet the board of that college?

I should probably declare an interest as I stay in a factored property. Indeed, on Tuesday night I attended a residents meeting, where this debate and Patricia Ferguson's proposed bill were discussed. At some points, the meeting was quite heated, so I will not name the factor or its other properties, but I will give members a couple of examples as I go along. I know that, basically, there is consensus on the issue. There may be dubiety about how we go about tackling it, but there is certainly a consensus  that the people of Scotland need better factoring. The debate is about how we get that. As has been mentioned, there are good factors and bad factors, and we must remember that there are good factors that support Patricia Ferguson's bill as we do. They want legislation to get rid of the rogue factors, and they are very supportive of action. Speaking about legislation, I should say that I do not believe that voluntary regulation will work in this case. However, I will quote from Consumer Focus Scotland's briefing for this debate, which we should consider: "Voluntary and statutory approaches to regulation are not mutually exclusive, and both have advantages and disadvantages from the consumer perspective. CFS believes that the cost of regulation must be weighed carefully against the benefits." That is fair. "In most cases, it is the consumer"— that is, the tenant— "that foots the bill for the costs of regulation through increased prices. Citizens can also pay indirectly, through taxation, if the public sector is to bear the cost of regulating an industry. Any regulation of this market must therefore be developed to ensure that there is real benefit to consumers and taxpayers to justify increased prices".

I quoted the briefing only to put the debate in perspective. I do not believe that voluntary regulation will work—it must be statutory—but I wanted to mention the view of CFS, which spoke to people. Those are the answers that it got back, and we have to look at everything. CFS makes a valid point, which is why I wanted to raise it. Like others, I have spoken to the minister, and I know that whether any system is statutory or voluntary is not set in tablets of stone. We have to take into account everybody's ideas on the proposed bill. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, there may be various amendments as the bill goes through Parliament. We have to consider everything. Although there is a cost, we are dealing with people's lives. As Margaret Curran mentioned, we are talking not just about property but about how people live their lives. I want to give some examples of good and bad practice. One issue is a lack of information when people move into a tenement property or, as Mary Scanlon rightly said, a new-build property. People do not know how much maintenance will cost and  what the factoring fees will be. Malcolm Chisholm's example was one of the best—when the residents shopped around, they were able to save hundreds of pounds on their insurance bill. As I know to my own cost, factors never tell people that they can save that amount of money. That is why it is important to address the lack of information. There is also an issue with the difficulty in having repairs carried out. Even more so in some cases, there is difficulty in finding out whether repairs have been carried out. People get a bill and pay it, but then they think, "I didn't see anyone come out to do the work. Who let them in?" When they phone the factor, they cannot get any answers or a breakdown of the bill, and yet in some cases they are paying thousands of pounds. There is sometimes no proof that repairs have been carried out—there is no receipt or breakdown—but people have to pay for them. Of course, when people query the bill and say, "I'm sorry, but I don't see that the repair work has been done and I'm withholding payment until I see evidence of it," the next thing is that they get a letter from a sheriff officer saying that they are being taken to court. That is an important issue—people are very dissatisfied with how things are dealt with. Another issue is that when people query a bill and ask factors to get quotations from other builders, joiners, gardeners or other maintenance people, factors never seem to do it. As Malcolm Chisholm's example showed, people can save hundreds of pounds when they shop around, but when they ask the factor, "Why didn't you do that?", they reply, "Well, it's not my job." Factors are not being proactive; they are basically just collectors of money. They are not doing anything for the tenants. I am talking about the bad factors, which are mostly in the private sector. I must admit that I used to get most complaints about the GHA, but, as others have said, Martin Armstrong and the minister seem to have improved things there, so I get a lot fewer complaints about the GHA than I did before. I mostly get complaints about private factors. Mary Scanlon mentioned other areas, but as a Glasgow MSP I get most of my complaints from tenement properties and the residents meetings that I attend. The complaints are both worrying and annoying for people. Most of the people I represent are working and are not in during the day, so they cannot prove that things have been done—even changing a light bulb, as was said. We would think that it costs a couple of pounds to buy a light bulb, but people can get a £300 bill for changing one light bulb and cannot even prove that it has been done.  We have to regulate those problems. I look forward to the bill going through the parliamentary process. We agree that something needs to be done, but we may want to lodge amendments to toughen or slacken the bill, and there will be an opportunity to do that. I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on bringing forward the proposed bill, and I thank the minister for lodging his amendment, which should be acceptable to members. I hope that we can move forward in consensus, because people who live in factored buildings—myself included, I must admit—are having to put up with problems day after day, week after week. I look forward to the bill going through the process.

I fully agree with the member on the action of the CHCP with regard to the Castlemilk Stress Centre. Does he agree that it is ridiculous that the CHCP gave one week's notice for its withdrawal of funding?

I thank the minister for lodging the motion for debate. I also thank Johann Lamont and Jamie McGrigor for their very constructive amendments, which do much to enhance the motion and the debate. I will wait until I hear Robert Brown before making up my mind about the Liberal Democrats' amendment. I will just pick up on what Cathy Jamieson said about eyesores and vacant land. Funnily enough, I have figures here showing that 10,863 hectares of land in Scotland is classed as vacant, and that 3,352 hectares of that—37 per cent, which is a lot—has been unused for at least 23 years. Those are handy figures to have, and Cathy Jamieson is quite right to ask the minister and local authorities to consider how they can use such land.

Karen Gillon is right about that. I hope that local authorities will be able to look at that suggestion.  A good example is Drumchapel, which I visited on Friday to meet what used to be called Drumchapel Opportunities. The area has been deprived for—gosh—decades, but it still has derelict land sitting there. That is not just an eyesore but a disgrace. It would be good if something could be done about that. The land was supposed to be for regeneration 10 years ago, but I honestly do not know what has happened, as the "For Regeneration" signs have been taken down. To wake up to that every morning, or to see that when going to the shops, certainly does not make people feel good. As a Glasgow MSP, I have seen many changes, particularly in the city centre with the regeneration of the harbour site. We should congratulate Steven Purcell—I know that everyone here will wish him all the best for a speedy recovery—on working to achieve that along with other agencies. He has done much to redevelop the harbour site, so we should give credit where credit is due. However, local government obviously needs to work in tandem not just with the Government of the day but with many other organisations. Although that has happened in Glasgow's harbour area development, regeneration has not really reached other areas of Glasgow. That is a disappointment. With the Commonwealth games coming to Glasgow, we must ensure that those areas that have not enjoyed regeneration also now benefit. They need not just short-term, quick-fix jobs and housing but long-term benefits for everyone in those communities and for the people at large. As the minister mentioned, regeneration needs to be targeted not just by Government but by local authorities, community planning partnerships, community health and care partnerships, the voluntary and private sectors and the local communities. All those groups need to be consulted and involved. However, as Johann Lamont mentioned, a recent report highlighted Glasgow as one of two areas where the CPPs and CHCPs do not engage with the voluntary sector or with local communities. Indeed, I am sure that I am not the only MSP to have been told by voluntary groups that their local knowledge of problems and issues is overlooked by the CHCPs and CPPs. As other members have said, the voluntary organisations feel that those partnerships are not operating as they should. I ask the minister to look into that, because I am sure that those partnerships were set up to operate with, rather than just talk down to, the local groups on the ground. Unfortunately, in Glasgow—and in another area that I cannot remember—the partnerships do not operate in that way. I also ask the minister to look at the boards of those organisations. As Ross Finnie mentioned,  many different organisations, such as SIPs, were set up many years ago to try to help deprived areas. However, their boards are often unrepresentative not just of local people but even of the political parties. I ask the minister to look at the boards of the CHCPs and CPPs to see whether they are representative. I hope that something can be done about that to ensure that there is parity for all on those boards. For decades now, in Glasgow—and elsewhere, as Ross Finnie mentioned—we have had various schemes to try to target deprived areas. Billions of pounds have been spent, but the same areas are still suffering from deprivation. After decades in which money has been thrown at them, those areas have never risen out of deprivation and people are, unfortunately, still suffering and in need. In this day and age when we are looking at fresh thinking, we cannot allow that situation to continue, so I would like some form of monitoring of the money that is invested in those areas. Perhaps if we had had such monitoring 10 or 20 years ago, the areas might not be in the position that they are in today. We could learn from our successes and from our mistakes, but that has never been done despite all the moneys that have been pushed through SIPs and so on. When various colours of Government—whether Tory, Labour or Labour and Lib Dem—have been in power, we have never had feedback to tell us exactly how well those schemes are doing. Therefore, my plea to the minister and the Government is for some form of monitoring so that we can see where the successes are, which we can then replicate, and perhaps catch in time—before the situation goes on for another decade—those schemes that are not successful. It is about time that we targeted the moneys. Not just the Government and the Scottish people generally but the people who live in these communities need to be able to see that they get long-term benefits, such as employability and long-term sustainability.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's  position is on recently reported concerns regarding the use of public funds by members of Strathclyde partnership for transport. (S3F-2227)

I thank the First Minister for his detailed reply. However, given that serious questions have also been raised over what the leader of Glasgow City Council knew about the sorry affair, Labour cronyism and lack of parity within the organisation, does the First Minister agree with me that the people of Glasgow and Strathclyde deserve better, that they deserve to know the truth and that an even wider investigation than the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee one, in which the people concerned are called to explain themselves, is essential?

To ask the Scottish Government whether recently reported concerns regarding the use of public funds by members of Strathclyde partnership for transport had previously been brought to the attention of Audit Scotland. (S3O-9663)

Will the minister seek Audit Scotland's views on extending its investigation into the governance arrangements of SPT, with a view to achieving party-political parity, given the recent revelations that Labour councillors replaced Labour councillors as chair and vice-chair of SPT without the board's meeting to discuss the matter?

I am sure that the minister will want to join me in acknowledging the great work and dedication of staff in the maternity units throughout Glasgow. She will be aware that Glasgow's Princess Royal maternity hospital had a United Nations Children's Fund seal of approval for promoting breastfeeding, but has recently lost that seal. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to promote breastfeeding?

Will the minister join me in welcoming the provisions in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill to regulate private ambulances, which I have long campaigned for? Does the minister have any idea of the timescale envisaged for its implementation?

To ask the Scottish Government whether the Minister for Culture and External Affairs has raised or will raise at the joint ministerial committee on Europe the issue of apparent discrepancies between Wales and Scotland regarding applications for joint European resources for micro to medium enterprises—JEREMIE—funding. (S3O-9435)

I hope that that reply will be speedily forthcoming. Does the minister agree that the UK Government's insistence that Scotland, unlike Wales, must set up a private company to obtain JEREMIE funding, which has meant that £69 million has been lost from the Scottish budget, is a direct attack on small businesses in and the economic recovery of Scotland?

Presiding Officer, I wondered whether you were speaking to me when you mentioned that the debate should be specifically about Lesmahagow. I will go on to explain my interest in the matter, but first I congratulate Aileen Campbell on securing the debate and allowing me to go down memory lane. I have not moved from Glasgow to Lesmahagow or South Lanarkshire, and I did not receive one of Aileen Campbell's questionnaires. For the benefit of members and those in Lesmahagow who are, I believe, watching on video, I explain that many years ago—and I do mean many years ago—I and others from urban areas in Glasgow had the great pleasure of going to Lesmahagow and the Jubilee hall courtesy of our local churches, our Band of Hope and sometimes the Salvation Army. I do not know the village well now, but I certainly knew it well then. When I saw Aileen Campbell's motion, I rummaged through my suitcases for my old pictures of Lesmahagow Jubilee hall, which confirmed my memories of ma, pa and the bairns with their prams, the big tea urns and the huge breadboards of sandwiches and buns. I was sad to hear about the plans to close the Jubilee hall; after all, as the motion says and as people have told me, it is an important part of the town's heritage, so I cannot understand why it cannot be saved for future generations, not just of people from Lesmahagow but of people who might visit the town, as I did so many years ago. Indeed, the fight to save the Jubilee hall might well bring in tourists. I am not sure why this is a contentious issue—I have to say that I could not quite understand what Andy Kerr meant in his speech. Of course, I stand to be corrected, but when I tried to find out what was going on in Lesmahagow the people there told me that there had been no consultation on the proposal to close the hall. Where in South Lanarkshire Council's plans is the proposal mentioned? I certainly acknowledge that, as Aileen Campbell, Michael McMahon and Andy Kerr have made clear, this is a council issue—it is not, I should add, even a Glasgow City Council issue. Although South Lanarkshire Council has bought the Fountain hall for £500,000 and has allocated another £1 million for refurbishment, it has itself  admitted that the building is not suitable for all the events that already take place in the Jubilee hall, and it has suggested to the groups that will be without certain facilities that they can use local schools instead. As Aileen Campbell and the people to whom I have spoken have said, that cannot happen if, for example, examinations are taking place. I have to wonder why some of the £1.5 million that is to be spent on the Fountain hall cannot be used to refurbish the Jubilee hall, which has been around for a lot longer but has better changing facilities, a stage and so on. It is one thing to tell people that the Fountain hall will have all those facilities once it is refurbished, but surely if it ain't broke, we do not need to fix it. The council should say to the community, "Right, we've spent £500,000 on this building, but we're going to have to spend another £1 million on refurbishing it. Would you rather see that £1 million spent on the Jubilee hall?" I am sure that the Jubilee hall could easily be brought up to modern-day standards with only a fraction of that money, leaving perhaps enough money to turn the Fountain hall into a facility for, say, youth groups. Finally, have the people in Lesmahagow thought about submitting a petition to the Public Petitions Committee to allow community representatives to give evidence and bring to light issues surrounding the Jubilee hall, the Fountain hall and whatever else? I do not know the answer to that, but I am sure that Aileen Campbell will tell me after the debate. In any case, I believe that the way forward is for the people in the town to get a petition together, if they have not already done so. I am sure that Aileen Campbell and other members will give them all the advice that they need in that respect.

Will the member give way?

Will she take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not wish to interrupt Jackie Baillie's speech, but I bring this matter to your attention and ask for clarification. By my reckoning, I do not believe that Jackie Baillie addressed the motion in her speech. I never once heard anything that—

For the benefit of Labour members, let us remind ourselves what the green paper proposes. It sets out proposals for a new national care service to provide long-term care for older people in England. That is not scaremongering. It says "in England". Never mind Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland. The only mention of those is relegated to the back of the green paper. It saddens me that someone who says that she has socialist principles—Elaine Smith—is sticking up for the green paper, white paper or whatever colour it is. I say that because I would like to remind Labour members that it did not matter whether it was a green paper or a white paper that Tony Blair took to Westminster when the Scottish people said, "We do not want to go to war with Iraq." The Labour Government still did that, regardless of what people said. I ask Labour members whether it would have mattered even if we had been able to take part in the consultation process. Would the Westminster Government have listened to us? Will it listen to us even now?

I would like to carry on with my speech. As we heard, the proposed changes to attendance allowance in the UK Government's green paper might affect more than 150,000 people throughout Scotland. That is not a number  to be trivialised, glossed over or dismissed out of hand, and it is shameful that some members on the Labour benches appear to be keen to do that. The questions that the proposed reforms throw up are worthy of debate; in fact, it is vital that the Scottish Parliament has that debate to inform the public how these changes might threaten their livelihoods and to make the UK Government aware of the chamber's stated position. Johann Lamont's amendment is flatly contradicted by the House of Commons library's own research into the proposed changes. The amendment refers to a "postcode lottery". The research states that "disability benefits are popular because they provide a universal entitlement which does not depend on where a person lives". The research also cites the welfare rights expert Neil Bateman, who "argues that it would be 'catastrophic for millions of the poorest and most vulnerable' if Attendance Allowance or DLA were diverted to fund social care" and raises concerns about "the future of 'passported extras' such as Carers allowance, and the danger of a 'postcode lottery' replacing the existing 'standard, national, transparent and legally enforceable criteria' governing social security benefits." That last comment should be of interest to members, particularly Johann Lamont.

Jamie Stone is absolutely right. However, I was not actually denigrating anyone; I was simply making the point to Labour members and to Johann Lamont in particular that their amendment is totally skewed and that the House of Commons research note says the opposite of what they are saying. I also remind Mr Stone that these conclusions are not mine; they are the views of the House of Commons library and experts in the field of welfare provision. Johann Lamont is not in the chamber, but I want to put on record that I would be happy to give her a copy of this research so that she can better inform not only herself but the rest of the Labour Party about what is happening. It is hardly surprising that these proposals have met with real opposition from Scottish society and  the various organisations that represent the wide range of people who are likely to be affected. At my surgeries, at meetings of elderly forums and so on, people who have supported Labour all their lives—in other words, Labour's core vote—have approached me to express their concerns and worries about these changes. They are angry at the attitude of their Labour representatives and are looking for people who will stand up for them and ask the questions that the Labour Party is so unwilling to ask. The UK Government might have acknowledged the need to explain these reforms and engage with people who have concerns or who might be affected by the changes, but the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament does not seem to think that it should talk to people and find out what they think about what is going on. As for the consultation process that has been much lauded by Helen Eadie—who has also left the chamber—and other members of the Labour Party, I accept that a public consultation and a series of 36 stakeholder events were organised between last July and October to give stakeholder audiences the opportunity to learn about the green paper, to share responses and to meet and question senior policy officials. However, as I said earlier, all 36 events were held in England; not one took place in Scotland. That is an absolute disgrace. Perhaps a member of the Labour Party might in one of their speeches, in summing up or whatever, explain why people in Scotland have been sidelined, ignored and not consulted and are, as usual, expected to bear the brunt of funding social care in England. Even though the UK Government has explicitly stated that the changes will affect the whole of the UK, I fear that we will hear nothing. Also, the Labour Party keeps telling us that the Scottish Government has been consulted, but we now know from the minister that it has not been informed at all. Perhaps when she is summing up, Jackie Baillie will be able to tell me different. I am sure that she will come up with something. It is simply not acceptable to propose the changes without holding one single meeting to discuss their effects with the people who will be directly affected, while it is deemed necessary to hold 36 meetings in England alone. I would also be interested to know how those meetings were funded. Were they funded by the Benefits Agency? If they were, that would mean that Scottish taxpayers paid to inform people in England of changes while being denied that information here in Scotland. We should know that. While we are talking about those who are directly affected by the changes, we should take a moment to think about those who will be indirectly affected—those who dedicate their lives to caring  for others. Thousands of people save the social care services millions of pounds a year, and we should not forget that, at some point in our lives, most people will know or will become a carer. The proposed changes to carers allowance will directly affect the people who put their lives to one side to care for others, because currently their allowance depends on the people they care for receiving attendance allowance. That is one more reason why the proposals are ill-thought-out and potentially very damaging, and why the UK Government must commit to engaging seriously with stakeholders not only in England but in Scotland before attempting to take its proposals any further. The Labour Party opposite has been told often enough, so it must know that the proposals have met real opposition throughout Scotland and that, despite assurances from Labour, all is not clear and all is not well. I would like to get my message across to the Labour Party here and at Westminster that it cannot pull the wool over the Scottish people's eyes any more.

Elaine Smith referred to consultation. However, as has already been said, and as I know from reading the green paper, the 36 consultations all took place in England. If there was nothing to hide, why did they not come up here to Scotland and go to Wales and Northern Ireland to consult people?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is the member speaking to the debate?

Will the member take an intervention?

Name the newspapers.

Teachers have, unfortunately, not been mentioned much in the debate, so I put on record my thanks to the many teachers who work very hard, sometimes in difficult circumstances, to deal with not only education issues but social ones. That must be acknowledged. As Hugh Henry said, if we do not recognise the issues for people who live in social deprivation, we will fail the families that the literacy commission and the Parliament were set up to help. It is safe to say that, with regard to the acquisition of literacy, we are all reading from the same page and we all want progress, particularly in light of the evidence that we have heard from various quarters on Scotland's international literacy ranking. As many members have pointed out, according to an international study last year, Scotland has gone from 14 th to 26 th place and England has fallen from third to 19 th place. However, in the spirit of clarity and consensus, let us not forget—it has been mentioned by many members, including Cathy Jamieson—that the decline happened over many years and under previous Administrations. I hope that we can give credit where it is due: to the Labour Party in opposition for setting up the literacy commission to address those concerns. Labour is to be  commended for recognising the need to better understand and tackle literacy problems in Scotland. In the same spirit, I hope that we can give credit to the actions of this SNP Government, which, since coming to power has introduced initiatives aimed at improving literacy through support for adult literacy developments and by putting literacy at the heart of the curriculum for excellence, as others mentioned. Although the curriculum for excellence might have some detractors among members in the chamber, I hope that today's debate will refocus on the need to work positively and constructively to achieve what is best for the people we serve. I note that the report recommends early intervention, with which I agree. I am sorry that Des McNulty is not in the chamber, but perhaps someone will mention to him when he returns my surprise that in his opening speech he mentioned Glasgow City Council, but did not mention the fact that it removed nursery teachers from schools. That was a retrograde step. We must recognise that early intervention is important and that Glasgow City Council should not have removed those nursery teachers.

I seem to remember that when Hugh Henry was the leader of Renfrewshire Council, that matter did not concern him. I will leave it at that and he can take from it what he wishes. Although the report's recommendations are welcome, as others mentioned, I would like to have seen more input on the reasons for the issue. The report sets out much detail about the situation and how to improve it but, if we are to move forward on tackling illiteracy, we must understand why literacy levels are falling in the first place. That is worthy of a full debate, but perhaps it will suffice to receive a commitment from the education secretary today to include in any future deliberations about literacy the reasons why there are problems. It is undeniable that we have seen an unprecedented rise in the use of electronic media—I will go on to say why I think that literacy levels have declined, whether because of television, gaming or other areas—and I assert that such media have had a direct impact on children's time and volition for reading, as well as on adults' time for reading with them. That is important because, in our debate on how to address the issues, we must not confine ourselves to the remit of academic and professional attainment, which was mentioned before. In our drive to improve literacy, we must be careful that  we do not unwittingly turn young people off reading so that they see it as a merely academic activity—something to be tested and quantified. Reading has to be enjoyed and we must be mindful of the fine line between testing and encouraging enjoyment. Those from disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to leave school without the necessary skills to realise their potential. Studies have shown that many find themselves in that situation because they find it difficult to accept the testing and qualifications structures that make up a large part of the education system. I hope that that is taken on board by the minister and others. It is important for youngsters to enjoy reading and to see it as a fun activity that stimulates their imagination and makes them want to read even more. It is possible to experience the joy of reading and the tingling sensation of suspense that a good book can bring. I am sure that we can all recall a time when it was hard to keep our eyes open and we knew that we should turn off the light, but felt compelled to read the next page or go on to the next chapter. I am sure that we have all enjoyed telling a story to a youngster who got totally absorbed and carried away. Indeed, as one of the members of the literacy commission, Ian Rankin, admitted, he spent much of his childhood reading comics and it was not until he was older that he started reading books. I am glad that he did so. It might be difficult to encourage children to go from reading "Charlie and Lola" to "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory", but we must recapture that encouragement if we want to drive up and sustain literacy levels. As I said previously, to address the problem we must understand why those levels are falling. I am sure that today's debate will go some way towards enabling us to do so.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has been provided with details of the strategic review that has led to Barclaycard's decision to relocate its Barclays Partner Finance operations to Cardiff with a loss of 350 jobs at its Glasgow headquarters. (S3O-8935)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that detailed reply. Is he aware that BPF is a profitable business, with the lowest operating costs in the Barclay group, whereas First Plus, ironically, had to shed 300 jobs last year after criticism of its irresponsible business practices? I know that the cabinet secretary has met BPF's management, but will he meet employees to discuss their concerns and to ensure that the strategic review report—which is currently secret—enters the public domain?

I congratulate Jim Tolson on securing this important debate. I hope that it serves to galvanise and drive forward our current thinking on the provision of allotments, community gardens and green spaces. As Jim Tolson has said, there are organisations throughout Scotland that are dedicating their time and energies to the promotion and encouragement of establishing green spaces for all uses. I, too, congratulate the Scottish Allotments and Gardens Society on its efforts. I also highlight the work of organisations such as NVA and the Glasgow allotments forum, which work constructively with other organisations and the local authority and have been successful in influencing current thinking on the future direction of the provision of allotments. Glasgow City Council recently presented its allotments strategy for 2009 to 2013 to the group. I sincerely hope that the overarching aim of creating an inclusive, vibrant community of allotment gardeners that will contribute to the wellbeing of the citizens of Glasgow will be realised. Of course, for that to happen in Glasgow and throughout Scotland, all stakeholders must work together in a constructive manner to achieve that aim. However, the recent experience of people in North Kelvin has not filled many in Glasgow with optimism. The council's attempt to have the local people forcibly removed from the land that they have been using to grow their own food, without proper consultation or discussion of alternatives to the forcible removal of those people, goes directly against its stated aims. Although the council states in its strategy that it is guided by national legislation and public duties, it has acknowledged that, because of the archaic nature of the legislation on allotments, the statutory duty on local authorities to provide allotments is open to interpretation. Given that admission, I would be interested to know the minister's interpretation of the duties on councils. I hope that she will also explain what recourse citizens would have if they believed that a local authority was not fulfilling those duties. If the minister accepts that the current legislation is open to interpretation, will she support a review of the legislation in order to address the uncertainties that exist not just in Glasgow but throughout Scotland? Let us not forget that we are trying to empower individuals and local communities to provide for themselves and, as Jim Tolson has said, to teach  future generations the essential skills of not just gardening but self-determination. Historically, due to many factors that warrant a separate debate, our sense of community and belonging has been eroded to such a point that many people now feel disconnected from the community in which they live. In areas such as those that we have spoken about in Jim Tolson's constituency and in Glasgow, allotments can act as a focal point at which the community can come together and rediscover the values on which we in Scotland pride ourselves. That must also be seen as a fundamental aim of any national policy on the provision of green areas. I look forward to receiving the minister's responses to my questions either today or later, in writing, if she does not have the information to hand.

In light of the current financial situation, can the cabinet secretary tell me what impact the return of VAT to 17.5 per cent in January will have on the justice budget?

It is with a certain amount of disappointment and sadness that I find myself revisiting the issue of child detention. Despite previous debates on the subject and overwhelming support from all political parties for an end to such practices, they continue. I will not quote all the figures that I have—I know that other members will also have them—but the most up-to-date ones show that, shockingly, 884 children were detained at Yarl's Wood in England during the period July 2008 to July 2009. As for Scotland, 103 children were detained at Dungavel between October 2008 and September 2009. A total of 1,315 children were detained in three detention centres in the United Kingdom over a 15-month period. That is shameful and immoral in a society—not just Scotland, but the United Kingdom—that prides itself on justice, compassion and the protection of children. I thank all those individuals and groups who have been working tirelessly, giving of their own time to help and highlight the plight of those children and their families. Without those groups, the needs of the children would not have been properly served, either at Dungavel or in the community. I honestly thought that we had made progress in Scotland. In 2005 we called for a protocol to be established regarding the detention of asylum seekers and their families. In 2006 it was hoped that the agreement with the Home Office would begin to address concerns over the detention of families and their children. Although that was a welcome development, it has not removed those  concerns. The pilot scheme that the Government brought in, which is running in Glasgow, is a start, and I congratulate the Government, but it is not enough. Even to this day, children in Glasgow are being taken to Dungavel, having been removed by the UK Border Agency. The UK Government's removal of its reservation concerning the provisions in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child relating to immigration control is long overdue, and I would be interested to hear the minister's views on the legal implications of that reservation for our powers here in Scotland. Last year's commitment to limit the detention of children in Scotland to a maximum of 72 hours appeared at the time to be a step forward. Unfortunately, the measure has simply resulted in children being taken from their homes to Dungavel, held for the maximum 72 hours and then transferred to Yarl's Wood in England after that period has expired. Just the other day I was speaking about the fact that there were people who had been held in Dungavel for six weeks. Luckily, with the help of the groups that I mentioned, they were set free yesterday. We thought that that maximum period of 72 hours was progress, but it has provided a way to manoeuvre the figures. The lip service that has been paid to the agreement and the way in which the Home Office is getting round the commitment that it made is shameful and totally unacceptable. I urge the minister to take the issue up with the Home Office. As we know, the Home Office is actively directing its staff not to deal with MSPs, and it is encouraging MPs not to intervene, as that can halt the deportation process. I and members from other political parties have been working with asylum seekers and refugees for the past 10 years. We have contacts, we know people and we do our utmost to help them. It is scandalous when people who are being detained are denied the basic right of having their case heard. Many families end up being wrongly deported—that can be life threatening. It seems that the Home Office and the UK Border Agency do not want people to know what is going on, and let us not forget that that is being done in our names. What is it that is being done in our names? It fills me with shame and sorrow, but it gives me energy to continue to fight to end what are barbaric practices. It is the children who are the most vulnerable. Many of them fall ill as a result of their detention, and they are left scarred by the experience. Anyone who visits Dungavel, as I and other members have done, will never forget it. People get fingerprinted and photographed as they walk in. We are not allowed to give the kids sweets, and the guards, as I call them, take them  off us and tell us that they will give them to the kids later. I will never forget the fear on the faces of the kids and their family members. I remember the sadness and hopelessness of it all when we could not even give the kids sweets. A five-month-old baby was admitted to hospital having fallen ill, due to being imprisoned at Dungavel. Babies have lost weight because their mums could not feed them, due to the stress of being in Dungavel. Would we allow that to happen to our children? Would we be outraged? Of course we would. We would be terribly outraged. What would we do about it? We have to give those children a voice. They have witnessed terrible, unimaginable horrors—mutilation, rape, the murder of family members and even whole communities—but what do we do? We lock them up and for many children those nightmarish images recur. Night after night they relive the events that they experienced, without getting the support that they need and deserve. I can only begin to imagine the dreadful effect that that must have on children and I am ashamed that children are still in detention. I will leave members with some quotations from children who have been detained: "You're locked in when you eat"; "It looks like a jail"; "There's jagged glass over the bricks"; "There's a big door to let cars in and a wee door to let the people in"; "There are jaggy bits here and jaggy bits there"; "You can't get out to play"; "If you want to get out to play, you've got to ask these people, 'Can I get out to play?' You've got to wait till they tell you you can go out"; "I'm sad". On and on and on it goes. We should all be not just sad but ashamed that that is happening to young children in Scotland in this day and age. We would not let it happen to our children. I beg the minister to get in touch with Home Office ministers and tell them that enough is enough, for the sake of the children who are suffering terribly and should not be locked up in Dungavel.

I give apologies from Stewart Maxwell, who was to take part in the debate but is, unfortunately, unable to do so. I acknowledge his support as a previous minister with responsibility for the issue. I welcome the fact that Parliament is once again putting on the record its support for the 16 days of action, and its abhorrence of violence against women. I am reminded that, in a previous debate on violence against women, I mentioned Cathy Peattie's tenacity on the subject. I think that we both said that we hoped that we would never have to take part in another debate on the subject; unfortunately, however, we have had to do that. I acknowledge that we need to continue to discuss it. The fact that we are having this debate is a sign of the Parliament's continuing commitment to tackling violence against women and our recognition of the fact that it is endemic in our society. However, recognising the fact of its existence does not equate to accepting the inevitability of its continuation. There is no room  for complacency or resigned acceptance. Violence against women must continue to shock and appal all of us every time we hear evidence of what goes on in our midst. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has continued to support Scottish Women's Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland as well as the media campaign domestic abuse there is no excuse, and that it is promoting the important message of the this is not an invitation to rape me campaign. Much has been made of the domestic violence court in Glasgow, which has been successful, and we are aware that the Dumbarton sheriff court will open up a separate courtroom for domestic abuse cases on 21 December, which might address some of the issues that Bill Aitken mentioned. However, despite our debates, the investment and the good work of many people, we still face the problem. We have to ask ourselves why. It is clear that too many people believe that it is acceptable for a man to hit a woman on most occasions, on some occasions, or on any occasion. Surveys of public opinion have proved that. Worryingly, a survey showed that even young women think that it is okay for men and boys to hit them in certain circumstances. That is a worrying trend. As are others who have raised the matter, I am keen to ensure that the impact of domestic abuse on children is an integral part of the work that is taken forward. I know that Adam Ingram is working with the Minister for Housing and Communities on that. Anne McLaughlin mentioned the no more violence campaign. I had the pleasure of hosting the launch of that campaign last Thursday, which the minister attended. It is funded by the Government, and it involves a group of young people from throughout Scotland who have been elected by their peers. They will have access to ministers, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and officials and they will raise awareness of this heinous crime among their teachers and peers. It is the first campaign of its type in the world. We should pat ourselves on the back for going down that road, because the campaign is an excellent part of our work on the subject. Like Margaret Curran, I will not use a lot of statistics because they have already been quoted. We need to look beneath the statistics to discover why violence against women happens. We must continue to work towards stamping out the repugnant idea, which is rooted in some parts of our culture, that it is all right to hit women. Even after 10 years of the Parliament, that is easier said than done, especially as the depiction and treatment of women in some parts of our so-called "popular" culture reinforce the very behaviour that we are trying hard to get rid of.  I am deeply concerned at the number of young people who are being exposed to brutal images on the internet. Of course, given the nature of the medium, we have very little chance of preventing that, but I note that the issue was covered in last week's stage 1 debate on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, in which I spoke. I am also worried about the portrayal of women in certain music genres and entertainment venues; about the language that is used in lyrics to describe women; and about the sometimes disturbing images in the music videos that accompany these songs. No doubt some people will say that this is only a Mary Whitehouse-type rant from someone who knows nothing about music. Indeed, people have already said as much to me. It is true—I cannot pretend to be a music expert. However, it is totally unacceptable to justify what is nothing more than the degradation of women by saying that they are only words in a song or images in a video, or by arguing that it is all about artistic freedom. I will probably get lots of e-mails about that, but as far as I am concerned, this has nothing to do with artistic freedom and everything to do with perpetuating the objectification of women by portraying them as second-class citizens. I hate to use these words, but these songs, which are aimed at children and young people and have been deemed acceptable as entertainment, often describe women as bitches and whores. What lessons are such songs teaching the next generation? Will boys be able to grow up to respect women? Will women be able to grow up with confidence and aspirations? They will most certainly not, if they absorb such messages. In addition to tackling the violence that gets reported to authorities, we must also tackle its root causes at the cultural and social level of our communities. Blind acceptance of the portrayal of women in some sections of the media and the music industry could frustrate our attempts to deal with violence against women. We simply cannot let that happen, and it is our responsibility to speak out against it. If that unacceptable view of women is not tackled, it will spread unchecked and another generation will grow up with a distorted view of the relationship between men and women. This Parliament has a duty to all the men, women and children outside the chamber to do all that it can to prevent that.

I am pleased to take part in this debate. I thank the cabinet secretary for introducing the bill, which I welcome, and the Justice Committee for taking the time to consider it and put together its stage 1 report and recommendations. I fully support the cabinet secretary's intention to take forward this wide range of criminal justice and licensing measures, which will modernise our laws in a positive way and make our communities safer and healthier. At this point, I should say that I, too, have visited Cornton Vale, where one lady told me that she felt safer in prison, because outside it she had no recourse against violent partners and their families. I thank Ian McKee and Mike Pringle for their comments on that issue. Other members have talked about crime and sentencing, but I want to focus on specific aspects of part 2 relating to criminal law. That part of the bill includes provisions to widen the scope of sexual offences prevention orders and to revise the statutory definition of "obscene material", measures that I believe will prove beneficial. The bill will amend section 51 of the Civic Government (Scotland) 1982 to include extreme pornography within the definition of obscene material. Unlike "classified work", as defined in the Video Recordings Act 1984, such obscene material is solely for the purpose of sexual gratification, and includes images that explicitly and realistically depict extreme sexual acts that are a threat to life or would be "likely to result ... in a person's severe injury"; are forced as in, for example, rape; or feature other depraved activity. As such images frequently show abusive, disrespectful behaviour towards women, we must adopt the new framework in the bill to deal with such material and avoid the harm that it does to our culture, our society and women in general. However, although the bill seeks to strengthen significantly laws that criminalise the pornographic exploitation of women, section 126 in part 8, which amends provisions in the 1982 act relating to public entertainment licences, falls short of recategorising the licensing of lap dancing clubs by taking them out of the alcohol licensing system. At the moment, such clubs, which represent another form of commercial exploitation that perpetuates the objectification of women as sexual  objects for sexual gratification, are regulated and licensed by our local authorities under an alcohol and entertainment scheme similar to that for recorded music or live entertainment venues. That is not only misleading but leaves authorities without the necessary power to decide where—and indeed whether—lap dancing clubs belong in their community or to refuse a licence. As adult entertainment venues, lap dancing clubs that are seeking a licence should be subject to more scrutiny than other venues. I know that many councils and communities agree, and I hope that, at stage 2, the necessary amendments are lodged to ensure that local authorities have the power to regulate and recategorise such clubs not as public entertainment venues but under some new licensing category. We need to allow each local authority to regulate lap dancing clubs effectively. In England and Wales, the Policing and Crime Act 2009 has reclassified lap dancing clubs as sexual entertainment venues, made licences more expensive, required more frequent renewals and taken into account the views of local communities. I welcome the provisions in that act, which demonstrate the need for a progressive stance on the issue in Scotland. It is important that we in Scotland look at the issues of lap dancing clubs and the effect that they have on their local communities. In particular, I have been forceful in trying to ensure that we have better regulation of lap dancing clubs in Glasgow. I hope that, if amendments on the licensing of such venues are forthcoming from wherever at stage 2, the committee and ministers will look on them favourably. I conclude by expressing again my support for the bill and specifically the strengthening of the law on sexual offences.

I congratulate Jack McConnell on securing an extremely important debate, Annie Lennox on her  commitment, to which I will return, and Karen Gillon on the hard work that, as Jamie Stone mentioned, she has done for a number of years, and her involvement in Malawi, which I am sure she will mention. As we have heard, there are more than 33 million people living with HIV throughout the world. In 2007, more than 2.7 million new cases were recorded, almost 400,000 of which involved children, and there were more than 2 million deaths. Although we often think that the problem does not directly affect us, the truth of the matter is that it affects us to a significant extent. The number of people with HIV in the United Kingdom has trebled in the past 10 years to more than 80,000. In Scotland, the general trend has been an increase in the number of people who are diagnosed with HIV, even though there was a slight fall in that figure in 2008. It would be encouraging if that were to continue and a decreasing trend were to emerge. According to figures that were released just yesterday by the joint United Nations programme on HIV/AIDS and the data in the World Health Organization's 2009 "AIDS epidemic update", in the eight years since the UN Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS was signed in 2001, there has been a reduction of 17 per cent in the number of new HIV infections. Jack McConnell mentioned improvements in certain areas. In light of the motion, it is particularly heartening that the number of new infections in sub-Saharan Africa is approximately 15 per cent lower than the number in 2008. That is around 400,000 fewer infections. The numbers are startling, but that is nonetheless an improvement. There have been more encouraging results. Only last month, the genome of the HIV-1 virus was fully mapped out. That paves the way for new and more effective drugs to be developed. In the search for a reliable vaccine, it was reported last month that a possible vaccine, which was tested in Thailand, had made significant advances. Of course, we all know that much work still needs to be done, but I also welcome the HIV action plan that the Minister for Public Health and Sport, Shona Robison, announced today. Among other things, that plan aims to improve the co-ordination of prevention, treatment and care activities across the sectors. I am sure that we all wish that plan every success. I also welcome the commitment that has been given that all the organisations that have been mentioned and organisations that have not been mentioned that help and support people with HIV will be given every opportunity to feed into the action plan. In summing up, perhaps the minister can provide us with details of how those organisations can be involved in it. The longest-serving HIV organisations in Scotland, such as HIV-AIDS Carers and Family Service Provider  Scotland, are to be commended for their services to carers, families, partners, friends and relatives who are affected or infected by HIV or AIDS. The motion rightly says that "positive consideration should be given" to Annie Lennox's gracious offer of her services to the Parliament in an ambassadorial role. Jamie Stone mentioned that the executive of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, of which I am a member, is actively considering the issue; we will continue our discussions at our next meeting. Mary Scanlon pointed out that a strange anomaly exists that means that the Parliament cannot use the word "ambassador". Perhaps the word "envoy" could be used if that is better, although I prefer "ambassador". Obviously, the minister is not an expert on constitutional matters, but perhaps she could check that out. The idea is good. Annie Lennox has offered to work in an ambassadorial role, and we should look forward to that. I hope that we can move things forward and engage all stakeholders in the strategy, and I hope that the encouraging steps that are being taken internationally continue and that future generations will not be blighted by HIV.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the proposed job losses in the Lloyds Banking Group and in particular the impact on Glasgow. (S3O-8491)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that concise answer. It has been mentioned that up to 1,600 jobs might be lost in the city of Glasgow. What role can the Scottish Investment Bank play in safeguarding jobs and the creation of future opportunities in Glasgow and beyond?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

That is what I was going to ask, Presiding Officer. Mr Martin has not yet mentioned GARL.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point of order is the same as my previous one. We are now two minutes into Paul Martin's speech and he has not yet mentioned GARL. Will you ask him to stick to the subject?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and to give those who wish to make political capital from this difficult decision an opportunity to reflect on and, I hope, digest certain unequivocal truths. I remind Bill Butler that his Government never took GARL forward—he should remember that. [ Interruption. ] Yes, we hear the shrill voices, outrage and horror from the Labour members, but will we have a mature debate on the subject and the savings that will have to be made if GARL is to go ahead? I doubt it. Only yesterday, the Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer announced a further bail-out of Britain's banks to the tune of almost £40 billion, which dwarfs the entire block grant that is available to the Scottish Government. He also announced the sale of the banks' profitable insurance operations, which will endanger a very important sector that currently supports 1,600 jobs in Glasgow. Do we hear anything from the members opposite about that? No, of course not. They have no concern for the people of Glasgow, their future or their livelihoods. They are in opposition for opposition's sake, and are ready to dance whenever the jig is asked of them. It is political posturing of the worst kind. It has always been known that they do not stand up for Glasgow or Scotland's interests as they take their orders from London's Labour Party.

I will, but this is part of it. It pains me to say this as I have great respect for certain journalists—I lobbied and led debates in support of media jobs and freedom of speech—but the Evening Times , once a widely respect newspaper, has in many people's eyes become the mouthpiece of the Labour Party in Glasgow. Some might say that the tail is wagging the dog. I wonder who is being ripped off. GARL is mentioned in the Evening Times day after day.

I mentioned GARL.

Presiding Officer, I did—

No, I will not. I did mention GARL. It was part of an Evening Times campaign about ripped-off Glasgow. Let us deal in truths rather than scaremonger. Let us acknowledge—I am going on to GARL—that, of all the mainland councils in Scotland, Glasgow City Council receives the highest funding. Does Bill Butler dispute that it receives £2,871 per person? Labour members have a big chance today. It is time for their party to grow up, be straight with the people of Glasgow and the people of Scotland, and tell us where they would save money to allow GARL to go ahead.

No. I am sorry. I suspect that Labour members will not tell us where they would save money to allow GARL to go ahead and that, through their inability to put forward any alternative proposal, they will be exposed as the political opportunists that many have come to know them as. Why will Steven Purcell, who is a Labour councillor, not use his millions of pounds of reserves to help to fund GARL? What is he doing with that money? It is time to come clean with the voters and explain to them exactly what is going on in Glasgow. Labour is no longer the party of the people; it is the party that has created the largest public deficit in history. We are currently paying out £6 billion in interest rate payments every month. Labour members talk about GARL, about money, about Glasgow and about savings. The Labour Party has been in control in Glasgow for decades and has had the opportunity to take forward GARL and crossrail.

It is Labour that is ripping off Glasgow. [ Interruption. ]

I pay tribute to Irene Oldfather's tenacity and hard work in pursuing a cause that is very close not only to her heart but to many hearts in Scotland—after all, 69,500 people in the country suffer from dementia—and I thank the many groups who have worked on and helped to produce this very important charter. I speak not only as the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on older people, age and ageing, but as someone with personal experience. My mum had dementia for a number of years. Although we went to visit my parents two or three times a week, including every Sunday when all the kids in the family went, we did not know that my mother had dementia because my father covered it up constantly. It was only after my father died that we realised that the reason why he had kept such a close watch on my mother was because she had dementia. For example, if he was going to the shops, he would tell her to stand at the window and watch. We used to think—unfairly now, we realise—that my dad was a bit of a control freak because he told my mother to stay there. After he died, we realised that that was for her safety, because she would have wandered out of the house otherwise. The stress and strain on my dad must have been tremendous. Eventually, my mother could no longer live on her own because, unfortunately, she would wander out of the house at 4 o'clock in the morning. We tried to stay overnight at certain times, but that was not always possible because  we were working, so a care home was the only place that my mother could go. My experiences of care homes, from visiting my mother and from visiting professionally through the cross-party group, have been a mixed bag. As members will know, there are very good care homes and some not-so-good ones. The sad thing is that many people in the care homes that I have visited have not had dignity. As Dr Simpson mentioned, they were not fed and they were left to sit. When they asked to go to the toilet, they were told they had already been. In a number of care homes that I visited, people were treated abysmally. That experience was distressing, particularly when some of those people had no relatives to visit them. I became their relative and part of their family. People with dementia just want to be listened to. They would talk about the times way back, and sometimes I was their mother or sister, but that did not matter because they were happy that I was willing to give them my time. There are several reasons why it is important that we have a charter of rights. One is to ensure that dementia is highlighted and that awareness is raised through advertising campaigns and leaflets in doctors' surgeries. If I had known that my mum was suffering from dementia, I might have been able to do more about it. There are lots of people in the same situation as my family and I were in. We must also ensure that training is provided in care homes. There are some good care homes that stimulate people's minds and take them on outings. As Linda Fabiani said, perhaps they do not remember the outing the next day, but they feel better inside because of it. We must highlight the need for training. Another important aspect is that, if we are to provide proper care, it must be proper care across the board. We cannot have a postcode lottery. The proper care must be provided everywhere and not just in certain areas. That is important and it is highlighted in the charter. I am pleased that the minister has said that the Government will adopt the charter. As I said, dementia could happen to any of us—it could happen to me tomorrow or next week. I have met many people with dementia, including my mother. Some of those folk should have had a good quality of life—they should have had dignity and been treated as human beings—but they did not. It is important that, when the charter is launched, people are treated with dignity and as human beings. Once again, I commend Irene Oldfather for the hard work that she has done to produce the charter, which is important. Her ideas will be put into every care home and doctor's surgery. I await  the minister's response to the debate, but I thank her for taking on board Irene Oldfather's suggestions.

To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it provides to local authorities to meet its recycling targets and how it will encourage the local authorities that are failing to meet these targets. (S3O-8115)

I thank the minister for her comprehensive reply. She will be aware that Glasgow City Council has the worst recycling rate in Scotland and is projected to spend £30 million of council tax payers' money on landfill tax this year alone. Does she agree that Glasgow must address the issue before the impact of increasing landfill tax becomes "catastrophic", as is acknowledged in the council's corporate risk management report?

Does the member deny that the figures that I quoted came from the previous Executive? Further, is he saying that people who volunteer from their heart to help their communities are any less worthy than people who belong to a voluntary organisation?

I am pleased to take part in the debate; I am just sorry that it seems to be turning into a debate about ProjectScotland. There are many voluntary opportunities out there other than just ProjectScotland. As others have said, there are many ways to volunteer, from being involved in organisations to working for the local community. Those are the two areas on which I want to concentrate. The briefing that we received from the SCVO states: "Volunteering should form part of a broader strategy of civic engagement and community empowerment ... We need to ensure that volunteering is supported as a way of gaining and retaining skills." Those aims are commendable but, as I said before, that is not the only way that people choose to volunteer. Last night, I attended the Glasgow community champion awards ceremony in Glasgow city chambers. People who were nominated for the awards, which are sponsored by the Evening Times and others, included people from voluntary organisations but also many individuals who work tirelessly for their communities—individuals, not organisations. They included Hugh and Margaret Tavendale, who have served their community for more than 30 years; Glasgow Old People's Welfare Association, which works tirelessly for older people in Glasgow and which has more than 1,000 volunteers who give of their time; a 21-year-old trainee doctor from the west end who volunteers in his community in his spare time; and the Ruchill Youth Project, through which young people volunteer in their community.

I started by saying that there are many ways to volunteer and that people choose to volunteer in different ways. People choose whether they want to volunteer; we cannot force them to receive training or counselling. People such as Hugh and Margaret Tavendale chose to volunteer. They have never asked for training to be volunteers—volunteering came from their heart. Volunteering comes in many shapes and forms; it is not all orchestrated. I was disappointed by the contributions from Robert Brown and Jackson Carlaw. Volunteering should not be seen as a way to take over jobs or training. People choose to volunteer. It would be disingenuous to say to young people that volunteering is the only way that they can get into a job. It is rather sad that the speeches that I have heard so far appear to say that young people must volunteer and a job will follow. These kids should be getting real jobs, real training and real apprenticeships. The voluntary sector should not be used to take people off the unemployment list and send them on to a job. We have to remember that volunteering is about choice.

I am sorry, but I have less than 60 seconds left. Everyone seems to be mentioning ProjectScotland. We should be congratulating Kate Mavor on her new job with the National Trust for Scotland—I am sure that she will do very well there. We have to be honest and look at the figures for ProjectScotland, which show a cost of £8,934 per volunteering opportunity. I remind members of the previous Executive that they said that ProjectScotland should start to look to secure funding from the private sector. It has not done that yet. Please do not lecture anyone else on ProjectScotland. There are many other volunteering organisations out there. People need a choice; they should not be forced into volunteering. It is about time that members listened to that. The people whom I mentioned chose to volunteer. They did not volunteer because they were told to; they chose from their hearts to help their communities, which is what volunteering is all about.

As someone who has been involved in many consultations with Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board in which the original proposal was what we ended up with, I ask the cabinet secretary whether the advent of directly elected health boards will go some way to improving the situation regarding Blawarthill that Mr Finnie mentions and perhaps other such situations.

A few weeks ago, I met representatives of BAA Ltd and the cost of the Glasgow airport rail link was discussed. Can the cabinet secretary tell me what the financial position is in relation to GARL? Can he also confirm how he sees fastlink meeting Glasgow's transport needs, in particular those of the 2014 Commonwealth games and the Southern general hospital campus?

To ask the Scottish Government what measures contained in the draft housing (Scotland) bill are intended to reform the situation surrounding the licensing of houses in multiple occupation. (S3O-7847)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that detailed reply. I am pleased that consideration is being given to how we deal with the planning and migrant workers situations. The cabinet secretary is aware of the large number of HMOs in Hillhead in the west end of Glasgow. Many people in the area are concerned about the lack of enforcement and inadequate fines for landlords who do not comply with the legislation. Will she take on board their concerns and consider whether they might be dealt with through the housing bill? After all, we need to get rid of such unscrupulous landlords, so we need more enforcement and larger fines.

Will the member give way?

I thank Margo for an excellent speech. She touched on a number of areas on which I will touch. I am not a member of the Health and Sport Committee, but I hope that its members will take my comments in the constructive way in which they are meant. I thank Margo for her explanation of physical literacy.

I am sorry. I thank Margo MacDonald for her explanation. When I phoned people in my constituency, none of them knew what physical literacy was, so I asked the committee convener. I was told that it is running, jumping, catching and throwing. Perhaps we should have a wee bit more plain speech, not only in the committee but throughout the Parliament. Much of the debate—and the report—has focused specifically on the provision of physical education in schools, how best to achieve delivery of a two-hour PE target and where responsibility for the implementation of the policy lies. I congratulate the committee on being so robust on that and thank it for its recommendations.  However, I have concerns about one issue, which Margo MacDonald raised: the recommendation that "pupil report cards should refer to a pupil's physical literacy skills." My sister will probably kill me for this. She graduated as a psychologist but, throughout her life, she has been—and still is—unable to play skipping games or use a skipping rope. Would she have had a yellow, red or green card on her report card? Some people simply cannot take part in sports, so I have a real problem with that recommendation. I am concerned about it.

I appreciate the explanation, but I still have concerns. I think that some parents would have concerns too, as would some pupils, such as, perhaps, my sister when she was younger. As I said, the report is robust on the issue and I thank the committee for that. However, as I said, I am not a member of the committee so I am taking an overview of the matter. I think that I should be able to give my impressions of it, and I hope that my views will be taken in the constructive way in which they are meant. Further focus has been given to the active schools programme and the need for integrated local sports provision. Although I agree that those areas are important, I am concerned that the committee's considerations focused on a remit that, to my mind, put too much emphasis on the provision and development of formal sporting activities to the detriment of physical activity in general. That is despite the fact that, during phase 1 of the inquiry, when the committee took evidence from athletes, it noted that one reason for the falling off in participation levels was to do with social changes whereby, as Christine Grahame said, young children are less likely to play outside. That should have been looked at more carefully and in more depth. Furthermore, the section of the report on the remit and evidence at phase 2 of the inquiry explicitly states at paragraph 24 on page 5: "The goal for the inquiry was to encourage physical activity in general". Physical activity in general was to be encouraged, but that was not looked at deeply enough. I agree with the minister that the provision of sport hubs that cater for all is one of the ways forward.  The report goes on to define physical activity as "movement of the body that uses energy". It states that this includes, among other activities, play, gardening and dance. Margo MacDonald mentioned girls. I say to her—I am sure that she will take my comment in the spirit in which it is intended—that the fit for girls programme was introduced by the Government to encourage girls to be more active. Jamie McGrigor and I were involved in discussing that when we were on the Equal Opportunities Committee. The programme has been welcomed and it has had positive outcomes for young girls. Unfortunately, however, it seems that the physical activity aspect of the inquiry was overlooked in favour of more structured sporting activities, particularly those for young people, even though Scotland's national organisation for health information, ISD Scotland, has reported that two thirds of Scottish adults do not do enough physical activity. Once again, that should have been looked at much more closely. I am not criticising the committee, but we should be looking at these things in much more detail. The inquiry focused too narrowly on PE provision and younger people in general rather than considering the large percentage of the population who could benefit from an inquiry into how to encourage and make provision for increased physical activity, which, as the report states, could include housework and gardening. In my experience of my kids and others, those activities are not best enjoyed by youngsters. We all agree, and the committee's report states, that the 2014 Commonwealth games give us a great opportunity to create a lasting legacy for the whole of Scotland and to raise the profile of sport and healthy living in general. Since the announcement on the games, I have received a great deal of correspondence from constituents who are keen to learn what the lasting legacy will be for their communities. I know that a lot of work is being done on that. Surprisingly, however, a lot of that correspondence has come from adults who are concerned about the lack of local places for youngsters and adults to take part in physical activity. I am not using my speech to publicise it, by any means, but as a result of that concern, I and my colleague Bill Kidd launched a consultation—

—to determine how we can respond to those concerns, by asking local residents what they would like to see. One model is the outdoor gym at Barlanark in the east end of  Glasgow. That is something that we should be looking at—

To wind up, and in conclusion, Presiding Officer, I believe that we can build a consensus. There were promises in the Labour Party's manifesto, the Lib Dems' manifesto—

Will the member take an intervention?

We know that the Lighthouse is owned by Glasgow City Council. Taking into consideration the grants that have been received by the Lighthouse from the Heritage Lottery Fund and the Scottish Arts Council, and the caveats that are attached to that funding, designating it for public purposes, will the Lighthouse remain in public hands in the future?

I pay tribute to Irene Oldfather for the sincerity that she shows on  this issue. We sometimes travel together on the train from Glasgow to Edinburgh and we have long conversations about it. I know that her heart is very much in it. Christine Grahame is indeed a pensioner, and today is her birthday, but I will not tell members what age she is. As convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing, today's subject is of particular interest to me—as it is to fellow members of the cross-party group and to others. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for her attendance at today's group meeting, at which we discussed the forthcoming Scottish older people's assembly, which is to be held on 2 October in the Parliament. I hope that many attending the debate today, whether members or people in the public gallery, will have the opportunity to attend that assembly, which I think will be very important. It has long been a goal of the cross-party group and other interested groups and individuals for older people's voices to be heard and for their needs to be addressed, and I am happy to say that I believe we are making real progress in that regard. Today's debate and the forthcoming publication of the Government's dementia strategy demonstrate that older people's voices are at last beginning to be heard. The older people's assembly will serve as the perfect platform for that to happen. Much of the proposed programme is directly related to the needs of an ageing population, its health, wellbeing and quality of life, and I hope that the older people's assembly will have the opportunity to feed into the Government's dementia strategy. Perhaps in her winding-up speech the minister will confirm that that will happen. Much has been said about the medical causes of and possible remedies for the syndrome. Although remedies are, of course, to be welcomed, we must ensure that any strategy aims to provide whatever support is necessary to delay or minimise the onset and symptoms of dementia. A key aspect is the need for older people to lead active, engaging and rewarding lives, at home and in care homes—it is important that we address the situation in care homes in that regard. I will give one example of why it is very important for people to lead an active life, whether in their home or in a care home. I regularly have the pleasure of visiting the Wing Hong Chinese elderly centre in Garnethill in Glasgow, where I frequently come off second-best at table tennis. Members might not think that that is very surprising, given my size and stature, but someone with a much greater stature—the First Minister—has also found himself on the wrong end of a ping-pong ball at the centre, having lost to a gentleman of 93 years of age. I have seen some of the most mentally and physically active older  people I have ever come across in that centre. They are absolutely amazing—93 years old, on a treadmill, playing ping-pong or checkers, or out digging the garden. That is fantastic. We need to focus on the subject of keeping older people mentally and physically positive in their outlooks. I believe that, as direct result of their being mentally and physically active, older people can lead as full a life as possible and remain as full of life as possible. If we are to achieve our aim of improving the lives of older people, we must seriously consider how we can provide the stimulation and activity that are needed to promote healthy lives and mental wellbeing. I hope that the minister can address that point, which I know will be mentioned in the strategy. She said that she will take on board the issues that we raise, and it might be a good idea for her to visit the Wing Hong group and perhaps get a game of table tennis with that 93-year-old man, too. As Irene Oldfather and others have said, there are people sitting in care homes doing nothing. There are gardens and equipment at some homes that are never used, and that situation has to be addressed seriously. Such cases have been brought to me, and I have seen others with my own eyes. I have visited care homes, not just when my mother was in one but through the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing. I have been shocked and angered to see some of the care that people receive. It is admirable to look towards better regulation and a higher standard of care in the sector—I would welcome those. However, I believe that it is by empowering older people—the service users in care homes—that we can achieve some form of lasting change. I would like the minister to talk about that when she sums up. I recently spoke to Professor Alan Miller, the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, about the human rights situation in many care homes. I was encouraged by the commitment of the commission to empowering people in care homes to understand their rights. We discussed the establishment of a human rights champion, who would be nominated by their peers and would ensure that everyone in the peer group understood their rights and had representation. I would be interested to hear the minister's thoughts on the idea, which she might feed into the strategy. Dementia can affect any of us and it is imperative that there should be early diagnosis and treatment. We must improve care, treatment and support for people who have dementia and the people who care for them. As Irene Oldfather, Christine Grahame and Mary Scanlon said, we must ensure that there is understanding and  knowledge of dementia, not just among the medical profession but among people who care for or simply know people who have the condition. Then we will be able to have a proper strategy that we can work with.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I do not know what to say after that speech, although I am sure that I will have plenty to say. I came into the chamber for the beginning of the debate at 5 minutes to 3 and listened to Alex Neil's speech on the legislative programme, which was good. It was not just fun; it was positive. The speeches that Mary Scanlon, Patrick Harvie and a few other members made were in exactly the same vein. Sitting and listening to the diatribe from the Labour Party was disheartening, not only for me and other members, but people in the gallery.

I do; but I am certainly not depressed and I do not want to listen to the depression that is coming from the Labour Party. I have never heard such a diatribe. It was depressing. We tell the Scottish people that they should look forward. If people listen to the Labour Party, they will not know what to do. Rhona Brankin mentioned building a school in Barrhead and not going to Bahrain. Future generations of children will be able to get social housing because we have abolished the right to buy it. She wants future generations of children to pay for schools for ever and to be in debt for ever. I ask her to consider that and to consider for once, please, what is happening not just as a result of our legislation but even what is happening as a result of legislation that the Labour Party passed and that we supported.

I will let Cathie Craigie in in a couple of minutes. I thought that I would be able to come into the chamber and take part in a decent debate that people would listen to, but the diatribe from the Labour Party would make people even more depressed than being a member of it would.

No, thank you. I will let the member in in a couple of minutes. I am already nearly two minutes into my time. I wanted to start off in a positive vein. I congratulate the Government on introducing the legislative programme, particularly its proposal to end the right to buy new-build social housing, which I have mentioned, greater protection for those who face repossession, and ending people being made homeless as a result of small amounts of debt. That is important. Those issues might not be sexy and they might not grab newspaper headlines, but they are important. Cathy Jamieson mentioned that such things are important to the public—to the ordinary people of Scotland. People face problems with debts and repossessions every other day. I am thankful that the Government is looking for solutions.

I agree with Johann Lamont and have already spoken to the Minister for Housing and Communities about those issues. I have met housing associations, particularly from the Glasgow area, to discuss the possibility of putting a cap on HMOs. I take Johann Lamont's point entirely, and I am sure that the Minister for Housing and Communities is aware of those issues. Earlier, Cathy Jamieson mentioned repossession. She will be aware that the Government has already taken action to reduce the risk of repossession through the home owners support fund, which helps those people who are at risk. Today's announcement will see home owners given even greater protection. As Alex Neil said, the proposed bill will go a long way towards preventing repossessions. Concerns on the issue have been expressed by many groups, such as Citizens Advice Scotland, as well as politicians. I welcome the proposal for a debtor protection bill that will improve access to debt relief and protection for debtors in family homes. I thank the  debt action forum for all its work in that area and its recommendations, such as those for the production of Scottish data on repossessions—we do not have such data yet—and the provision of more independent advice to people. I also welcome and support another of the forum's recommendations, which is that court procedures should be simplified in order to make the process clearer and less intimidating. I have accompanied people who have been taken to court, unfortunately, by the Glasgow Housing Association. It is a very stressful experience. In addition, the proposed debt and family homes bill will amend the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007 and provide alternative provisions to replace the outdated diligence of adjudication for debt. That will ensure that the family home cannot be taken from people who are in debt, which is a big problem at the moment. I am pleased that Cathy Jamieson and others have said that they will support that bill. I do not want to linger, but there is one last point that I would like to raise with Iain Smith. He mentioned the consultation process on the debt and family homes bill. It is rather disingenuous of him to say that he is not happy with the consultation process. I thought that the Liberal Democrats always liked consultation. He said that the consultation process is taking far too long, but I think that it is better to have a long consultation than no consultation at all.

When he reads the Official Report , he will see what I mean. It is important that people who lose their jobs and who get into debt because of the present situation do not also lose their family homes through no fault of their own. Creditors deserve to get their moneys back in a fair way, but it cannot be fair that people lose their homes just because they have lost their jobs. We cannot support that, which is why I am pleased with the bills that the Government is producing to prevent the repossession of people's homes. We have also heard the announcement of £1.5 billion to provide social housing and the proposal to end the right to buy for new build. Those measures will provide much-needed social housing and will protect social housing for future generations—something that is long overdue, as I have said before. Despite what other members say, I am proud of the Government's achievements. I look forward to the legislation, which will not only stand the Parliament and the Government in good stead, but will stand the Scottish people in good stead as well.

The cabinet secretary will undoubtedly be aware of the decision by InBev to sell another of Scotland's iconic brands—Tennent's lager—to C&C Group. Does he agree that the assurances that I have received from that company that it is fully committed to the continuation and development of the Wellpark brewery in Glasgow, which are in stark contrast to the way in which Diageo has acted, are to be welcomed and that Diageo would do well to have the same faith in and commitment to the workers in Scotland that have been shown by the new owners of the Tennent's lager brewery?

Will the member give way?

Will Richard Baker tell me in all sincerity—with his hand on his heart, and bearing in mind that the word "integrity" appears on the mace—whether the amendments that the Labour Party and the other Opposition parties have lodged are political posturing of the worst kind, rather than anything to do with Megrahi or even the Lockerbie victims?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and decision, which I fully support. Does he agree with the comments that Jack McConnell made in 2007? Mr McConnell said: "We need someone to preside over the Parliament who embodies the words on the mace: justice, wisdom, compassion and integrity. Each of us should embody those principles every day in carrying out our duties".— [ Official Report , 14 May 2007; c 13.]

The minister may be aware that much of the correspondence that I receive is connected with the gridlock in Glasgow city centre and that, over the recess, I will seek Glasgow residents' views on that issue. Will he meet me to discuss the detailed responses that I receive?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to explore areas of opportunity in Latin America that would prove beneficial to Scotland. (S3O-7488) It seems that Latin America is the flavour of the month.

I hear what the minister says and agree with his reply to Elaine Smith, but I am interested specifically in the green energy production that not just Cuba, but other Latin American countries are at the forefront of. Has the minister thought about speaking to those countries about their green energy production? Scotland has expertise in green energy, too.

Is the minister aware of the situation at Glasgow Gaelic school, where pupils have to use the assembly hall and the canteen for gym facilities, and where only limited use can be made of the blaes pitch  because of its poor condition? Although the parents body has put forward proposals that are backed by sportscotland, positive feedback from Glasgow City Council is still required. In the light of what the minister said to Margo MacDonald, will she facilitate similar dialogue with Glasgow City Council, with a view to it coming to a conclusion in the process?

The pre-action protocol has been presented by some people as a panacea for all repossession problems. For the sake of clarity, can the cabinet secretary say what impact the pre-action protocol has had since its introduction and what support there has been for it among stakeholders?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will convene a meeting of all interested parties to discuss an inquiry into the banking industry in relation to protecting jobs in Scotland. (S3O-7384)

I am grateful that the committee will look into the subject. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the announcement from Lloyds Banking Group that it will axe more jobs after repaying £4 billion to the Westminster Government is a slap in the face for the hard-working staff in the banking industry, and that those job losses are a direct result of the HBOS-Lloyds merger that Gordon Brown pushed through at Westminster?

I also thank the Justice Committee, its clerks and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for the hard work that they have done. They listened to everyone and produced an important bill. I am pleased to be able to speak on this bill. As I said, I do not think that it is the most important bill in the Parliament, but it is certainly one of the bills that I have spoken about and I feel is important. It is also historic. Lots of bodies have raised issues regarding the subject of the bill, as have the public and academia, because they have felt that Scots law is out of date in relation to rape and sexual offences. I thank the previous and present Governments for taking those issues seriously and enabling the Parliament to pass this bill in a consensual manner. We must remember that, whatever decisions we make in this Parliament, the rights of victims and the protection of the most vulnerable in our society must be what we focus on. I am pleased that Margaret Curran's amendment 1 was accepted, as I believe that the defence of prior consent has been used far too often in rape and sexual assault cases involving intoxication. I am sorry that Paul Martin and the Labour Party appear not to understand exactly what Robert Brown's amendments 121 to 125 mean. I think that Robert Brown explained the position, but I will try again to make it clear. The accepting of the amendments means the addition of fines, whereas Paul Martin is advocating that the accused be admonished—I wish that he would accept that point. We all agree that any sexual offence is a terrible indictment of human society. I would like Paul Martin to clarify in his own mind the fact that the fines would be an additional disposal and that the alternative is that the accused would merely be admonished. I wish that he would listen to that point. My only regret involves the issue of consensual sex between young people of between 13 and 15 years of age and the threat that those young people might end up with a criminal record, which Robert Brown touched on. The matter might be outwith the remit of the Scottish Government, but I hope that we can return to it, as it is important, and that it will be part of the consultation with young people that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice mentioned. The issue might be controversial, but it is an important issue for the 21 st century, and I think that young people should have an opportunity to speak about it.

That is right.

This week, the Scottish Government launched a blueprint to tackle violence against women. What measures are contained in the blueprint not only to tackle domestic violence but to raise awareness of this heinous crime?

One of the projects that has been identified is the John Logie Baird project in the merchant city in Glasgow. Will that project support training for jobs that relate to the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow? Will the people of the east end of Glasgow in particular be part of the project?

I agree with the member about small businesses and cash flow. Does he agree that the banks have to look to themselves when they are telling small businesses that if they want an overdraft, they will be charged 4 per cent?

The minister is obviously aware of the situation in Glasgow, but is he aware that many of the schools that are being closed are in good condition and that the 96 per cent of parents who replied to the consultation process only wish Glasgow City Council to meet them again to talk about the situation? Does he agree that the city council can afford at least to meet the parents of the children in those schools to allay their fears?

To ask the Scottish Executive what benefits the Scottish investment bank will bring to the economy. (S3O-6967)

I welcome the significant investment that is being made by the Government to support business growth. However, looking ahead, it would be good to expand that even further. Has the cabinet secretary considered any other potential sources of funding that could be used similarly in the future?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for his continuing support for community courts. [ Laughter. ]

As someone who speaks to the people of the east end of Glasgow, I know that they want action. Does the cabinet secretary agree that what is needed for the people of the east end of Glasgow is swiftness of delivery and not necessarily a building?

The member mentions saving jobs. In his reply to me, James Kelly said that the purpose of the Government's intervention was to save jobs, yet he said later that jobs are being lost. If the Westminster Government put in money to save jobs but we are now talking about jobs being lost, how does that correlate?

Does the member agree that if the UK Government had put in place more stringent banking legislation, as other countries did, we would not have been in the same position with Lloyds TSB and other banks?

I welcome the opportunity to have a debate on this important issue and congratulate Margo MacDonald on her tenacity in ensuring that it is not forgotten. I am pleased to support her call for a public inquiry and thank her for supporting my motion, which called for a special parliamentary committee to be set up to investigate the matter, and the letters of support that she sent to the Finance Committee. As has been mentioned, the Parliament has debated the issue before. I firmly believe that further investigation of the situation that surrounded the merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB is desirable and has merit. I wish that any such inquiry would also examine the transfer of the Dunfermline Building Society's operations to the Nationwide Building Society. It is important that we do that. There are many unanswered questions. For instance, why is there no paper trail? I wrote to the Financial Services Authority, which told me that it was conversations between Gordon Brown and leading bankers that led to the merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB—although Margo MacDonald told us that there was evidence but it has now been destroyed. That, above all, deserves an inquiry of some sort.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that clarification. I accept what she says, but I believe that even that merits an investigation. It is the duty of this Parliament to take the necessary actions to get to the truth and to represent the people of Scotland. Although we are talking about bankers, Gordon Brown and legislation, we have to remember that real people  are affected; members of the public have suffered and they want action and answers. It might be that the Scottish Government does not have sufficient powers to direct a public inquiry into this affair, but that does not mean that we cannot support a Scottish parliamentary inquiry. Of course it will be argued that without the full powers of a public inquiry any resultant parliamentary inquiry, or other such inquiry, would lack the necessary powers to compel witnesses to give evidence, but I believe that there are sufficient grounds not to reject calls for an inquiry. I am optimistic that anyone who was asked to come to the Scottish Parliament to give evidence would be more than willing to do so. I firmly believe that we have to push for an inquiry. I had a feeling that the Scottish Conservatives would still need to be convinced of the merits of an inquiry, but I really did not think that Labour would need convincing. Perhaps the Conservatives should heed the comment of David Cameron, the Conservative leader, that he would make a constructive working relationship with the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government a priority in the event of the Conservatives forming the next UK Government.

I am sorry, but I cannot take an intervention. As David Cameron falls over himself to apologise and Gordon Brown follows, the talk turns to transparency and openness once again. It is in the interests of this Parliament and the Scottish people to be open, honest and transparent, to establish an inquiry into the decisions that led to the merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB and to investigate why the Dunfermline Building Society was similarly carved up. Jeremy Purvis mentioned the use, or otherwise, of competition law in this matter, which merits investigation. The events of the past week have shown us that the public have no time for back-room, dodgy deals. I hope that members here today will reflect on how the public feel about this issue and that they will support an inquiry, whether a public inquiry or an inquiry by a committee of the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of any progress that has been made toward the establishment of a pensioners parliament. (S3O-6867)

As convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing, I wonder whether the minister or her officials might be able to attend one of our meetings and explain the proposals for 2 October.

I fully support community courts. Cathy Jamieson said that this is not about the building, and she is correct—it is about the expediency of the system. However, in  Glasgow we would be pretty hard-pressed to find any empty buildings, with Glasgow City Council closing down schools and community centres. I therefore ask her to think over the point again. I fully concur with what the minister has said and with what my colleague Nigel Don has said. I have heard many things about the Conservative party, many of which I cannot repeat here for obvious reasons, but until today I had thought that the party generally attempted to consider the facts. Today, however, we see Conservative members engaging in the very politics of spin and disinformation that their leader, David Cameron, has vowed to stamp out. His Scottish wing seems not to have heard about that and has decided on a policy of misinformation and soundbites in its quest to smear this Government.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. Bill Aitken's motion is a work of fiction. It is built on the premise that the Scottish Government decided not to proceed with the community courts system, and Bill Aitken has gone on to reiterate that misleading and ill-informed statement. Let us look at the facts for a minute. Bill Aitken knows, as all of us in the chamber know, that the project board for the Glasgow community justice centre met in March and decided not to proceed with the service. That was the board's decision, not the Government's decision. It cheapens the member and others in this chamber to pretend otherwise. We have to correct the glaring inaccuracies in Mr Aitken's motion. There is nothing to it—no substance and no merit—and I am really disappointed in it. The Labour and Liberal Democrat amendments are no better. It is to the credit of the Government and Glasgow City Council that they have continued to work on how their aims can be realised. As the minister and others have said, this is not about the bricks and mortar but about the expediency of services. It seems to me, and perhaps to others, that the other parties would be happier if all plans were simply dropped. That would give them the chance to criticise, rather than enter into constructive dialogue on how people in the Parliament and the country can work together to deal with the problems that crime creates for communities throughout Scotland. We should take that to heart. I remind members that the Conservative party was the party that failed to build any extra prisons in Scotland and which introduced automatic early release. What this Government is doing, in working with Glasgow City Council and others, is commendable. It is grown-up action that Scottish  people want to see—not juvenile point scoring and one-upmanship. Until the Conservatives realise that, they will continue to live and breathe the air of the political wilderness in Scotland. The Scottish Government stands accused of creating a "soft-touch Scotland", yet it is the Conservatives who have a soft touch with the truth.

Like others, I have spoken at great length on this issue and on the issue of job cuts at The Herald and the Evening Times , on which I had a members' business debate. It is with great sorrow that we are back here talking about job losses and about people getting sacked. I am sure that the management of Trinity Mirror will correct me if I am wrong, but I agree with Kenny Gibson and David Whitton that the group has used the Glasgow part of the operation, which made a profit of £20 million to £23 million, as a cash cow—a similar thing is happening in many other parts of the newspaper industry. Trinity Mirror is now using the present economic crisis as a reason to say that it cannot keep going and that there will be compulsory redundancies for various journalists—24 in the case of the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail . I have a real fear about that, which is why I am back here talking about it with great sadness. I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate, because it is important that the issue is debated, whether three times—as has happened today—or 30 times, to ensure that the message gets across to the management that all parties in the Scottish Parliament are absolutely sickened and disgusted by its actions. I hope that the minister can get around the table with the management of Trinity Mirror and do something, although I have my doubts about the management. I want to look at some practical things that I hope the Scottish Parliament can do. I said this morning that we have to look at employment law but, unfortunately, that is not part of our remit. Perhaps the minister in this Parliament could talk to the relevant minister in the Westminster Parliament about that; I would like that to happen if it is at all possible. We really have to look at employment law, because what is happening here  would not happen in countries with decent employment laws. We got the Health and Safety Executive involved in the situation at The Herald and the Evening Times —no conclusion was reached, but at least people spoke to each other—because of the practices at the titles and the stress that journalists were under. I wonder whether we could get the Health and Safety Executive involved in the situation at the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail , too. I want to pick up Ted Brocklebank's point about advertising. Given the record—excuse the pun—of the management and the profits that it has made from the two titles, if we gave it advertising money, perhaps it would just take the money and run. It might still end up paying off workers. I think that that is what would happen, so we should be careful about giving it the money. That is a great worry to me. I know a lot of the people involved. It is not a conflict of interest to say that I have worked in newspaper advertising. Over the years, every politician develops a rapport—whether good or bad—with journalists. We get to know journalists. When they phone us on a Friday night at 10 o'clock we are almost certain that they will want us to say something off the record, and when they phone at a decent time during the day we know that they are phoning for a decent story. The investigative journalism at the Sunday Mail is second to none. As Hugh Henry said in this morning's debate, it has been paramount in bringing down some of the worst excesses of gangsterism, drug dealing and so on, particularly in Glasgow. Without those investigative journalists, such criminals would virtually get away with murder. My big worry is that we are losing excellent journalists. The journalists must be worried sick because they are losing their jobs and, like all of us, they have mortgages to pay for and families to keep, but when Kenny Gibson and I have spoken to them—last Friday and at other times—their big worry has been that journalistic expertise will be lost from the country. Once that is lost, we will not get it back.

I welcome the commitment from the Minister for Public Health and Sport to work with the UK Government representatives and Glasgow City Council to ensure that national lottery funding is made available to make the games hugely successful, in terms of both the games themselves and the legacy they provide for Glasgow and Scotland as a whole. I look forward to learning the outcome of the meeting, as it is crucial that we get the money as early as possible to put in place the facilities. We cannot wait until it is too late and find the facilities are not there. With regard to the legacy that the games will provide, much has been said regarding material benefits to Glasgow's east end—Margaret Curran, Frank McAveety and others also mentioned that—and the economic benefits that will come as a result of these games. I am encouraged by the unifying theme of the interim games legacy plan, namely that of the promotion of health. The five underpinning principles of the plan—enhancing partnerships, enabling diversity, ensuring equality, encouraging community engagement and embedding sustainability—are equally encouraging and very worthy, but we will need to establish clearly how they will be achieved. I hope that the final legacy plan, which will be launched this summer, will address those issues in full detail. When it plans the delivery of those aims, the legacy plan delivery group should perhaps consider how we will "establish joint working, from grassroots upwards", as stated under the principle of enhancing partnerships. That will be fundamental in delivering a legacy that is not only long lasting but for the people. We must also be highly vigilant in ensuring that the people who are meant to benefit from the games are not bypassed in the development and delivery of the legacy and that their voices are heard. The minister mentioned the intergenerational approach, which is set out under the principle of enabling diversity. Every member who has spoken has rightly mentioned the benefits of the games to young people, but, as the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing, I am particularly interested in ensuring that the games deliver for people of all ages. I am happy to discuss with the minister the various views and ideas that have been raised at group meetings on how that can best be achieved. I should point out that when I talk about older people I am talking about 50 to 55-year-olds and over. Given the heart attack and stroke figures for not only the east end but the whole of Glasgow, it is important that  everyone has a share in the health aspects of the legacy. I believe that the principle of encouraging community engagement is entwined with that of enhancing partnerships and will be equally important in creating a successful legacy. In the interim paper, the aim is for community engagement to rekindle a sense of pride, to revitalise local communities and to "promote community ownership of the activities". I agree with Margaret Curran's point that younger people should be able to get in to watch the games either free or at a reduced price, although I think that that should apply to kids not just from the east end but from all over Glasgow. If we are to deliver on the unifying theme of health, we must ask local communities what they need to improve their health and listen to what they say. Although I welcome the idea of sports hubs, which the minister elaborated on, and the proposal to encourage people to get involved in the competitive sports that will be featured in the games, I believe that we must not lose sight of this great chance to improve the general health of the people of Glasgow and, indeed, the whole of Scotland. As the minister is aware, a number of respondents to the consultation wanted the legacy plan to refer specifically to support for the development of active play, adventure playgrounds and adventure activities. Moreover, in the young people's consultation, the number 1 thing that was wanted was for the games to encourage "young people to become fitter and healthier". I could not agree more. I regularly receive correspondence about the lack of facilities for young people, and I urge the minister and the group to ensure that, in finalising the legacy plan, they use the opportunity presented by the games to address such concerns. As Mr Finnie made clear, there is no point in leaving these things as a legacy if people in the east end and the rest of Glasgow cannot enjoy them. Finally, the principle of embedding sustainability and the commitment to making the 2014 games the green games give Scotland a great chance to showcase to the world our belief that Scotland can be at the forefront of a green and sustainable future. There will also be an opportunity to redesign the built environment to improve the quality of life of communities, which might act as a blueprint for other communities across Scotland. The potential is enormous. The task is not easy, but the results will be invaluable. Let us ensure  that we get this right not just for the people of Glasgow but for the people of Scotland.

I am a resident of Glasgow and I frequently travel around the city and beyond, so I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I cannot possibly cover everything that I would like to mention—from potholes to trunk roads to the Clyde tunnel—but I will do my best in the short time that I have. I welcome the Government's commitment to the building of the Glasgow airport rail link, which will bring huge benefits to business and tourism in the city and will enhance Glasgow's already enviable reputation as a world-class, dynamic and cosmopolitan city that embraces the 21 st century. Other dynamic projects are going on throughout Glasgow. I recently travelled through the long-awaited refurbished Partick railway station and was hugely impressed by its design and functionality. I put in a plea to SPT for public toilets at the station, because people constantly write to me about the facilities in the station, which I think amount to just one disabled toilet—I hope that SPT is listening. Scotland's fifth busiest station, which is a major hub and gateway to the west, offers a perfect opportunity to promote an integrated transport model. The newly reopened  Partick station is welcomed by people in Glasgow and beyond.

I certainly support the member's call for investment in Dalmarnock. It is important that we have an integrated rail system. Michael McMahon painted a picture of doom and gloom in his bitter speech. Des McNulty also painted a picture of doom and gloom in Glasgow and the west. They are right to point out that we are experiencing an economic recession. However, the recession was caused by the Labour Government at Westminster. Scotland has its own Parliament and Government and we must get on with doing our best for Scotland. Labour members should not shed crocodile tears when their Government is responsible for what is happening. People still want to invest in Glasgow and Scotland. Last Friday, plans were announced for the creation of a £90 million office, retail and leisure complex in the burgeoning financial services district, which will create around 2,500 jobs. As we know, the district used to contain warehouses and was the departing point for the Clyde ferries and Irish steamers during the early 20 th century. Jim Fitzsimons, the chief executive of Capella Group, which is behind the investment, said: "We believe the city is far better placed than most other UK cities to quickly come out of the current downturn". That is the opinion of a professional. Another professional, Peter Wood, the boss of insurance giants Esure Insurance, recently announced the major expansion of the firm's Glasgow office and said that he wanted to bring the posts to his favourite city because of Glasgow's workers' can-do attitude. He claimed that he would "need his head examined" to do business in London, because of the city's high costs and transport problems. The two examples that I have given demonstrate that we are attracting major investors as a result of Glasgow's unique attractiveness and ability to embrace new technologies and opportunities. However, more could be done. I welcome GARL, but consideration must also be given to high-speed rail and other rail connections and to road upgrades, for the benefit of Glasgow's wider community and Scotland as a whole. In that context, I agree with Des McNulty and other members that the Glasgow crossrail project has  been on the drawing board for far too long, gathering dust when it should have been gathering speed. Members might be interested to hear that I corresponded recently with the new chief executive of Transport Scotland, David Middleton. I was assured that the linking of rail services across Glasgow is a priority, that an initial meeting of the steering group has taken place to drive forward that aim and that the outcome will be known by June. Given the need for GARL and crossrail to be in place before the 2014 Commonwealth games, will the minister say whether minutes of steering group meetings will be published and whether the outcome of the group's deliberations will be available for the Parliament to debate before the summer recess? The 2014 games present a fantastic opportunity to create a lasting legacy and to showcase Glasgow's transport infrastructure to the world. We all want the Commonwealth games to be as green as possible—I bow to Patrick Harvie on that. The games offer an opportunity to develop the city's green transport network. It is essential that when we consider the transport needs of Glasgow and the west, we include among the many priorities the need to encourage people to walk, cycle and travel by boat. It would be wonderful if we could open up the river and make it the dynamic asset that it should be, so that Glasgow's people and visitors could use it to get around and see what our beautiful city has to offer. Perhaps the minister will say whether such issues fit into his vision of the overall transport infrastructure in the future.

Does the member agree that employment law regarding the redundancy situation must also be looked at?

I declare an interest as a member of the Dunfermline Building Society. I have certainly spoken in support of Margo MacDonald's position and suggestion. Given the large number of unanswered questions about the sell-off of the Dunfermline—including questions about use of emergency powers—does the First Minister believe that it would be appropriate for the Finance Committee to consider holding an inquiry into the facts behind the sell-off and to consider the impacts on the wider economy and on the future of Scottish financial services?

I congratulate Karen Gillon on her excellent speech and motion. I echo her sentiments in welcoming all who have joined us in the public gallery today. As the modern Commonwealth moves towards its 60 th anniversary, its continuing endurance and popularity is to be applauded. Almost 2 billion people all around the globe are now part of the Commonwealth. Half of them are under 25, so it is entirely fitting that the theme of this year's celebrations is "serving a new generation". I am sure that we all agree that the shared future of our societies lies in the hands of our young people. Through providing them with the opportunity to realise their aspirations, we will achieve a fair and more just society. Earlier today, I had the pleasure of speaking to a number of young people who were representing their universities from throughout Scotland. Their questions were wide ranging and covered the workings of the Commonwealth, fair trade, health,  equality, education and how the Scottish Parliament can strengthen the Commonwealth through its international aid programme, particularly in Malawi. I was impressed by their great knowledge and interest. The themes that ran through all their questions and observations were collective responsibility, mutual respect and the democracy that underpins the Commonwealth's great ideals. The guiding principles of the Commonwealth, such as the promotion of democracy, human rights, liberty and world peace, are as relevant today as they were when the Commonwealth came into being. It is a tribute to those noble aspirations that many countries that fought for many years for their independence from colonial rule have remained part of the organisation, which has come to symbolise freedom and the hopes that, many years ago, people could only have dreamed of. As we move towards a future that holds much uncertainty, I hope that the experience and strength of the Commonwealth will continue to help those people who are most in need. I hope, too, that the numerous programmes and worthy initiatives of which we are all undoubtedly aware—and which we will have the opportunity to highlight during the reception after this debate—will serve as examples for others to replicate. I represent Glasgow in this Parliament, and it was with great pride and honour that we received the news that Glasgow was to host the 2014 Commonwealth games. To my mind, the Commonwealth games are an enduring symbol of the friendship and unity of the Commonwealth. The games also offer the host country and city a unique opportunity to welcome members of the Commonwealth from around the globe with pride, to extend the hand of friendship. The games offer us the opportunity to gain a better understanding of each other's cultures. Glasgow will also be able to use the games as a springboard to a lasting legacy—one that benefits ordinary citizens and furthers the overarching values of the Commonwealth. I extend my hand in friendship to all who are here today and to all who will come to my home town of Glasgow for the Commonwealth games. I assure everyone that they will receive the warmest of welcomes.

I am very pleased by that reply. Does the cabinet secretary agree that in certain cases, as well as a prison sentence, the awarding of costs against a perpetrator of domestic violence goes some way to change the culture and tackle that despicable crime?

My thoughts are with Jackie Baillie and her family at this very sad time. I pay tribute to Jackie Baillie for her tenacity in pursuing the issue of parking bays for disabled people vigorously and I thank the many people from throughout Scotland who came to the Parliament to lobby for action. The passing of the bill today will be a victory for all the people in Scotland who have actively pursued the issue. Disabled parking has always been close to my heart, having had an aunt who was disabled for many years and an elderly mother who could not get about in her later years. I would have liked the bill to look at the blue badge scheme as a whole and at extending it to deliver a range of other concessions, for example in relation to off-street parking. However, I realise that the scheme is a reserved issue. Perhaps we can look at it again at some other time, if we get the powers to do so. If the scheme was extended to cover off-street parking, it would be much more enforceable. Perhaps the minister will address that point in his summing up. Parking for disabled people has been the subject of a parliamentary debate and numerous petitions to the Public Petitions Committee, of which I was a member when they were lodged. I  remember when the committee met in Dunfermline in the middle of winter. People from disability action groups came all the way from Glasgow and Greenock in their cars to speak to their petition—that is how strongly they felt about the issue. The subject was also discussed in the previous Equal Opportunities Committee. I see Cathy Peattie here, who was the convener of the committee when the subject was covered in our report "Removing Barriers and Creating Opportunities", which stated: "The Committee also recommends that the Scottish Executive develop and promote suitable mechanisms for the effective enforcement of proper use of accessible parking for disabled people wherever it exists including encouraging local authorities to make full use of Traffic Regulation Orders." The bill will confirm that statement. I am pleased to support the bill in its entirety. Like other members, Karen Gillon mentioned the variation in costs, which go from the extremes of the sublime to the ridiculous. Glasgow's costs seem to be rocketing all the time. We must examine that and ask local authorities what their costs are. The costs that COSLA and local authorities have provided vary so much that it is not possible to say whether they are correct. As Charlie Gordon said, financial costs should not take precedence over the human costs to people with disabilities. We cannot consider simply finance; we must look at the issue in the round and consider the human rights of disabled people. Financial costs are secondary to enabling people to live active lives. What are the costs of being unable to park? Let us consider what we can do. Blue badge holders or members of other disability schemes who cannot park cannot, unlike us, get about and perform daily tasks such as going to the doctor, going shopping or attending appointments. They cannot get about socially to go to the theatre or the cinema, and they cannot participate in all the activities that we take for granted, because of the actions of selfish people. As David McLetchie said, if people will not behave considerately, we must, unfortunately, have enforceable legislation. It is unfortunate that, in this day and age, people do not treat others with humility and in the same manner in which they expect others to treat them. I welcome the bill, which will be passed with the Parliament's full support. It will go some way towards ensuring that we strive to achieve a fully inclusive Scotland.

Does the member agree that the situation is difficult for older carers who are pensioners and who have no recourse to an allowance because of their pension? They might care for adults who are 60 or 65.

I thank Stewart Maxwell for the work that he did during his term as housing minister, especially the work that he has undertaken with the Glasgow Housing Association, which has been very important to the people of Glasgow. I look forward to working with my new colleague if the motion is passed tonight, as I am sure it will be. The Government has taken steps to increase substantially the position and the provision of social and affordable housing, for which I applaud it. Other members—the cabinet secretary in particular—have mentioned that under this Government more houses have been built, although I will not repeat all the figures. The right to buy that Labour extended to housing associations has been abolished by this Government. Labour applauds those housing associations, and yet it extended the right to buy to include them. It is a great pity that Mary Mulligan and the Labour Party cannot acknowledge the fact that this Government has, in less than two short years, continued to put in more money and to listen to housing associations. Housing is an important issue, so it is a shame that the Labour Party is, once again, using it as a political football. We should all unite to rid this country of homelessness. It is about time the Labour Party acknowledged that and listened to what the Government has been doing.

I do not have much time, but I will let Hugh Henry in shortly. The Labour motion mentions the urgent need to examine  "the provision of land and ... the regeneration of communities", which is an important point. If those issues are to be tackled, joined-up thinking involving local councils, central Government and housing associations will be necessary. The new planning legislation that is being considered should help in that regard. I sincerely hope that the forthcoming Commonwealth games will ensure that the much-needed regeneration of the east end of Glasgow goes ahead.

I have met them and listened to them. I am critical of the Labour Party because it denies that, over the past two years, the SNP Government has done the work that it failed to do over the previous eight years. Labour members should bow their heads in shame, because Labour did nothing on housing. Only the SNP has spoken to the housing associations and addressed the issues that they have raised. Credit should be given where credit is due—that is my point. Jamie McGrigor's amendment deals with second-stage stock transfer. I mentioned Stewart Maxwell's work with the GHA, which has been extremely important to the people of Glasgow. I have some facts and figures for Jamie McGrigor, to add to those that the cabinet secretary gave. Second-stage transfer is important and will be welcomed in Glasgow, provided that it is supported by the tenants and the housing associations can get a good deal from the GHA. We have learned lessons; people should look at what is happening with second-stage transfer in Glasgow. I agree with Hugh Henry in one respect—we should reconsider the lead developer model. It might be a bit tricky having one main developer, particularly when it comes to second-stage transfer, so that needs to be examined. I welcome the increase in HAG funds, which I am sure will help with second-stage transfer in Glasgow, but I caution against their use by the GHA to increase the price of each unit and I seek an assurance that that will not happen. The road to second-stage transfer has not been an easy one and I understand that some housing associations are still waiting for valuations from the GHA, even though the cut-off point is 30 March. That is worrying, and I ask for ministerial clarification on that. Second-stage transfer in Glasgow has at times been difficult, so I applaud  Stewart Maxwell for meeting the GHA to try to iron out the problems. Second-stage transfer to small housing associations is welcome and represents a benefit to the community. I hope that the lessons that we have learned in Glasgow will be learned by other parts of the country that proceed with second-stage transfer. I welcome the debate. Housing is an extremely important issue. We must get it right, not just for homeless people, but for people who live in houses that are deemed to be unfit for habitation. I look forward to my questions being answered. Perhaps the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change can tell us about regeneration and land banking, which Johann Lamont mentioned. We must get best value and we must ensure that the people of Scotland have decent housing. Second-stage transfer must go ahead, but only if the tenants want it, and not at just any price.

I congratulate Bill Kidd on securing the debate and extend our welcome to the members of Knightswood Youth Theatre in the gallery. The award that the group has won is prestigious—it was established in memory of Philip Lawrence, who died a tragic death. Despite its many well-documented challenges, Glasgow has always been a friendly and welcoming city in which great importance is placed on community and community spirit. I have visited the areas that Bill Kidd mentioned, such as Drumchapel and Knightswood, and there is certainly great community spirit in them. It is a fantastic endorsement of those values that, even today—after much upheaval and change to communities—an overriding sense of togetherness and friendship is alive and well in Glasgow, irrespective of what other people say. That is of special significance when we consider that those involved in the Knightswood Youth Theatre comprise a mix of young Glaswegians, asylum seekers and refugees, who are trying to understand one another in these challenging and changing times. By exploring contentious and diverse issues such as dawn raids and friendships, they empower the whole community with a sense of who they are now and who they  will be in the future, which will obviously be an inclusive and tolerant future for those communities. I hope that they will live and grow together in that spirit. All too often, we read or hear about negative stereotypes of young people or about the impending breakdown of communities, but the Knightswood Youth Theatre story and many others show us that, despite our fears, many young people are ready and willing to listen to and understand one another, and to stand up for what they strongly believe is in the best interests of their communities. Another fine example of the wonderful work that is being done in Knightswood, Drumchapel and throughout Glasgow is the work of Jean Donnachie and Noreen Real, joint winners of this year's Evening Times Scotswoman of the year award, who set up a local network in the flats at Kingsway in Scotstoun, which is not far from Knightswood and Drumchapel, to warn of any impending dawn raids. They successfully took on the Home Office and won by helping to end the dreadful and barbaric use of dawn raids, to which Bill Kidd's motion refers. I hope that those examples from Glasgow, which show the power of working together for the community, will serve as an example for similar projects across Scotland. We have a lot to be proud of in Glasgow. We should certainly be proud of our young people, who should be praised for the work that they do throughout the city. I praise Knightswood Youth Theatre in that regard. All too often, we hear dire reports in the press about the terrible things that young people do, but the press should listen—I do not see any members of the press listening in the press gallery—to the kind of news that we have heard in the debate. I hope that some would listen to the view that young people should be praised highly for the work that they enter into with good spirit. The work of Knightswood Youth Theatre is a good example, and the kids involved—some of whom are in the public gallery—have led the way. I wish them well and all success for the future.

With regard to the proposed new maternity and children's hospital on the Southern general campus, what is the situation with Ronald McDonald House, which is a fantastic and unique facility? Will it be replicated in full on the new site, and is there a timescale for that?

Is the member aware that Alyn Smith MEP has a motion in the European Parliament on exactly that point? It proposes that we keep up the pressure on Israel and not have trade links while the conflict continues.

I thank the Scottish Government and all political parties for acting swiftly to enable us to have this debate. It is important that the Scottish Parliament sends a message to Israel and the rest of the world that there must be a cease-fire and an end to the killing on all sides. I say to Ted Brocklebank that we cannot blame the Palestinians for the horrors that were visited on the Israeli people. Some 700 Palestinians and 11 Israelis have been killed in the recent events. I leave members to ponder those numbers. Disproportionate? I would say so. Like others, I have visited Gaza. I have seen the refugee camps and I have eaten and drunk with the people, and it breaks my heart to watch the continued bombardment night after night. Gaza is a densely populated area in which the people have suffered greatly through the siege. Members might have seen a small red-haired boy during the television coverage. We spoke to that boy when we were there, simply because he stood out because of his red hair. I wonder whether that small red-haired boy is alive today to speak on behalf of the people of Gaza. We met people on the streets and in hospitals, and we met kids in schools. Those kids said to us, "All we want is a life the same as yours. We want to be free. We want to be able to study and move freely throughout our country." That is not too much to ask. Sadly, those kids cannot even attend their schools any more, because those schools have been bombed. As we have heard already, a UN school was bombed and 40 children were killed. Yesterday, there was a three-hour cease-fire to allow aid to enter. That was a completely inadequate amount of time. How long would it take to get the aid in? How long would it take to get it to the right people? Furthermore, after the so-called truce, leaflets were dropped warning people to leave their homes or face air strikes. Following that, 60 air strikes were carried out. Where were those people supposed to go? Gaza is densely populated, and Gaza city is almost the same size as the middle of Glasgow. Where could those people go? Into the sea, which is patrolled by Israeli boats? The UN and the international community have called for a cease-fire, yet they are ignored. What is the point of having institutions such as the UN if no one listens to them and no one obeys the laws that they create?  When we visited Gaza, the situation was dire. As the Deputy First Minister said, nothing was going in and nothing was coming out. Children were in incubators and people were on dialysis machines, and no one knew when those machines might be turned off because Israel controls the power. They had no fuel for ambulances to bring people to hospital. That was before the recent invasion; just think what it must be like now. Gaza is undergoing a humanitarian crisis of huge proportions. That must be stopped. There must be a long-lasting cease-fire, not just three-hour truces here and there, so that aid can be delivered to the Palestinians. The situation cannot continue. There must be peace in the middle east, and there must be a two-state solution. There must be a Palestinian state, as people must be allowed their democratic rights. Bombing and killing people is not the way forward. I agree that both sides are engaged in killing, but the situation is disproportionate. As I said, I see what is happening in Gaza on the television every night. I see the frustration of the people in Gaza and feel the frustration of people in Scotland and throughout the world. I visited a couple who left Gaza on the boat with us—an old man, whom we brought to Scotland for treatment that was unavailable in Gaza, and his wife. They now stay with their son in Riddrie in Glasgow. They are lovely people, and they gave me a warm welcome. I say to the people of Gaza that we want to give them a warm welcome. There must be a cease-fire, and the bombings must end.

Will the minister give way?

Since its inception in 1783 as the  Glasgow Advertiser, The Herald has always been held in high regard for the quality of its journalism and its proud editorial independence. It is one of the oldest newspapers in the world and has come a long way from its humble beginnings. In 1876, it was joined by its sister paper, the Evening Times ; more recently, it was joined by the Sunday Herald , which was launched in 1999. Despite fears over the continuation of those proud traditions, the titles were sold off after the Competition Commission received assurances from Gannett. The commission stated: "Gannett said that it was committed to maintaining the autonomy of local editors, and planned to manage the titles locally in Scotland ... In our view, commercial considerations were also likely to deter any attempt to adopt a different approach for the titles ... As a final safeguard, we also believed that Gannett would not wish to risk its reputation (especially among competition authorities) with regard to any future inquiries into newspaper acquisitions by Gannett. We did not therefore expect the transfer adversely to affect the editorial freedom, editorial stance, content or quality of the SMG titles, accurate presentation of news, or freedom of expression." In my view, the takeover of the newspapers has affected all of the aforementioned and put in jeopardy the hard-earned reputation of the titles for fairness, justice and freedom of expression. Indeed, I believe that when those issues were raised with John Hutton MP, he agreed that that was the case. The draconian antics of management, which have resulted in journalists on all three titles being made redundant and invited to reapply for jobs in the new structure, call into question the assurances that were given to the Competition Commission and raise some serious points.  First, I ask the minister to consider making representations to the Competition Commission on the matter. Secondly, I ask Gannett's management to pay close attention to the commission's final safeguard, which was that "Gannett would not wish to risk its reputation (especially among competition authorities) with regard to any future inquiries into newspaper acquisitions by Gannett." Although it seems that Gannett has paid little or no attention to the workforce or politicians on the matter, I hope that, as a successful business, it will pause, consider its future business prospects and re-evaluate the whole process. Let us be clear that the process will undoubtedly result in worse pay and conditions for staff, which is clearly unacceptable given that Newsquest made a profit of more than £23 million in 2007, bringing its total profit since 2004 close to £100 million. The conditions under which staff find themselves working will also undoubtedly deteriorate under the new structure that is being proposed. That is particularly worrying given that a recent survey that was undertaken by the Health and Safety Executive revealed that, even before the current plans were announced, alarming levels of stress among production staff were being recorded in all areas, including demands, control, manager support, roles and the threat of change—not surprisingly, that was seen to be producing the most stress. Indeed, the survey indicated that, for six of the seven markers, urgent action was required to reduce stress levels. It is wholly unacceptable that management are pressing ahead with changes that have not been thought through and which will lead to more stress among the staff. I therefore ask that the minister also consider asking the HSE to look into these deeply worrying proposals, which are clearly having a detrimental effect on staff health. We cannot expect staff not to be suffering under these terrible conditions—they were doing so even before they were told that they would have to reapply for their jobs, which they do not even know whether they will get. The problem has been compounded by the lack of information given to staff. We learn that Donald Martin has set deadlines for staff to reapply for jobs without even giving them information about the jobs for which they are applying. Frankly, that beggars belief. How staff have been and are being treated is unacceptable and, as has been noted, possibly illegal. I would be interested to know whether the issue of the legality of the group's approach to staff was raised at the minister's recent meeting with Tim Blott and Donald Martin, and, if so, exactly what was said. If the issue was not raised, I would ask the minister to raise it.  Let us be in no doubt that the titles and coverage will be affected. It seems that there are already plans to scrap the third edition of the Evening Times , which means that there will be only one edition available to the public to buy on the streets—the early morning edition; the second edition is for home delivery only. I understand that an edition of The Herald has also been scrapped. These are worrying times, not only for staff but for the readership. It might seem strange to hear politicians standing up for the press, as we do not always agree with it. However, all of us truly value a vibrant and diverse press, even if it does not always write what we would like it to. There must be a completely democratic and independent press. It struck me as strange that coverage of this important event has been somewhat muted. I urge all members of the media to stand together to highlight the owners' unacceptable approach and, by supporting the workers at the titles, ensure that other journalists and broadcasters do not suffer the same fate. The process must be halted until the Competition Commission and the HSE are given an opportunity to deliberate on the matter and meaningful consultation is entered into with all parties, including the workforce of the titles and the National Union of Journalists.

I congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate and commend her for her long-standing commitment to Palestine and its people. I also commend the Scottish Parliament for having the courage and conviction to hold a debate on a subject that is very important for peace in the middle east and the rest of the world. Unfortunately, the situation in Gaza is continually overlooked by the international community and its media, but I hope that the Scottish Parliament's action today will serve to highlight the growing humanitarian crisis that is happening there. I have been watching with interest the BBC's documentary on Aleem Maqbool's walk from Nazareth to Bethlehem, in which he re-enacts the journey made by Joseph and Mary. His documentary tells the human story behind the many headlines. There is also some surreal comedy, as he is told that one of his donkeys does not have the correct paperwork. Unfortunately, that would not be funny to many people in Palestine and the Gaza strip. As we celebrate the 60 th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights—an aspiration that was born of the persecution of Jews and other minorities—many are still suffering. We must take this opportunity to uphold people's rights in the 21 st century and stand up for those who are being persecuted and denied the right to live in peace and freedom. The situation in Gaza is dire. People have no food, schools have no equipment, hospitals cannot repair their equipment, electricity is cut regularly, and people are dying from lack of medication. Why? In a democratic election—let us remember that the election was democratic—the people of Gaza elected Hamas. Let me put the politics aside: those people are being collectively punished. No one gets in or out, and no goods are allowed in or out.  I therefore praise the people who operate the Dignity, enabling medicine to reach Gaza and allowing people who urgently need medical help to get out. Teachers and doctors are told that, if they go to work, they will receive no salary, but if they stay at home, they will receive $40,000. Why? Because Israel will not allow money to enter Gaza. The reason that Israel has given for that is that the crossings into Gaza are closed. Whose fault is that? Who closes the crossings? The Israelis—at the least, that is hypocritical. I get very angry about this subject. What is happening in Gaza is nothing short of genocide and it must be stopped. We cannot let the situation continue. I welcome the statement from UN human rights delegates, in which they urged 100 measures to be taken by Israel, including ending the siege of Gaza. I sincerely hope that the Israelis take that statement on board. Pauline McNeill has described exactly what we saw in Gaza. However, we did not see everything. More suffering is going on. The state of Israel was created 60 years ago. I ask the Israeli people to look on the people in Gaza and Palestine with humanity, as they themselves were regarded 60 years ago, with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the bringing into existence of the state of Israel. We cannot allow the situation to go on. The international community must heed the words and the suffering of the people of Gaza. A humanitarian crisis is happening there, and it will get worse. I do not want thousands of people in Gaza to die—at my hands, if I do nothing. The international community has to take the message on board and tell Israel that it must end the siege of Gaza, and the issue of a Palestinian state must be settled.

I would echo the comments of my colleague Christina McKelvie, who set out the detailed improvements that have been seen and will be seen throughout Scotland as a result of the strategic transport projects review, the conclusions of which were announced yesterday. Alex Johnstone sets out in his amendment the history of the original contract—it will do no harm to remind ourselves of exactly what that contract was. In 2004, the Labour Executive awarded the contract for another seven years to 2011, with the opportunity for a further three-year extension. I say to Mr McNulty that it included no specified conditions, no criteria were laid down for future management, and there was no mention of consultation. That happened on the watch of the Labour Executive, so Labour should spare us its hypocrisy.

I am sorry, but I want to get through all my speech.  I remind Cathy Peattie that Transport Scotland was set up in 2006 and its membership would have been known to the Labour Executive, so she should spare us her crocodile tears.

No—sorry. If I may be so bold, I will answer Des McNulty's calls directly in a few sentences. "Yes" and "yes" would be the answers to the calls that he makes in his motion. This Government has co-operated and will always co-operate with the committee structures of this Parliament—something that, sadly, cannot be said for the previous Executive. Furthermore, this Government—unlike Des McNulty—values the integrity and impartiality of the committee structure and will not seek to pre-empt the conclusions of any investigations by lodging spurious motions for debate in the chamber before the committee in question has had an opportunity to investigate the matter fully.

I believe that Audit Scotland said that the gentleman in question did declare an interest, so Cathy Peattie's remarks are spurious. The issue is about the strategic transport projects review as well as various things that are happening in Parliament. Cathy Peattie cannot dictate to the minister or to Parliament what a committee will do. She cannot see into the future—that is the point that I am trying to make. We should not be dictating to the minister or to the committee. The minister has already said that he would not dictate to the committee. Cathy Peattie's accusations are pretty spurious to say the least. If it is deemed appropriate for the minister to make a statement to Parliament, I am sure that he will make one. I put that point strongly. I hope that those points answer in a nutshell the concerns of Des McNulty and others. Des McNulty's motion seems to misrepresent the findings of Audit Scotland's report. Indeed, everyone has accepted that the report was generally positive. It stated that "Transport Scotland's management arrangements are generally effective ... Transport Scotland used the Network Modelling Framework and drew on the Department for Transport's templates and guidance on franchise continuation." Despite that, Des McNulty expressed "serious concern"—there is possibly even a conspiracy involving unscrupulous ministers and shadowy figures within Transport Scotland. To make unfounded accusations about the integrity and  impartiality of Transport Scotland and individuals in a sad attempt to make a political point is lamentable; it does the Labour Party and the Parliament no service.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate exactly 60 years, as he said, since the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the declaration on 10 December 1948. It was an historic occasion and one of which we should all be proud. As Jamie Hepburn said, it was born out of the horrors of war. My comments will perhaps be a wee bit controversial, but we must all ask ourselves whether we and other nations have upheld the democratic rights that are outlined in the declaration. I think that, sadly, we have not. The preamble to the declaration states that recognition of the "inherent dignity", equality and rights "of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world". Those are fantastic sentiments, which we should all strive to live up to, but we know of many cases of inequality not only in Scotland but throughout the world.  Let us look at some of the articles. Article 14 states: "Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution." That was written 60 years ago, but it is still relevant today—perhaps it is more relevant than ever. However, as I said, do we really uphold those sentiments? We may accept people who are fleeing persecution, but it is certainly not an enjoyable experience for them. We do not allow them to work or to contribute to society and we hound them continuously, which leads to dawn raids, imprisonment in Dungavel and deportation. Those are not examples of respect for the dignity and rights of human beings. Article 13(1) states: "Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each state." and article 13(2) states that "Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country." In referring to those articles, I draw members' attention to the creation of the state of Israel which, by coincidence, is also 60 years old today. I will point out some of its actions that are against articles 13(1) and 13(2). In the west bank in Palestine, Palestinians do not have freedom of movement or the right to residence. Instead, they are confined to certain areas and must go through checkpoints that are manned by Israeli soldiers. They sometimes wait for hours at a checkpoint just to visit their families. That is directly against article 13(1). Parliament must highlight those issues as best we can, as this debate will do. As I said, Article 13(2) states that "Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country." People who live in Gaza, within the country of Palestine, are not allowed to leave their country. If they manage by good fortune to leave their country, they are not allowed back in, which is directly against the declaration. The Scottish Parliament has a duty not only to Scotland but to the world and to all human beings to ensure that we highlight that infringement of people's basic human rights.

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Strathclyde Police, which has increased its numbers by more than 200, ensuring that the citizens of Glasgow and beyond are safe in their communities? Does he agree that rather than being concerned about whether the recruitments are planned or not, the public are just happy to have more police on the streets?

Duncan McNeil makes interesting comments about Asda. Does he agree that the similar scheme at Braehead is fantastic? The profit that it makes goes into communities in Renfrewshire. We could look at schemes such as that in future.

I declare a special interest in this subject, as my sister has been a foster carer for many years. I agree entirely with what Richard Simpson said about continuity of care for looked-after children. Government guidelines say that the care services need to think like a parent and to constantly challenge what is happening around the child by asking, "Is this good enough for my child?" That question must be at the forefront of the minds of everybody in the services that serve those children.  The tragic case of Baby P has been raised by previous speakers. Such a case must never happen again. Protection of the rights of children must be paramount in any legislation and those rights must come before the rights of parents. I want to concentrate on what we are doing in this Parliament to protect the people who I consider to be the most vulnerable in our society. Children do not ask to be born, but they are born. Further, they do not ask to be born into a certain lifestyle, but that happens as well. Their parents might lead chaotic lifestyles, be drug dependent or simply be unable to cope. That is why we, as a caring society, have put in place certain measures to protect such children. However, as has been said, sometimes those measures do not work. We must all ask whether we are doing enough or could do more. I hope that the debate will raise some questions and supply some answers. Rhona Brankin's amendment calls on the Government to ensure that "local authority funding for the care and safety of children more generally is properly protected". In that regard, I am quite concerned by the news—which I received last night—that the City of Glasgow Council has decided to remove direct and care services from council control, which could lead to the loss of 600 jobs. That decision will have a direct effect on the very vulnerable children we are talking about today. I ask the minister to instigate a meeting with the Councillor Steven Purcell, the leader of Glasgow City Council, on that matter so that we can ensure that vulnerable children are not further disadvantaged. It is important to do something about that right now. I agree whole-heartedly with what Margaret Smith said about early intervention and continued support. That is where the child protection committees come to the fore. They have oversight of protection measures at local level and work in partnership with the police, social work, health agencies and others to ensure that support is put in place. However, it must be put in place as early as possible. If it is not, the child's life could be in danger. It is good that the child protection committees work at grass-roots level, and I believe that they are working well. However, nothing is perfect, and we must continue to monitor the committees to ensure that they continue to intervene at an early stage. Foster parents do a terrific job, as Karen Whitefield said. However, their views are not always taken into consideration. I have spoken to foster carers—not just my sister—who say that they are not always listened to. One issue that arises frequently in my discussions with them is the length of time that children are kept in the care  system. The sad fact is that, by the time children get to the age of four or five, many people do not particularly want to adopt them. However—as was alluded to by Richard Simpson and Margaret Smith—the reason why they are kept in care for that length of time is that, time and again, they are sent back to their parents, who are trying to co-operate with the services, only to be returned to the care system when things do not work out. That must damage those children. Richard Simpson spoke about trust: imagine being a child who is learning to trust someone, but is taken back to parents, and then again back to carers. What long-term damage must that do? That is why we have such problems in the care system for older people. I would like the minister to consider that issue. Another issue that I and others, including those who come to see me, constantly raise is children being given access to parents. Children are told that they are going to see their parents, but the parents often do not turn up to meet them. What damage does that do to a young child who had looked forward to contact with their parent? It does not always happen, but it happens time and again. Children turn up and wait, but the parent does not turn up and there is total damage. Obviously, such children are left in pieces—we perhaps pick up those pieces later. I promised the foster carers who I spoke to that I would raise such issues, and I would like the minister to consider them. If possible, I would like the minister to organise or instigate a meeting, a conference or something else in which foster carers can express their concerns to the relevant departments and be listened to. Foster carers are at the coalface and must be heard for the sake of the children I see daily and other children who will come into the system. We cannot fail those children. The costs are being paid, but not by us—those children's lives are the cost.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate. I thank some members for their worthwhile contributions. I will give the members whom I have not thanked some facts and figures. I say to those who argue that this subject has nothing to do with Scotland that the ID plan will cost Scotland more than £600 million over the next 10 years. That is far too high a cost for something that is not guaranteed to work. We could spend that money on more beneficial things for Scotland, such as more police on the beat and more teachers. There is a continuing failure to produce correct estimates of the cost of the UK identity card scheme. As Robert Brown said, the staffing costs were underestimated by £460 million over the 10 years. As far as I am concerned, Scotland and Scottish people are affected. ID cards are a complete infringement of civil liberties.

No, sorry. The idea of biometrics goes too far. What do they do with the pictures that they take of us at airports? Do they destroy them? We do not get them back. Only last week at Heathrow airport I had to have a biometric picture taken of me. They put it on my passport and then said that they had destroyed it. I do not know what they have done with it. That is highly questionable, and it should not happen. More important, the UK Government does not have the best track record. Child benefit claimants and naval recruits have been mentioned. I do not want to go through the same scenario. What happens with the data? We cannot trust the Government. I disagree with the Labour Party's stance on ID cards. I really would have thought that Labour members would have the humility to acknowledge the errors and agree that one of the functions of the Scottish Parliament is to represent the views of the Scottish people. As their elected representatives, it is our duty to represent their views. We know that public opinion in Scotland is  dead set against the introduction of identity cards. Given that the Labour Party knows that, I had hoped that it would stand up for Scotland and the Scottish people. The Labour Party should stop timidly accepting the dictates of the UK Government. It is sad that Labour has put itself in that position. Of course, it seems that Labour members do have opinions on ID cards, however childish they may be. Richard Baker—who I see is not in the chamber—showed in his opening remarks how childish he can be. His remarks were taken straight from the Labour Party's ridiculous press release. If Labour members have opinions, they should bring them to the chamber. I might not agree with them, but it is up to them to bring their opinions here. They should have the courage of their convictions and argue their position. They should lodge an amendment, which we could then debate. Labour lodged an amendment to Patrick Harvie's motion on ID cards in 2005. Some Labour members expressed concerns. I will name one Labour member whom I spoke to about this: Pauline McNeill, who is to be commended for her defence of human rights. She stated: "The benefits of an ID card scheme are overstated."— [ Official Report , 24 February 2005; c 14722.]  She hit the nail on the head. Christine Grahame mentioned all the information that they have on us already. They do not need any more information. That is one of the fundamental reasons why we need to have an open debate in this Parliament. The ID card scheme affects Scottish people; it affects our constituents; it affects all of us. We should be able to debate things that affect our daily lives, which ID cards will do if they are introduced. They will be mandatory, not voluntary, and people should not think that we will not be stopped at every turn to present our ID cards.

No. I live in a democratic society, and I want to be treated as a democratic citizen. If ID cards are introduced, we will not have a democratic society. I have already quoted various figures. The public have been misled on the benefits—what benefits? They have been misled on the cost—it is extortionate. They have been misled on security—it is astounding how information can be lost by the Westminster Government. Most important, they have been misled about the purpose of ID cards. The public have been told that ID cards will stop terrorism and illegal immigrants. As Robert Brown and others have said, the cards can be forged.  What will be done with our information if ID cards are introduced? Committees in the House of Lords—which George Foulkes will be familiar with—and the House of Commons and joint all-party committees have criticised the Identity Cards Bill. I would have thought that Mr Foulkes would realise that. One committee warned that the stated aims of the ID scheme do not justify the huge invasion of privacy. It did not even mention the cost, just the huge invasion of privacy. Despite that, a contemptuous UK Government in Westminster—not for the first time, and probably not for the last, unless it is no longer there—has chosen to ignore those findings and drive through ill-thought-out and illiberal legislation. I for one will not support the introduction of ID cards either here or down south. However, we can only say what we want for this country: no compulsory ID cards at all.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her welcome announcement that families with a disabled child will receive help with central heating where appropriate, as I have a number of constituency queries about that. Will families who will be eligible be able to register their interests immediately with Scottish Gas so that, when the package comes on stream Scottish Gas will be able to contact those families straight away?

In 2006, Tom McCabe, who was then Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, said on a similar issue: "We can do our best ... to mentor local government and to encourage it to reach agreements that will strike the balance".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 21 February 2006; c 3419.] Does the cabinet secretary agree with that? Does he agree that it is up to local government and not central Government to move equal pay forward?

I thank Kenny Gibson for lodging the motion and enabling us to debate this serious issue. I am glad that the issue is being brought to the attention not only of the chamber but of the wider public. I must also thank Frances Curran, who was the previous convener of the cross-party group on lupus. She worked hard to establish the group, which was well attended and went from strength to strength. We must give credit where credit is due. I did not know much about lupus until I became involved in the cross-party group. However, I learned fairly quickly. The members of the group—some of whom are probably in the gallery today—ensured that we knew exactly how badly lupus affects the 5,000 sufferers throughout Scotland. I was shocked to learn that 90 per cent of the sufferers are women, as Richard Simpson said. Lupus can cause recurrent miscarriages, which came as a shock to me when I found out about it. However, clinical evidence suggests that research can be done on that aspect. Although we need specialist services for everyone who suffers from lupus, not just women, given that we have evidence that 90 per cent of sufferers are women and that the condition can cause miscarriages, we should focus the attention of specialists on that area. I ask the minister to take that point on board and ensure that we are able to make an early diagnosis of the condition. A starting point would be to ensure that professionals are educated about the evidence that is available. Mary Scanlon and I have mentioned that 5,000 people are affected by lupus. The condition has various symptoms, but we know that it is correlated with recurrent miscarriages. I would like us to look at that issue. Kenny Gibson said that many sufferers do not want to divulge the fact that they suffer from lupus. I want to tell members how I became involved with the issue. My involvement is not professional or personal. A young person, not long married, with a young family, discovered that they were very ill. The person, whom I will not name, was vibrant and had a good career in front of them. It took a number of months for them to discover, after various tests, that they suffered from lupus. That person is now in a wheelchair—not all the time, but now and again. It took many months for them to be diagnosed and to find out exactly what was the matter with them. They are still very cheerful,  but they now have to use a wheelchair or sticks. When we see such situations, it makes us wonder how many other people do not know that they have lupus, because the symptoms vary so much. It is important that we look at research into lupus. We know how many people—more women than men—suffer from it. There is evidence on the condition, and people who do not know that they have it are continuing to suffer. It takes too long for them to be diagnosed. As Richard Simpson said, we should diagnose the condition early, so that people do not have to suffer so much. I ask the minister to take that issue on board and to consider providing specialist services. I agree with Ian McKee that we do not need to provide a single specialist service in Scotland, similar to the one that exists in England, and that we need to share information, to ensure that people are aware of the condition. Awareness and education are important.

I, too, thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for its report on what I would call the chaotic 2007 elections; I also thank all who gave evidence to the committee. I echo other members' calls for the Scottish Parliament to be responsible for elections to the Parliament. I have found the debate interesting, except for Michael McMahon's and Des McNulty's speeches, which I thought were bitter, vinegary and full of sour grapes. I see that they are sitting together now, which is perhaps the best place for them. As other members have said, the DRS equipment created an immense number of problems during the 2007 elections. I will give my experience of that. When I arrived at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre on the night, the first thing that I saw was people running about with cans of WD40—I thought that it was used only on motor cars when someone could not get their key in the lock—and spraying it on machines. The response of everyone in the SECC was, "Goodness me—what the heck is happening now?" We could not believe that they had to use cans of WD40—incidentally, they had to send out for them—to ensure that the machines were working properly. That was an absolute disgrace and it shows that the electronic vote counting machines were not satisfactory at all. Voters were annoyed by the amount of rejected ballot papers, but all the candidates who were in the SECC that night were annoyed when we saw ballot papers clogging up the machines and people pulling them out from the other end. The system did not work and, like  Patrick Harvie, I hope that that is the end of that type of vote counting system. It does not work and it is no good to anyone at all. After the elections, almost half the local authorities had to claim reimbursement from DRS after encountering a number of issues involving technical difficulties with the equipment or supplies being delivered late or not at all. For example, DRS had to reimburse the City of Edinburgh Council more than £100,000 for the late delivery of ballot papers, which of course contributed to there being more than 10,000 spoiled ballots. Clackmannanshire Council's reimbursement was even greater than Edinburgh's because the necessary staff to operate the equipment were not supplied. The situation was outrageous, not only because of the amount of money involved—the amount I spoke about is just the tip of the iceberg—but because of a catalogue of errors, some of which I have mentioned. The overall impact on the elections was huge, and I conclude that we should not use such electronic machines in the future. Duncan McNeil said that it was unfortunate—to say the least—that DRS did not turn up to give oral evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee. That was indeed unfortunate, because DRS should have been there, even though it submitted an explanation to the committee on paper. I turn to the separate issue of equalities. I commend the committee for considering that issue in its report and discussing its role in the election process. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I believe that it is important that everyone should have the opportunity to exercise their democratic rights. In that context, I note that the Local Government and Communities Committee's report referred to research that found that there were inequalities in the election process, which was unfortunate for voters whose ballots were rejected. David Whitton and James Kelly touched on the University of Strathclyde investigation, which was conducted by Dr Christopher Mason—sorry, he is a Glasgow Liberal Democrat councillor, as McNulty knows. I should say that the investigation was conducted by Dr Christopher Carman and Professor James Mitchell, who found a close relationship between the number of rejected ballot papers and the social context of a constituency. Relevant factors were the percentage of adults without academic qualifications, the percentage receiving unemployment benefit and the percentage reporting that they were not in good health. Those factors had not previously been considered together. I recommend that the findings of that report are taken on board.  As other members have said, the University of Strathclyde report also found that the percentage of rejected ballots was higher when there was a greater number of parties on the ballot paper, which obviously confused a number of people. There is no explicit recommendation to fix that problem, but the evidence clearly calls for the ballot paper to be redesigned. I remind members that the number of rejected ballot papers in some areas was the same as or higher than the elected member's majority. The committee's report contains many recommendations. Although I do not have time to mention them all, those recommendations, together with the Electoral Commission's suggestion that we should involve people with visual impairments in the design of the ballot papers and other suggestions, are welcome and necessary if we are to ensure that everyone is able to vote and that people's needs are met—not just for politicians' sake but for the electorate's sake. We have a democratic duty to ensure that everyone can vote. The Local Government and Communities Committee gave its view on improving equality in the election process by addressing the issue of candidates' names appearing in alphabetical order on the ballot paper, which might help people with literacy difficulties, for example. The committee also recommended including representatives from equalities agencies and organisations in election steering groups. That is a good suggestion because we must ensure that everyone is included. Jim Murphy should think again and ensure that the Scottish Parliament has control over its own election process.

I am pleased that the figure was 100 per cent, because it had not always been so high. Is the Government considering some way of using the moneys collected through fiscal fines in order to benefit the communities that are suffering from the crimes that incur such fines?

Christine Grahame may have upset some people, especially women from the west of Scotland and some Australians; she can expect a few e-mails and letters about what she said. Margaret Curran made a thoughtful speech. It is not the case that I and others do not want the London Olympics to be a success. For me, the nub of today's debate is that the money that is available must come to Scotland sooner rather than later; that is the issue on which I wish to concentrate. I thank Margo MacDonald for lodging the motion that we are debating. Today's debate will enable us—constructively, I hope—to get to the nub of the problem. I will address some of the specific points in the motion, especially the call for "National Lottery funding to be released as soon as possible". As I have said before, that is one of the most important aspects of the debate. Margo has described eloquently some of the problems that arise when people do not have proper sporting facilities. A lack of modern, up-to-date facilities forces young people to go elsewhere not just to train but to take up their chosen sport in the first place. That is not acceptable when we are looking forward to the 2014 Commonwealth games. Sometimes, the problem leads kids to drop sport  altogether. That should be of concern to all of us; it is certainly of great concern to me. If we do not put the necessary facilities in place now, kids who hope to take part in the 2014 Commonwealth games will not be trained up in time to do so. I hope that Margo MacDonald will agree that that is the nub of her motion. Eventually, the lack of proper facilities will cause us to lose young people who are training at the moment. It will also discourage other young people who want to take up sport or exercise from doing so. That is why we say that we need the money that has been taken from Scotland to fund the London Olympics—our money—to put facilities in place right away. In its reply to the Scottish Government's consultation on securing a positive legacy from the 2014 Commonwealth games, the Big Lottery Fund states: "We believe the 2014 Games present an unprecedented opportunity for Glasgow and for Scotland. Quite apart from the sporting significance, there are very big potential gains in terms of community involvement, ownership, cohesion and celebration; grassroots participation"— that is very important— "employment, employability ... regeneration of Glasgow and the wider region". Frank McAveety's amendment is eminently sensible; the Big Lottery Fund made the same points in its response to the Scottish Government's consultation. However, we need the funds now to enable us to bring about regeneration. Those funds have been denied us—they have been taken away from Scotland at a crucial time. We should not forget that, unfortunately, what has happened in the east end and other parts of Glasgow has been going on for 50 years, rather than just one, two or three years. If we want regeneration, we must take that on board. I hope that Frank McAveety will pay attention to what I am saying, instead of having a conversation with another MSP, as I am speaking to his amendment. I agree with what he is saying, but the problem has existed for 50 years. Certain politicians must take responsibility for that. We are trying to turn the situation around. There are many good people in the east end of Glasgow and throughout Scotland but, as elected members, we have a responsibility, not just to the people of the east end or Glasgow but to the whole of Scotland, to present a united front to Westminster. We must lead by example and demand that the money that has been taken from Scotland at a crucial time be given back now, to fund regeneration and increased participation in sport. I hope that, regardless of our politics, we can move forward together and say that, for the good of Scotland, Glasgow and the 2014 Commonwealth games, we  need our lottery money now. We do not deny London the Olympic games; Westminster should not deny Scotland and Glasgow the 2014 Commonwealth games.

There has been widespread speculation that Gordon Brown knew about the HBOS situation before it became  public knowledge—[ Interruption. ] Let me finish, please. There has also been speculation that he encouraged the merger. Does the First Minister agree that, if that is correct, it was a breach of the financial rules? Will those actions have any effect on the merger?

I thank Patricia Ferguson for lodging the motion for debate, and I wish her a speedy recovery. I also thank Jack McConnell for opening the debate. It is important that the matter is being debated fully in Parliament. I signed and support the motion, which calls for 2014 to be designated Scotland's year of sport, but I hope that Parliament's and Scotland's ambitions will go beyond that one year, and that we can look forward to every year being a year of sport that benefits the health and wellbeing of Scots. I and others, including Jack McConnell, have called for all political parties to come together and make representations to the Westminster Government regarding funding for the Glasgow Commonwealth games, including lottery funding. I am pleased to say that all political parties in the chamber have agreed with us, even though Andy Burnham, Labour MP and Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, has said no. Will the Minister for Communities and Sport assure me in his summing up that cross-party representation will be made to the Westminster Government about the important issue of funding to ensure that Scotland gets its fair share of funds and is not penalised, as is happening at the moment, by having lottery funding taken away from community  sports and their further development and given to the London Olympics? I think that we all agree on that, so I hope to get an answer on it from the minister. We should remember that the Commonwealth games in Manchester received £112 million of lottery funding for revenue costs and infrastructure. However, no lottery funding is forthcoming for the Commonwealth games in Scotland, which are being funded entirely by the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council. I want the 2014 games to benefit Scotland and Glasgow so that children are encouraged to take up sports and physical activities and communities are unified. I want the games to promote Scotland as being a great place in which to live and work and I want the games to include tourism, as well. Most important, I want the games to involve and help the people of Glasgow. On that note, I want to ask the minister two specific questions on training and jobs. Perhaps he cannot answer them; they might be better asked of the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism. However, will representations be made to employers who will be involved in building the Commonwealth games village and the sporting arenas to ensure that local people will be given the first, or any, opportunity to get training and jobs? It is important that we take such people with us. We want to leave a legacy from the Commonwealth games that will benefit the lives of the people of Glasgow and Scotland as a whole. It is an important issue, but if the minister cannot answer my question, I hope that he will pass it on to the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism. Another issue that I want to raise is volunteering—an important aspect of the games and other sporting activities. I ask the minister to ensure that volunteering opportunities are offered not only to the people who regularly do a fantastic job in other areas but to others, such as disabled and disadvantaged people and the elderly, who may not be aware of the fact that they can take up the opportunity of volunteering. Will there be a project or a media campaign to encourage such people to come forward and volunteer to help with the games? We have a fantastic opportunity for Glasgow in the Commonwealth games, so we must ensure that we secure the moneys. I agree with Margo MacDonald that we must ensure, too, that the games leave a lasting legacy for the health and wellbeing of our children and Scottish people in the future.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement on single crews and rapid-response vehicles. Such vehicles undoubtedly make a big difference, but in the present climate they basically determine whether a two-man ambulance turns up. Will that situation continue? If so, will it be monitored? Can we be assured that paramedics, rather than people with lesser qualifications, will be used in rapid-response vehicles?

The Deputy First Minister mentioned lottery funding. I am sure that she is aware of the cross-party support in Parliament for that funding. Is she considering sending a deputation of members from all parties in the Parliament to Westminster to ensure that we get that lottery funding back?

I thank the First Minister for his statement. In his contribution, Tavish Scott mentioned housing. Indeed, the First Minister said that support for housing was high on the political agenda, with £100 million being brought forward for housing. What support will the Scottish Government give through shared equity schemes and mortgage support to help people to access housing?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement, particularly the points on Glasgow and the GHA. She spoke about regeneration and pilot schemes. Will the joint forum involving Glasgow City Council, the GHA and Government officials report regularly—for example, monthly—to the Parliament or to ministers? Will the minutes of the forum meetings be made available?

I acknowledge what Pauline McNeill is saying on the matter. How many Glasgow MPs signed the early-day motion on the subject at Westminster? Will she encourage other MPs to do so?

Although the debate is entitled, "Glasgow Passport Office" the matter affects not just Glasgow but the whole of Scotland. I welcome this opportunity to debate this important issue and I hope to have the support of all parties in sending a clear, united message that the proposals for Glasgow passport office are unacceptable to the Scottish people. Many issues could be raised, such as identification cards, passports for members of the armed forces and emergency passports, but I will not have time to cover them all. I expect that members will talk about such issues. I welcome to the public gallery members of the Public and Commercial Services Union and I thank the PCS for its excellent briefing, which makes it clear that throughout the process serious concerns have been expressed about inaccuracies, contradictions and disregard for staff and customers in the Identity and Passport Service's approach. Those have been compounded by discrepancies in the evidence that the IPS provided to staff when they were told about the proposed changes. Staff were told that the Glasgow passport office currently processes around 350,000 passports a year. However, according to a House of Commons written answer from the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Identity, Meg Hillier, in 2005 the number was nearer to 600,000; in 2006 it was 650,000; and in 2007 it was 550,000. Staff were also told that Glasgow was chosen because of its small production capacity. However, in another written answer Ms Hillier acknowledged that the London and Belfast offices have consistently had lower processing figures. A serious issue must be  addressed. The figures do not add up and staff are being deliberately misled, which might call into question the legality of the proposed changes. Perhaps the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism will seek advice on that. More sinister and worrying is evidence of a deliberate run-down of services at Glasgow. Again, the IPS and Ms Hillier have provided conflicting information. The IPS told staff that no decision had been taken on where postal applications would be sent. However—lo and behold—in response to another question, Ms Hillier said that 40 per cent of post office deliveries have been diverted from Glasgow to other passport offices since January, which is almost unbelievable. The two positions cannot stand up side by side. Questions must be asked about such discrepancies. We are witnessing the deliberate run-down of services, a campaign of misinformation and a blatant disregard for the workers and people of Scotland. I hoped that if I expressed my concern directly to Ms Hillier I would receive a response that would enable me to come to the Parliament today with a glimmer of hope and faith that she is listening to the people of Scotland and to passport office staff. However, that did not happen, which is sad. I wrote to Ms Hillier in April, and only by constantly haranguing her—I am not generally known for constantly haranguing people—did I get a response, which was faxed to me today. It is unfortunate that the response is short, dismissive and curt and contains more contradictions. It says that a decision has not been made. However, in the document that staff were given on 2 April, in answer to a question about whether the consultation period means that changes might not happen, it says, "No. The board has taken the decision." That is contradicted by the response that I received today, which is ridiculous and would be laughable if it were not for the seriousness of the situation and the contempt that Ms Hillier has demonstrated. I ask the minister urgently to seek clarification on the matter. The United Kingdom Government cannot treat passport office staff like that and it should not be allowed to treat Scottish people like fools.

Elaine Smith is absolutely right—I was going to come on to that. The IPS will make a decision on 1 July, which is worrying.  The consequences of the decision, which has undoubtedly already been taken, as I said, are very worrying. There will be no emergency passport or passport printing services. In future, will Scotland have no passport office? That would mean that people would have to travel outwith Scotland, perhaps to England, to get a passport, and would mean the loss of more than 100 jobs—an alarming point is that given the history and make-up of the Glasgow office many members of the same families have jobs there. The minister should be aware of the concerns of the business community that it will no longer be able to get passports at short notice. I believe that those passports are called jumbo passports; union representatives have told me that. The economic impact that the possible closure would have on Scotland, particularly on our oil industry, is worrying indeed. We should be clear that this is only the start. With another three to four offices to close throughout the UK, could all areas with devolved Governments be without a passport office? Given that possibility, I urge the minister to encourage his Cabinet colleagues to raise the issue at the next meeting of the joint ministerial committee. I draw the minister's attention to information that I learned about only today about Northern Ireland, where there is legislation to protect such services from closure. A recent PCS magazine included the headline, "Scotland's Going: Who's Next?" That says it all. An irate passport office worker told me: "Once again, Scotland is being used as a guinea pig to see if these cuts will be accepted before another three to four offices throughout the UK face the same fate. Will it be Wales, Northern Ireland or England?" It is time that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people sent out a clear message that the cuts are unacceptable, that we will fight tooth and nail to ensure that the only passport processing service in Scotland is retained and that staff must not lose their jobs. We should have a passport service in Scotland.

The debate is important. I thank the minister for his positive speech. Far from condemning children, he talked about the positive contribution that the majority of young people make to society. We must not forget that some of the children we are speaking about are as young as five and six. I acknowledge the issues that are raised in the Labour and Tory amendments and warmly welcome the motion. For too long, the youth justice system has been too focused on demonising and criminalising young people who commit offences. Although their behaviour is unacceptable, it is too simplistic to rely solely on punishment as the panacea for all ills. The time is right to consider why young people get into those situations and why too many of them cannot find a way out. I hope that the Parliament will move forward together on the issue. I hope that we can reach common solutions to the problems, which affect all the constituencies and regions in Scotland. I welcome the Liberal Democrat amendment, particularly the points about the Mosquito device, which I believe goes against children's human rights. I thank Mike Pringle for his thoughtful speech. Youth justice is too big and important simply to be used as a means of political attack. Members must act responsibly and contribute positively. We must put young people at the forefront of the policy decisions that affect them. It could be said that it is little wonder that young people act in certain ways when we consider the behaviour of some of those who are said to represent them—present company excluded, of course. We must take into account young people's views and concerns in our approach to the problems. A recent report by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child identified as one of its main recommendations the need to involve children in decisions that affect them. I would be grateful if the minister told us what steps the Government will take to ensure that young people's views are taken into account. I suggest that an appropriate starting point would be the current antisocial behaviour strategy review, which has been criticised for having no clear plans to engage young people. I ask the minister to comment on that in his summing-up speech. Another key point that has been highlighted is about children's right to play. There are not enough activities for young people. As Bill Aitken mentioned, places where kids play—particularly parks in Glasgow, although the same is true in  other areas—are slowly being eroded. Many people I speak to mention concerns about the rise in youth crime and antisocial behaviour, but in the exact same breath they identify the solution and talk about a need for more facilities such as sports centres. As the minister said, young people need more things to do. We can all agree that the Government's efforts so far to provide more opportunities are laudable. The cashback for communities scheme, which has been mentioned, is hugely successful and is a perfect example of how we can tackle the problems. We can fund projects to support young people who are at risk, such as drop-in services and outdoor activities. However, to return to my earlier point, such initiatives should involve young people at every stage of the process. It is not good enough, and is not conducive to helping young people, to build a basketball court and then bemoan the fact that no one uses it, or that young people just hang about in it. Did the young people want it? Did we ask them whether they wanted it? Did we involve them in the process? The key point is that we must involve young people. If we take that approach, new facilities will be successful and will, I hope, flourish. I ask the minister to consider seriously involving young people at all stages. To tackle the problems of youth crime, we must also try to change attitudes to violence. As has been said, many young people grow up in an environment in which violence is accepted and is seen as a routine and ordinary part of life. We must consider certain activities that are covered in the media that may glorify violence and desensitise people to the reality. I give the example of cage wars, which involves two contestants locked in a cage battling it out while being bayed at by a huge audience. The event came to Glasgow twice last year and was widely condemned, including by Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan and me. We thought that it was highly inappropriate to have glorified gladiator contests in a city with some of the highest levels of violence in the UK. As a Glaswegian, I am not proud of that, but it is a fact. I accept that these are contentious and difficult issues, but we must tackle them nonetheless. I hope that the Parliament will support us in doing so. We must take difficult decisions together, not just for the sake of the Parliament but for the sake of future generations, to change our attitudes and, perhaps, even the media's attitude to reporting on children. We never seem to hear good news from the media—it is always bad news. If there is anyone in the press gallery, I hope that they will look at good examples of what young kids are up to. Every one of us wants Scotland to be a safer and fairer place. To achieve that, we must take our  young people with us and ensure that they see themselves as part of Scotland's future.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member refers to young people reoffending. Does she not agree that constantly demonising young people makes them offend more and that, in fact, the best way forward is early intervention to find out the reasons for persistent young offenders' behaviour?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has made in discussions with the United Kingdom Government regarding prison funding. (S3O-3716)

In the light of what Annabel Goldie said earlier about the justice system and the Conservatives’ record on prison building, I am sure that we can count on their support when the cabinet secretary next raises the issue. I hope that the same applies to all the parties that are represented in the Parliament. Given that any application for departmental expenditure limit reserves should be made by the Secretary of State for Scotland on behalf of the Scottish people, does the cabinet secretary agree that whatever parallel universe Des Browne inhabits, it is not one that best serves the Scottish people?

I, too, congratulate Angela Constance on securing the debate, which seeks to address a serious and pressing issue that affects many women and children who are already suffering abuse in what, in some cases, can only be called modern-day slavery. I thank Amnesty International for its report, which I wish that everyone would read; it is harrowing reading. I also thank the women's aid groups who are vociferous in pushing this issue forward. I raised the issue with the First Minister on 6 March and I received a letter from him. I do not want to put the minister on the spot, but I know that the short-life working group met on 27 May, so could we have an update on what was said at that meeting? It is important that we have that.  Like everyone else here, I cannot express how angry I am about the treatment that these women and children have to go through. It is inhuman and wrong that they are not protected and helped just because the Home Office labels them as having insecure status. They are human beings the same as us and they deserve to be treated the same as we are treated. They live and work in our communities and should be afforded exactly the same access to services as everyone else who lives and works here. To deny them that basic human right is to go back to the days when women were treated as chattels. The situation reinforces the question, what other gender would be treated in this way? Amnesty International succinctly said that these women are being treated as "Second class human beings." That would not be allowed to happen to any other gender, and we have to make sure that we get that across. As Angela Constance and others have said, women come here with visas, some are students, some, unfortunately, are trafficked and some come on a spouse's visa. They think that they are coming here to have a life and contribute to this society, but inhuman Westminster legislation treats them as if they are chattels and slaves. As Angela Constance mentioned, countries such as Canada, America and Austria provide such women with help on certain aspects, albeit that in some cases they are allowed only a three-month stay in accommodation. In Canada, such women are given status after they have produced various documents. If other countries can do that, why can we not? Basically, the Westminster Government is going against international law by failing to uphold the human rights of such women and children. I know that the issue is reserved to Westminster, but that never prevented us from considering Westminster issues such as refugee status. Many of us in the chamber today, including Johann Lamont and others, worked together to ensure that we got rid of some of the horrendous circumstances that applied to refugees, such as the voucher system. We pushed for those changes and we achieved a victory. Through pushing the issue together, we in the Scottish Parliament could secure a victory. We need to ensure that the Westminster Government realises that it is culpable if it does not uphold international law by protecting the women. As Angela Constance said in her speech and in her motion, the Scottish Parliament should provide some form of emergency funding. We can no longer tolerate the fact that women and children in our midst are being treated as second-class citizens like back in the 18 th century. I congratulate Angela Constance on her motion, which I support.

I thank the minister for the copy of his statement, which I have just received. It contains many positive points and a great understanding of the areas in which more work must be done. I request that the statement be passed on to the Equal Opportunities Committee, so that we can consider it in more detail. I know that the minister will agree with me—

—when I say that the Parliament must reflect the diversity of the people of Scotland. We know that women and ethnic minorities are not represented in certain groups.

Will that anomaly be addressed as part of the impact assessment process that the minister has just announced, which is most welcome, to ensure that such groups are represented in certain public bodies?

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria determine whether an environmental impact assessment should be undertaken. (S3O-3238)

The minister will be aware of the proposed development by Tesco at Partick in Glasgow, which attracted over 1,000 objections and a request by Glasgow City Council that an EIA be carried out. It was refused. Is the minister aware that the plans for the development were changed and resubmitted on numerous occasions? Does he agree that if substantial changes are made to development plans, a fresh EIA should be sought?

The Equal Opportunities Committee took evidence recently on female offenders in the criminal justice system; the Lord Advocate was among those from whom we heard. One issue that was raised was that the fact that community service orders were designed more for men than for women makes it extremely difficult for women to carry them out. Will the cabinet secretary examine that issue, with a view to making CSOs much more suitable for women?

As one of people who has been referred to not by name but just as a bank bencher, I am very proud to be a member of this party of Government. Collectively, the unionist parties have an absolute cheek to lecture anyone on housing. Let us look at their record.

I am sorry; I have just started. With the introduction of the right to buy, the Tories single-handedly scheduled the social housing market and completely skewed the situation, making it very difficult for social rented accommodation to be made available to people who could not afford the right to buy. It is a disgrace that the Tories want to further that right: I will not take a lecture on that from Mary Scanlon or anybody else, particularly when her party is backed up by the Labour Party, as she mentioned. Let us have a wee look at Labour and the Lib Dems. What can I say about them? The Liberals propped up the Labour Party on the housing stock transfer to the Glasgow Housing Association—an absolute monster about which the previous Labour-Liberal Executive did nothing.

I am sorry, Margaret; I have only four minutes.

I apologise, Presiding—Deputy Presiding Officer. [ Laughter. ] Only now that the Liberals and Labour are in opposition do they complain about the GHA: they bleat about second-stage transfer and Robert Brown bleats about wanting an Audit Scotland investigation. What did you do when we were propping up the Labour Party to make that second-stage transfer? Absolutely nothing happened and yet you have a cheek—sorry, Presiding Officer. The Liberals and the Labour Party have a cheek to try to lecture us. Where were their members when the housing associations, owner-occupiers and tenants held meetings and went to constituencies and offices to complain and talk about their concerns about the situation with the GHA? No one from the Liberal and Labour Parties turned up. It was left to the SNP Opposition of the time to take up those people's concerns. I am pleased that the minister listened to us about those concerns. I ask Robert Brown: please do not pretend to be on the side of the owner-occupiers and tenants of Glasgow because it is the SNP that is on their side. It was the SNP that brought concerns about the GHA to the chamber, while the Liberal-Labour Executive did nothing about them. We are now celebrating one year of an SNP Government, which is absolutely fantastic. Let us look at what has happened—much more than the other parties ever achieved—since the SNP took control. The GHA has been taken to task, 16 local housing associations have been given approval to move to second-stage transfer and there are another 17 in the pipeline. After just one year, that  is worthy of congratulations. Liberal and Labour members who were in Government for years did nothing to help the people of Glasgow, apart from introduce the monolithic GHA. We are now ending the right to buy—the proposal to do that received the support of 94 per cent of respondents to the Scottish Government consultation on housing. I say to David McLetchie and the Tories that even one of their councillors, Jim Millar, has said that his party's defence of the right to buy is simplistic. If the Tories want more information about that, they can look at his blog, which contains lots of other bits and pieces. The SNP Government has also increased investment in housing and regeneration and has set a target for increased building. There is also the recent announcement that Scottish local authorities will be given £25 million to build new council houses, which is a step towards the future. I congratulate the SNP Government on what it is doing.

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing this debate on the Glasgow crossrail. This issue has been on-going for three decades—30 years—and since the inception of the Parliament it has been debated year after year by members of all parties. As Bill Butler said, the project has cross-party support. The minister might remember that I hosted a fringe meeting at the SNP conference on the subject of crossrail, which was the largest fringe meeting ever to take place at our conference. It had full support, and I do not think that we have had as large a fringe meeting ever since. I mention that to refresh the minister's memory. I congratulate SPT on its work and its tenacity—Councillor Watson is in the gallery—in ensuring that crossrail has continued to be at the top of the transport agenda, not just in Glasgow but more widely since the Parliament's inception. I sincerely hope that we can move forward with the scheme. I labour that point, if members will pardon the pun, because crossrail has been debated to death and, as Bill Butler eloquently said, the time is right—the time has come. We must ensure that the scheme is put forward for full implementation. I thank SPT for considering the issue in its entirety, and for its willingness to meet people from all parties and none and to examine the phasing of the project. Bill Butler mentioned that. That is important, and I reiterate and support Bill Butler's comments regarding the phasing of the project and the question of having three stages or one. We would like the scheme to happen in one stage, if the minister is so minded. As I said, SPT is considering the project in its entirety and I congratulate it on its willingness to admit that it could be done in three stages.  Bill Butler outlined the geographical areas that crossrail would cover, but I do not want to get into that during the debate. We all know which areas the crossrail system would cover, but we must remember that it is not just a parochial Glasgow system. The system would benefit the whole of Scotland and—as Lord Foulkes said—it would benefit the Ayrshire Hearts supporters. I am sure that the Glaswegians will make Lord Foulkes more than welcome if he comes into Glasgow Central or Glasgow Queen Street station. I certainly will not be afraid to go to Ayrshire. I welcome the fact that Lord Foulkes realises that the project is not just for Glasgow; as has been said, it is a Scotland-wide project that will supply the pieces of jigsaw that have been missing for many years. The scheme is desperately needed throughout Scotland. The scheme will help to create an integrated transport system for the 21 st century. I believe—as I think everyone does—that such a system is long overdue. Glasgow 2014 has been mentioned. Although that is not the be-all and end-all, it is a golden opportunity for the crossrail project to go ahead. We hope that Glasgow 2014 will regenerate not just the Gorbals area, but the east end of Glasgow. Crossrail can help that regeneration by providing jobs and connections for the 2014 games. I sincerely hope that the project will be included in the strategic transport projects review. I will listen with great interest to what the minister says. I congratulate Bill Butler again on securing the debate.

I come to the debate so late because I am not a member of the Health and Sport Committee and I wanted its members to have their say first. Will the minister consider an amendment on notifiable diseases? The bill mentions "the patient's circumstances (including age". Will she consider including a reference to the patient's profession? I ask because of a case of TB in Glasgow. The person concerned was a schoolteacher, but was not asked their profession. Might there be circumstances in which it would be beneficial to know the profession of the patient?

To ask the Scottish Government what issues will be discussed at the next joint ministerial committee. (S3O-2883)

The minister will be aware that the Glasgow passport office—Scotland's only passport office—is to be run down, which will lead to the loss of more than 100 jobs. The same fate may befall the offices in Northern Ireland and Wales, leaving all the devolved Administrations without full passport services. Does the minister agree that that would be totally unacceptable? Will she consider raising the matter at the next JMC meeting?

The cabinet secretary is to be congratulated on this initiative. As the Labour amendment states, the previous Government is to be commended for the establishment of the HAI task force. The additional money that the cabinet secretary announced today and previously will be greatly significant in targeting not only MRSA but other virulent infections. Incidence of MRSA has risen steadily over the years, as my colleague Michael Matheson and other members said. There are numerous reasons for that increase, but I will concentrate on just a few of them. A number of members spoke about the increase in drug-resistant infections, which has been brought about by the overprescribing of antibiotics. Nanette Milne targeted that point very  well in her contribution. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement on how we will monitor and tackle that problem. People have been used to going to the doctor and receiving antibiotics because of a perceived need. That has led to antibiotics no longer working and our being left with virulent infections. Another area that gives cause for concern is the movement of patients between hospitals and wards. Not so long ago, it was much less common for patients to be moved from hospital to hospital or even between beds. Unfortunately, it is much more common now, which has something to do with the spread of infectious diseases. Helen Eadie and Irene Oldfather mentioned the contracting out of hospital cleaning services, which has had a direct effect on the spread of infectious diseases. Staff are now paid less and less time is allocated to cleaning wards. It is certain that those circumstances have contributed to HAI. I hope that the cabinet secretary, or perhaps the task force, will look at that area. The one-year screening programme pilot will have positive results, but only as part of a coherent and integrated approach to overall hygiene in hospitals. That point was mentioned in the motion and recognised by the cabinet secretary. I know that the cabinet secretary is aware of the different views about screening. I offer two examples. In Geneva, 3,000 patients were screened for MRSA and the conclusion was that there was no benefit in such a programme. However, three hospitals in America used screening for MRSA and the conclusion was that screening did work. That is why it is beneficial for us to run the screening pilot, which must be monitored and audited after a year, as was mentioned. The pilot scheme is most welcome. The cabinet secretary spoke in her opening remarks about the appointment of nurse consultants. Could that role be enhanced to include targeted cleaning pilots? Ross Finnie raised that point, as did the HAI task force, which I think referred to the housekeeping monitoring group. Combined targeted cleaning, which would entail the cleaning of clinical equipment and the patient environment, including lockers and bedframes, would be extremely beneficial. If it is not possible to extend the role of the nurse consultant in that way, will the cabinet secretary consider a pilot of targeted hospital cleaning? Nanette Milne and others spoke about the role of former matrons. We know that we cannot go back to those days, but it is important that hospitals are clean not only for patients and visitors, who are encouraged to wash their hands; the hospital environment must be considered too. Michael Matheson mentioned that services vary in hospitals. In a letter to The Herald yesterday, I  think, a lady said that she went to visit her mother in hospital and was appalled to see blood on the handrails of her mother's bed. That is totally unacceptable. Although it is up to the hospital management to deal with the problem, a targeted cleaning pilot would tackle such situations and they would not be allowed to happen. Over time, it would become the norm for hospitals to reach that high standard of cleanliness. Everyone here agrees that patients must come first. They must have faith in the health service. The MRSA screening programme and additional money that the cabinet secretary announced today will bring benefits not just to this generation but to many generations to come.

Trafficking is inhuman, abhorrent, vile and knows no boundaries, and we must do what we can to eradicate it. I well remember the events in Germany that Trish Godman mentioned. However, not only were women trafficked in, but tents were erected to house them, which was absolutely ridiculous. Along with other people, I wrote to the German Government to express our concerns about and abhorrence of the practice. Trish Godman mentioned Glasgow 2014. I do not think that the problem that she discussed will happen in relation to the Commonwealth games, but we must be vigilant to ensure that it does not. I join others in congratulating Gil Paterson on securing this debate and commend him for his continued fight against sexual exploitation and violence against women, of which trafficking is one of the most horrendous examples. Gil Paterson highlighted the failure of the Westminster Government to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, and pointed out what that means for the victims of trafficking. Pauline McNeill said that she looks forward to the Government ratifying the convention at the end of the year. However, I hope that Pauline McNeill and others from all parties will join Gil Paterson and me in asking the minister to ensure that UK Government ministers bring ratification forward. The convention has been unsigned for years, and I would prefer it to be signed tomorrow or next week, rather than at the end of the year. The victims of trafficking are suffering because the convention has not been ratified. We must give those victims' representation at the highest level to ensure that they are safe and secure and come under the jurisdiction of the law of the country that they have been trafficked into.  Like Pauline McNeill, I support operation pentameter, which brings together police forces in the battle against trafficking. I thought it was an absolutely fantastic idea when I heard about it. However, as members have said, there are on-going concerns about the identification of trafficking victims and the workings of the national referral mechanism. I ask the minister to examine those issues, which have been well explained by other members. I congratulate the TARA project in Glasgow, which is the only dedicated trafficking project in Scotland. I also congratulate the Scottish Government on its on-going support for that project, which has been acknowledged by Amnesty International. However, I would like the minister, in conjunction with the workers and volunteers of the TARA project, to examine the criteria under which the project operates, as they mean that support can be given only to women who are over 18 and have been sexually exploited in the UK, which leaves out children, men and those who have been sexually exploited outside the UK. Human trafficking can involve sexual exploitation, sexual torture, and a variety of other aspects, such as people picking cockles. We thought that we had ended slavery, and we were proud of that. However, now we have another form of slavery, and we must do our best to eradicate it.

It would be beneficial to consider the past housing situation and what we hope to and should achieve in the future. To do that, I will comment on the Labour motion and the amendments. The Labour motion, in the name of Johann Lamont, states: "the Housing Supply Task Force has no timetable or remit to produce recommendations for action". If Johann Lamont had read the task force's minutes, she would see that it has agreed "To identify and tackle impediments to increasing the supply of housing across all tenures—all with a view to ensuring that people across Scotland have the opportunity to access suitable housing that meets their needs and demands." That is a pretty sensible approach.

Sorry, but not now.  The task force should be allowed to get on with its work and the Labour Party should stop interfering, as it had no task force and no idea whatever about housing.

Cathie Craigie can shout, but that is true. I will reiterate a point that Tricia Marwick made, as we should not forget it. In each of the eight years when Labour and Lib Dems were in power in a so-called Government, they built fewer homes than the Tories did in 1995. Labour's manifesto pledge was to build 6,000 houses a year, but it did not even reach that. Labour members sometimes have very selective memories—they do not want to think about what they did not do, rather than what they did. The Labour motion refers to community-controlled housing associations, which is a real novelty. As Bill Kidd mentioned, in Glasgow, Labour gave us the GHA, an idea that was thought up by Wendy Alexander, who is now the party's leader. The GHA is not accountable to anyone, but Labour members proudly say that their party introduced community housing. That is unbelievable—they should hang their heads in shame over what they have done to the people of Glasgow. As my colleague Bill Kidd said, tenants, owner-occupiers and even local housing associations are all suffering because of the Labour plans for the GHA.

No—I am sorry. I do not have much time. Johann Lamont talked about being proud. There is nothing to be proud of in visiting the GHA on the people of Glasgow. Recently, I read a local newspaper in Glasgow in which Bill Aitken of the Tory party demanded an investigation into the GHA. Robert Brown of the Lib Dems has demanded such an investigation. Those people supported the GHA.

Johann, it is a bit late to be coming in through the back door.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.  Johann Lamont has a cheek coming in the back door, when she set up the GHA, knowing full well that it would cause trouble. She should not lecture me on the GHA, which she set up. The Tory amendment mentions extending the right to buy. The right-to-buy legislation is one of the worst pieces of legislation. It decimated the social rented sector, so I certainly do not support that part of the Tory amendment. To give credit where it is due, Labour tried to address the issue with measures such as that on pressured areas. However, the SNP Government has abolished the right to buy—yes, Cathie Craigie, abolished it—for all new-build social rented housing. We have taken action on the issue, when Labour failed to do so. We should remember that, in three years under a Labour-Lib Dem Government, local housing organisations and local authorities built 12 houses. Members of those parties should hang their heads in shame over that. The SNP Government is determined to improve housing for the people of Scotland and, as a member of the SNP, I will ensure that that happens.

The First Minister will be aware of Amnesty International's report, "No recourse, no safety", which highlights the plight of women with insecure immigration status who are fleeing domestic abuse, and who have no recourse whatsoever to public funds. Will the First Minister look at that issue and enable those women to access the services to which they are entitled under our country's obligation to protect human rights?

Does the minister agree that the 2014 Commonwealth games present us with a golden opportunity to provide employment opportunities for some of the most deprived areas in Glasgow? Will the Government consider introducing special measures to achieve those aims? I am, of course, willing to meet the minister to discuss any proposals.

I am a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, and I was also a member of the committee in the previous session, when Cathy Peattie was the convener. We carried out an inquiry into disability issues and took evidence on the matter from Government ministers, and the committee continues to consider the matter. In the inquiry, we considered the choices that people with disabilities have. Time after time, we heard that wheelchair users could not get new wheelchairs and that they faced problems with access to buses, trains and so on. Other members have raised that point, and it is important because, as Johann Lamont said, the situation has been going on for years and years. I would like the minister to take that on board and write to local authorities to remind them that people who use wheelchairs have just as much right as the rest of us to enter town centres, use pavements, enter public toilets and so on. To get back to the substance of the motion, I congratulate Trish Godman on bringing the matter to the chamber for debate. She has raised the matter many times, and I have also raised it in committees and in the Parliament. I will give an example of a constituency case that I dealt with. A young person was told that, because she was going to grow, she could not get a wheelchair. That was absolutely ridiculous. The health board could not afford to give her a wheelchair simply because she was going to grow—she was about eight years old at the time—and it would have had to replace the wheelchair. As Johann Lamont said, a wheelchair is not a prop—it is something that helps people's quality of life, and people should have the right to a wheelchair as they grow, progress through life and access education or whatever. I was appalled, not just by the answers that I received from the health board but by the treatment received by people who approach health boards to request an upgraded wheelchair because they are older or their disability has got  worse. They are sometimes treated with such disdain that it is downright disgraceful. Health boards should perhaps have training—Johann Lamont and Bill Kidd mentioned training on how to lift people from wheelchairs, but perhaps boards or doctors should be given training in basic good manners when they are speaking to people who say that they need an upgraded wheelchair to have a decent quality of life. One of the most appalling aspects is that the health boards use a lack of money or facilities to prevent people from getting upgraded wheelchairs. The problem has been with us for far too long and, unfortunately, it will probably continue to be with us—although, I hope, only for a number of months. I hope that the new Government and the Minister for Public Health will seriously consider it. I hope that, as well as writing to local authorities as previously requested, the Government will write to health boards to tell them that someone in a wheelchair deserves to live their life in the same way as the rest of us. Health boards should not use the excuse of having no money or people growing for not giving someone a wheelchair. I would like to see such a letter going not just from MSPs but from the minister.

I thank the First Minister for his reply regarding the speed with which the planning laws will come into force. Will he comment on the use of good neighbour agreements, which I know he is very aware of? Does he agree that, when we consider development, we must also consider consultation with local communities? Does he agree that—

Does he agree that good neighbour agreements are the best way for local communities to put forward their ideas and work in partnership with developers?

I sincerely welcome this opportunity to talk about a bill for an event that we all want to succeed and which will leave a lasting legacy not only to the city of Glasgow but to the rest of Scotland. I remind the chamber that, at the 2006 Commonwealth games in Melbourne, Scotland won 39 medals, 11 of which were gold. That was a fantastic achievement, but I am sure that we will overtake it at the 2014 games. Given that the games will be seen all over the world, a major consideration for the bill must be to ensure that the image not only of the event itself but of Glasgow is a positive one. In that regard, I note the minister's comments on the provisions on the control of trading in the vicinity of the events. However, there is concern that section 7 could mean that currently licensed traders might be disadvantaged or financially penalised because of the games. Although I note the minister's comments about Glasgow City Council's role in that matter, can he, in his closing remarks, reassure traders that they will not be disadvantaged or penalised in that way? I also ask the minister to set out the Government's plans for ensuring that existing businesses will not be affected adversely by the compulsory purchase powers that will be granted. Such concerns have already been raised with me—and, indeed, with other members—and although the minister has given some assurances on the issue I feel that those concerns still need to be addressed. Perhaps he will pick up on that point in his closing remarks. With regard to the financial memorandum, the Finance Committee has strongly recommended that the Scottish Government pursue possible avenues of lottery funding. My colleagues will elaborate on the point later, but, as members will agree, it is shameful that because lottery moneys are being diverted to support the London Olympics, they are being taken away from the Glasgow Commonwealth games. It is to this Government's credit that it will bid for other lottery funding to ensure not only that Glasgow has a lasting legacy from the games but that people both in Glasgow and outwith the city will benefit. In light of the precedent set by the Commonwealth games in Manchester in 2002 and given what has happened with the 2012 London Olympics, I very  much hope and believe that this Government will secure the money for the games in Glasgow. Given that the games will bring many business and employment opportunities, the establishment of a central point for procurement should be brought forward. I do not know whether other members have seen this, but the London organising committee's website has a dedicated section for companies to tender for upcoming work. The London organising committee has also established a business network that includes a UK-wide programme of business events. Has the minister considered such ideas and has he thought about introducing something similar for the 2014 games? One of the games' greatest benefits will be the employment opportunities that they will offer. Indeed, there will be a tenfold increase in such opportunities, and we must ensure that they are not lost to the people of Scotland and that Glaswegians in particular are given the fullest opportunity to take part. Existing training and apprenticeship schemes must be developed to ensure that those who at the moment are not in employment, training or further education feel the games' benefits. Glasgow 2014 is for them, and they should benefit the most from the event. Will the minister also consider making special provision for the active recruitment of volunteers with special needs and disabilities to assist in the smooth operation of Glasgow 2014? The issue has been raised in various cross-party groups, particularly the cross-party group on older people. With regard to the need to make Glasgow 2014 inclusive to all, I echo Jamie McGrigor's point about disability requirements and believe that the bill should contain a requirement that new buildings, access provisions and transport comply with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. Such a move will ensure that everyone can see and take part in the games. As members have already mentioned, the games will provide a great opportunity to improve transport, and the creation of the so-called games lanes, which Glasgow City Council has said will be one of Glasgow 2014's lasting legacies, will I think be very appropriate for the people of Glasgow. Moreover, the Glasgow airport rail link will present a fantastic opportunity. However, one opportunity has been missed. Will the minister speak to the Minister for Transport and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, about the Glasgow crossrail project, which has been on the cards for 30 years and which could be up and running for 2014? With Glasgow 2014, we have a golden opportunity not only to improve the health and life chances of all the people of Scotland but to show to the rest of the world that Glasgow's sporting  achievements are among the best. We must not and cannot fail—this is the opportunity of a lifetime, and we must ensure that we pass on to the people of the east end and of Glasgow as a whole a lasting legacy of life improvements. I am sure that, with the support of the Government's positive and ambitious programmes, people will see long-lasting benefits from the games.

First, I extend my support and thanks to the firefighters who fought the recent fire in Whiteinch. I am sure that Parliament will join me in that. That resulted in some of the firefighters—

Some of the firefighters were taken to the Western infirmary. Given the changes that are taking place with A and E services in Glasgow, will particular attention be paid to emergency services, such as I have just mentioned, and to restricted use of the Clyde tunnel, which is a main artery between the north and south of Glasgow?

I have genuine concerns about snaring and take this opportunity to thank the minister for meeting me and others to explain the matter to us and to listen to our concerns. The minister mentioned in his statement that he has looked at the types of snares that are used and his decision that all snares must have safety stops and identification tags. Will he explain the evidence that made him reach that decision and what difference the measures will make?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with new European Union member states regarding concerns over human trafficking. (S3O-2189)

Are there any plans to formalise the role of the trafficking awareness-raising alliance—or TARA—in the implementation of the national referral mechanism, given that the current process is police led, which goes against international best practice? Further, what action can the EU or indeed the Scottish Government take against countries that do not comply—or take action to comply—with the convention against trafficking?

I thank the minister for his statement, and I pay tribute to the survivors of abuse. The minister mentioned the time bar, which—as we know—prevents victims from taking action against their abusers. I understand that it would be very difficult to pursue some cases, considering the timescale, and I welcome what the minister says about the guidance and the extension of the limit from three to five years. The minister will, however, be aware of the recent ruling in England that virtually ends the time bar. If the forum that the minister mentioned does not meet the needs of survivors of abuse, will the Government examine the time bar again?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, the reason why I made no declaration of interests is that what Mrs Eadie alleged is completely untrue. I cannot declare an interest that does not exist. I take on board what  you are saying, Presiding Officer, but Mrs Eadie should apologise for making false accusations, which bring this Parliament into disrepute.

I was amazed by Helen Eadie's speech and am sorry that she did not take an intervention from me. She said that "Labour in Scotland has led the way". If that is the case, I wonder why the Scottish Labour leader, Wendy Alexander, had to go down to the British Labour Party conference to apologise for losing the Scottish election. I thank the Scottish Government for instigating this debate on poverty. It is the most important problem that we face and it continues to blight the lives of so many of our people. I remind members that the previous Executive never brought poverty before Parliament as a subject for debate. I shall explain that point and quote from the motion that the SNP lodged on the subject in 2002. [ Interruption. ] Will you please listen, Ms Eadie? Despite what I have just said, I believe sincerely that members from all parties genuinely want to tackle poverty. However, the big difference is in how we intend to do it.

If you listen to my speech, Johann—I am sorry, Ms Lamont—you may learn something. I believe sincerely that all of us have the interests of the people of Scotland at heart and that we want to eradicate poverty, but we propose different ways of doing that. If you will listen to me, I will explain how we intend to tackle the issue.

I corrected myself, but perhaps Helen Eadie did not hear that. The first debate in Parliament that included  poverty in its title was initiated by the SNP. Our motion stated that "the most effective way to tackle poverty in Scotland is to ensure that all powers over tax and spending decisions are transferred from Westminster to the Scottish Parliament." That is true, but this minority SNP Government has developed innovative ideas to tackle poverty within the present powers of the Parliament. It should be congratulated, not derided, for that. Measures such as the freezing of council tax, free school meals projects, an increase in nursery provision, the abolition of prescription charges, the move towards a local income tax and the central heating programme have been mentioned. We have inherited problems from the past eight years when the previous Executive was in government, but I am sure that this Government will tackle them. I have great faith in the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Minister for Communities and Sport. One of the most important issues, on which Ross Finnie touched in his speech and his amendment, is the need for joined-up thinking—we must speak to other people. The cabinet secretary mentioned that when she launched the framework that is to be developed, which will take a different approach. I believe that the framework will achieve the practical outcome of reducing the appalling figure that one in four children is officially recognised as poor in Scotland, and will reduce the effects of poverty on those children's health. I ask the cabinet secretary, when responses to the discussion and the framework have been received and considered, to pay special attention to the appalling and shocking figures for Glasgow, my home and constituency, which contains 52 per cent of the most deprived 5 per cent of areas in Scotland.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time. A child who is born in the east end of Glasgow is three times more likely to suffer from heart disease, four times more likely to grow up in a workless household and 10 times more likely to be hospitalised than a child who is born in a prosperous suburb. It is disgraceful that in the east end of Glasgow a man can expect to live to only 54.

After so many years of devolution and Labour and Liberal Democrat Government, those figures are truly shameful. Nevertheless, Opposition members such as Margaret Curran talk about the great job that the UK Government is doing, how Scotland is better  off and how good Gordon Brown is. When will the Labour Party in Scotland have the courage to condemn the inequalities that are faced in Scotland today?

I am sorry, but I cannot give way. Pensioners suffer greatly—one in five is in poverty and more than 40 per cent of them face fuel poverty. That is not a record to be proud of. I know that I have less than a minute left, but I want to congratulate Scottish and Southern Energy on its approach to fuel poverty. It is the only company that does not put up prices during the winter months and which has social tariffs. It is doing a wonderful job, and I ask the minister—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is a pity that we do not have a bit more time. I know nothing about the issue that Helen Eadie raises. I hope that other energy companies will look at the good work that Scottish and Southern Energy is doing. It is difficult for people to access the necessary information, and I ask the minister to take that fact on board.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister join me in congratulating the people of Broomhill in Glasgow, who have successfully campaigned to prevent green space in their area from being sold off to developers? Does he agree that, before any such action is taken, local people and organisations should be fully consulted?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in relation to Glasgow Housing Association's improvement plan. (S3O-1957)

The minister will be aware that problems with GHA still exist, particularly with its actions in relation to members of the community, residents and owner-occupiers. Will he meet me to discuss those urgent issues for the people of Glasgow?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council education services. (S3O-1793)

Given that Glasgow has 60 schools that have achieved health-promoting status and 29 excellent new learning communities that continue to pursue the determined to succeed initiative, will the minister tell me how the Government, in conjunction with Glasgow City Council, can further develop those programmes to the maximum benefit of the local communities?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's priorities will be for 2008. (S3F-406)

I concur with everything the First Minister says—which will come as no surprise. I am sure that he will share my opinion that a main concern of people in Scotland in 2008 is the possible loss of their local post office. That policy was pushed through by Labour MPs in the face of widespread opposition from other parties. Four post offices in Glasgow, Argyll and central Scotland have been saved, but it was announced yesterday that four others will close. Does the First Minister agree that what is not needed around the country is a piecemeal approach? The UK Government should call a halt to the process and take a more considered look at the future of post office services in Scotland.

I start by saying that I am rather disappointed in the Lib Dem amendment. It does them no favours and it belittles the debate, which is about a very serious issue. I note that there are only two Lib Dems in the chamber. Perhaps their colleagues have taken the same view as I have: the amendment belittles the Lib Dems.

I do not want to know about the Liberal Democrats' manifesto commitments, some of which certainly have not been taken forward. That said, I take the member's point. However, my point is that the amendment belittles this debate. The issue could have been raised in other debates. For too long, Scotland—and, in particular, Glasgow and the west—has been scarred by the activities of organised gangs that have terrorised the general public and have made huge profits from others' misery. As a result, I welcome not only this debate but the cabinet secretary's recent announcement that he will crack down on the use of taxi firms for money laundering purposes by making it easier for councils to limit the number of private hire cabs. I also welcome the proposal for legislation to regulate security firms, which, as most of us know, have some very high profile clients. We all recall the conviction last year of James Stevenson, who, as Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken have pointed out, was sentenced to more than 12 years for his part in money laundering activities, which included the setting up of a taxi firm. Moreover, Tam McGraw, who died last year leaving a fortune estimated at £14 million, laundered money through taxi firms and security companies. We should welcome the length of the sentence imposed on Stevenson as a clear message that we will not tolerate those who participate in organised crime.  Indeed, the courts should make a commitment to take such a view in future, as only through our taking a consistently tough line on sentencing can we hope to deter others. I also welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to crack down on the use of tanning salons for money laundering purposes. I have raised this issue many times over the years, particularly in relation to unmanned salons where unsupervised and uninformed people simply put £1 into a machine. No one checks their age or, indeed, what they get up to, and I assure the chamber that some salons have been closed down because of the unsavoury practices that have taken place in them. I look forward to hearing more on that matter from the cabinet secretary. By bringing together different agencies and bodies in the fight against organised crime, the serious organised crime task force will be highly effective in achieving our desired aims. For too long, criminals have been able to operate because intelligence on their activities has not been as widely available to other agencies as it might have been. As Bill Butler and others have pointed out, through this platform of co-operation the task force will be in a perfect position to work with its UK counterpart, the Serious Organised Crime Agency, and Europol, to fight and respond to the threat of organised crime on an international level. As the motion makes clear, more than £17 million has already been recovered through the provisions in the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. However, although that situation should be welcomed and applauded, it can be improved on. In fact, in response to a question on 15 November 2007, the First Minister said that "we are actively looking at what improvements can be made" to those provisions and that "We are also considering ways to increase the value of assets seized."— [ Official Report , 15 November 2007; c 3470.]  I welcome both that statement and the cabinet secretary's on-going dialogue with Westminster. In that respect, I wonder whether the cabinet secretary is able to give us some idea of when he will announce what improvements can be made to the 2002 act to ensure further that criminals get the message that we will not tolerate their activities and that they will not benefit from them. The cabinet secretary also mentioned that the Government was working with several organisations on using recovered assets to help young people throughout the country and on drawing up specific funding proposals to increase available opportunities. I would be grateful if he could provide us with an update on how those plans are progressing. After all, investing in a  positive future for our young people is the best guarantee that they will not turn to crime in the first place. Of course, we must ensure that any money for such initiatives makes a real difference to the lives of the people that they target. I am interested in finding out how that will be achieved. We will debate the legislative consent motion on the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill next week. I hope that the money that will be raised through its provisions and which will be administered by the Big Lottery Fund with guidance from ministers will be used specifically for local initiatives aimed at helping more young people to become involved in activities and projects of interest to them and their community. By sending out the message that criminals will receive the maximum sentences that are available to the courts and that they will not profit from their activities, we are going down the right road. By coupling that message with the bringing together of the crime agencies to hunt down those criminals, we will take the fight to the criminals who are blighting our communities.

I congratulate the member on securing the debate, and I thank him for doing so. This is a very important subject that has caused great concern not just in the Pakistani community in Glasgow, but throughout Scotland. I wish to pick up on an issue that Bill Aitken raised. I know that members' business debates tend to be conciliatory, but I cannot let this pass. Bill Aitken said that it is not for us to intervene in another country's affairs, but for the people there. Perhaps there is a lesson to be learned—we did intervene in other countries' affairs not that long  ago, and we are suffering the terrorism aspects of that now. I feel that I had to say that. Hugh O'Donnell touched on the history of Pakistan. I, too, want to give a wee bit of background. We are all aware that the country has had a troubled past since its creation through the partitioning of British India. More than 100,000 people died in the early days after partition, through communal violence. The Indo-Pakistan war followed in 1947, as a direct result of the flawed partition. It was the first of four wars between India and Pakistan over territorial disputes, which are still a source of great tension today. The last, in 1999, was considered an unmitigated disaster for Pakistan, and many people believe that it led General Musharraf to stage a coup, after receiving criticism for his part in the Kargil war. It was claimed that he went on to bury a report on the conflict. It is essential that the Pakistani people's faith in their right to determine their future is restored. The people have suffered a great deal in their desire for democracy. As Hugh O'Donnell and I have mentioned, we are a part of that history on account of the time of the British empire—which I would put in inverted commas. Because of that, we have a duty to support the Pakistani people's call for free democratic elections. It is important that we highlight the present situation. I express my concern about reports, which I learned about today, that suggest that prospects for a free and fair general election in Pakistan next month are very poor, and that a rigged result could lead to more instability and play into the hands of Islamist militants. It seems that although the international pressure to hold a general election has been bowed to, it will not be free and fair, as the motion rightly calls for it to be. That is very worrying for the future of Pakistan, as it could fuel unrest and lead to a rise in support for other groups. We have had assurances from President Musharraf that there will be a fair election, but a weak caretaker Government such as his, a tame judiciary and restricted media freedom do not bode well for the election or for the future of Pakistan. I think that we can do something for the people of Pakistan, and I hope that by our actions today we can send out a clear message to the UK Government that more action must be undertaken to ensure that the general election is fair and transparent. Anything short of that will be a real disaster. The main opposition leaders have already stated that they will protest against an unfair result. That could lead to severe civil unrest in Pakistan. I echo Bashir Ahmad's call for the state of emergency to be lifted this weekend. That could be used as an ideal building block to restore faith in the upcoming  election, and I support the calls that we have heard today for the UK Government to put pressure on the president to ensure that that happens.

The minister will be aware of the proposed price rises for rail travel, which will result in the price of a journey between Glasgow and Edinburgh rising to £17. That link is vital to the economy of both cities and of Scotland as a whole. Does the minister share the public's concerns about the price rises? Will he meet me to discuss those concerns?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will do my best to cut short my speech. I welcome what the minister said in his speech, including the announcement of allowances for family carers. We would all agree that such allowances are well overdue. Members have said that thousands of children are looked after by extended families. The measures that have been announced to alleviate the real financial and emotional difficulties—we must remember the emotional difficulties—that people face are welcome. Members have also said that at present it is almost impossible for kinship carers to find out where and whom they should go to and what they are entitled to. Sometimes that leaves them wading through numerous agencies in the hope that they can reach the correct one and get much-needed help. That is why I welcome the proposal for a specialist information service for all kinship carers that would give much-needed advice. I also welcome the involvement of Citizens Advice Scotland. When the minister sums up, will she reply to the question that Christine Grahame asked on whether there will be a partnership with local government? Obviously, ministers will be aware, as members are, that the services that local authorities provide vary greatly area by area. Mary Mulligan and other members also made a relevant point about kinship carers' payments being made through local government social work departments. I would like clarification on both those issues. I raise those two issues because of a number of constituency cases that I have dealt with—I am sure that other members have had similar constituency cases. I know how difficult it is to extrapolate the relevant information. I will give an example of a recent case in which I was involved. An elderly gran who was the carer for her grandson did not receive any benefits whatsoever—her only income was her old-age pension—but she supported her grandson through thick and thin. She did the best that she could to  provide him with a safe and stable environment to the extent that she used part of her pension to pay for after-school care. Eventually, she could not continue to do so, given the money that she had, and she found it almost impossible to get the help that she and her grandson deserved. Fortunately, through contacting various agencies, we were able to help to guarantee funds for after-school care. Those funds are guaranteed only until March 2008, but I hope that what is proposed will help that lady and others who are in the same position. I thank Glasgow City Council for providing that help through a vulnerable families fund. Without that, the lady's grandson, who had led a chaotic lifestyle in difficult circumstances, would not have help and would not be able to mix with other children. That helps him emotionally and helps his grandmum emotionally, as it gives her much-needed time on her own when she knows that the kid is being looked after. The woman who I have mentioned is one of thousands of people who care for and nurture children. Often, they rescue those children from a chaotic lifestyle. We must not forget the important point that those people save Governments thousands, if not millions, of pounds by preventing kids from going into care. We should not deny those people the same right as others have. I thank the Government for these important and welcome measures and I look forward to their introduction.

I am very pleased to say that today sees the appointment of the first ever chair of the Scottish commission for human rights, Professor Alan Miller. His experience in human rights and law is very impressive—director of a human rights law consultancy, visiting professor of law at the University of Strathclyde, and internationally renowned throughout the world as an expert adviser to the business leaders initiative on human rights, led by Mary Robinson, the former UN high commissioner for human rights. Professor Miller's remit will be to promote awareness, understanding and respect for human rights, as well as reviewing and recommending changes to the policies or practices of public authorities and providing them with guidance. He will also work with the Parliament. I commend his appointment to the Parliament. I look forward to working with the commission and wish Professor Miller all the best in his post.

My point was about the Labour amendment, which is certainly not positive.

I thank Iain Smith for reiterating the SNP's and this Government's commitment to St Andrew's day. I also remind him that if this country had full independence, we would be able to make St Andrew's day legislation. He should think on that. St Andrew's day is a day for everyone to celebrate, so I am disappointed that the Opposition parties are so bitter that they have used what should be an opportunity to show confidence in our past and future to sow the seeds of discontent and see failure instead of success. From speaking to various people, particularly in Glasgow, I know that if the Opposition cannot adapt to and embrace the SNP Government's new positive outlook, they will be consigned to history as failures. This Government will be applauded as a success that delivers for the people of Scotland, unlike the Opposition parties, which have scant ambition for Scotland's future. I will move on to the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill. I pay tribute to and congratulate Dennis Canavan for his conviction and dedication in getting his bill enacted. He met with very fierce opposition from the Lib-Lab coalition, which returned the bill to the Enterprise and Culture Committee in the hope that it would change its views and not recommend the bill to Parliament. I am glad to say that the committee re-scrutinised the bill but did not change its recommendation. That reinforces the strength of Parliament's committee system. When considering the bill, the committee asked the previous Executive to enhance the celebration of St Andrew's day domestically and internationally: I am glad to say that that is exactly what the Government is doing. As the minister has already said, we view St Andrew's day as the launch of Scotland's exciting winter festival. On that point, I congratulate "River City"—a fantastic television programme—for introducing St Andrew's day into Tuesday's episode. I must also say that I hope that Archie gets his comeuppance. Tomorrow's activities will include Glasgow's shindig in the square, Edinburgh's jig in the gardens, a Doric cabaret evening in Aberdeen, music, dancing and food in Dundee, a ceilidh in Stirling, and living history displays on Culloden battlefield near Inverness. There are international events including balls, dinners, lectures and concerts from Abu Dhabi to Washington. That is what it is all about: it is not about parochialism, as some of the Opposition have said, but about internationalism and ensuring that the Scottish people remain the internationalists they always were.  Young people are getting involved. Information was sent to all schools.

I believe that the saltire can belong to anyone in Scotland or elsewhere—whatever they like. It is a flag and we, as a political party, are identified with it. It is shame that the Liberal Democrats are not identified with some kind of symbol. I believe that the saltire belongs to everyone, and I think that it is cheap shot to try and take over a debate about St Andrew's day by talking about the saltire not belonging to some people. I will continue with my theme of internationalism. Iain Smith talked about St Andrew's day being rolled out only in the big cities. Today, I got a phone call from my sister who stays in a wee place called Carntyne, near Glasgow; she asked me if I had any tartan because they are having a St Andrew's day celebration tomorrow and her kids want to join in. It is all about everyone being able to join in and celebrate. Scottish universities are also in Edinburgh debating Scottish identity. Is not that a good thing? There will also be a conference on national days at Glasgow Caledonian University. I have received a number of St Andrew's day cards. As people become more aware of the day and more employees take the holiday—both my employees are taking tomorrow off—it will continue to grow, which is a good thing. I turn to Labour's amendment and remind members that the Lib-Lab coalition returned Dennis Canavan's bill to the Enterprise and Culture Committee in the hope that it would change its view and not recommend the bill to Parliament. In a letter to the committee, Tom McCabe said, "there are more effective ways of encouraging Scots to celebrate our national day". Iain Smith said: "The bill will not deliver."— [ Official Report , 6 October 2005; c 19881.]  Karen Whitefield—the member who voted against her own bill in favour of further consultation—said: "I ... believe that the creation of a new bank holiday will not in itself achieve that aim."— [ Official Report , 6 October 2005; c 19884.]  I will not read out the names of all the Labour members who objected to the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill.

No. I am sorry, I will not take an intervention. Suffice it to say, you were in majority Government and you could have delivered a bill instead of pretending that others—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. The Labour Party and the Lib Dems were in Government and could have delivered if they so wished. They should stop using that white elephant to attack people. St Andrew's day is a day of celebration and people in Scotland should be proud of our country, our people and our patron saint. I look forward to St Andrew's day being embraced by everyone. We should not hide from the fact that we are Scottish and proud of it. I am proud to support a St Andrew's day holiday.

I am proud to be able to speak in this debate in equality and  diversity week and I congratulate the minister on his positive contribution. I welcome in particular what he said about the mainstreaming of equalities, which was raised at yesterday's meeting of the Equal Opportunities Committee, and the impact of the equality impact assessments, which are at the core of ensuring that equality is delivered by Parliament. Tomorrow will see the appointment of the first ever Scottish commissioner for human rights. That person will lead on human rights issues relating to devolved matters and, with the other members of the commission, will be charged with promoting widespread awareness, understanding of and respect for human rights; reviewing and recommending changes to any policies or practices of Scottish public authorities; and providing advice and guidance. I am sure that everyone in the chamber will welcome that appointment as further evidence that the Government is committed to equality and justice for all. I believe that we are moving in the right direction and that the profile and importance of equalities and diversity has grown over the years and will continue to do so. I want to give everyone their due and say that all parties have played a role in that, but we must not be complacent. There will always be new challenges to overcome and there are some challenges that have been going on for a long time without having been resolved. I want to concentrate on equal pay, which other members have talked about. The Equal Pay Act was passed in 1970, but today many people are still fighting for the right to equal pay. Bill Kidd mentioned that the pay gap between men and women has increased since then. The situation that exists 37 years after passing the act is unacceptable and must be tackled. For far too long, women have been employed in low-paid part-time jobs. I agree with Hugh O'Donnell's words about stereotyping in employment and I assure him that the SNP Government is committed to challenging that serious issue. Equality of pay, conditions and opportunities must be at the forefront of any skills strategy, so that we can ensure, for example, that as many women as men take up apprenticeships and that the drop-out rate for women, which is greater than it is for men, after a couple of months, is examined. I ask the minister to ensure that that is looked at. In 2001, Wendy Alexander, in answer to a parliamentary question on equal pay in the further education sector, referred to a guidance letter in which she had written: "staff are the key resource ... and we must continually strive to improve people management, staff development and succession planning."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 15 November 2001; S1W-19620.]  I will avoid commenting on Ms Alexander's powers of people management, staff development and succession planning, but I agree with her remark. I hope that the historic agreement between local government and the national Government, which the Government has delivered, will provide a firm foundation for future agreements and allow both parties to work together to tackle the problem, after years of failure.

I do not agree with Hugh O'Donnell. If he reads the Official Report  of yesterday's Equal Opportunities Committee meeting, he will find that Morag Alexander told the committee that many voluntary organisations have a good approach to equal opportunities and that the public and private sectors can learn from the voluntary sector. Day care workers in Glasgow are on strike over downgrading of their jobs. Those workers support vulnerable people and do not have the support or opportunities that other members of society enjoy, as members have said. Women in such situations are the very people we are talking about, because low-paid jobs that are done by women are constantly targeted for regrading.

I am sorry, I do not have time. I would have liked to have given way to Margaret Curran. I am the Equal Opportunities Committee's reporter on older people and I am the convener of Parliament's cross-party group on older people, age and ageing. The population is ageing and many older people express concern that they are excluded from society, denied opportunities for employment and discriminated against because of their age. Such discrimination is against the law, but it happens and the Government must address it. I encourage the minister to consider how the Government can work with relevant stakeholders—I hate that word but it is the only one that I could find—to raise awareness of the growing problem of age discrimination and to implement the many recommendations of reports such as the excellent "All Our Futures: Planning for a Scotland with an Ageing Population". That report calls for the planning and delivery of "age-friendly services" and employment opportunities, the establishment of a national forum on ageing— this is a wish list, but I might as well carry on—the development of indicators to monitor success and the production of regular reports to Parliament from 2008. I hate to say it, but we are all getting older, although we should not fear ageing or run away from the issue. There is much to celebrate about getting older. Older people's experience and the contribution that they can—and do—make to society should be embraced.

Last night, I attended the annual general meeting of Say Women in Glasgow, which provides—among other things—a unique support package for homeless victims of sexual abuse. One of the issues that was raised at that meeting was concern about  funding. Can the minister reassure that group and others regarding future funding for their services?

As one of the MSPs who voted for the bill in its original form, does the minister agree that a member in charge of a bill should stand by their commitment and vote for their bill regardless of what their party says? The minister will be aware that a large consultation has already been carried out. Does he agree that, if the member in charge of the Christmas Day and New Year's Day Trading (Scotland) Bill had wanted it to be passed, they would have voted for it in its original form?

The First Minister will be aware of yesterday's pledge by Prime Minister Gordon Brown to do more to increase security at airports. Has the Scottish Government been offered any financial assistance by the United Kingdom Government in its fight against terror attacks, which is a UK-wide operation, given that the recent incident at Glasgow airport cost Strathclyde Police more than £1.7 million in overtime and expenses?

I also sincerely thank and congratulate the many people who have brought the Commonwealth games to my home city of Glasgow. The First Minister mentioned that we now have great responsibilities and opportunities. I could not agree more, particularly in terms of regeneration and the environment. What environmental impact will the games have? Can he assure Parliament that one legacy of the games will be environmental sustainability?

The minister will be aware that I visited Cuba a number of weeks ago. I saw its excellent education facilities and health service. In her response to Bashir Ahmad's question, the minister mentioned the British Council's scholarship programme. Will she explore the possibility of inviting the Cuban MPs, when they visit the Parliament on 15 November, to take part in developing a scholarship exchange, in education or another area, perhaps through Scottish universities or the British Council Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it aims to enhance the role and profile of farmers markets. (S3O-1125)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the excellent farmers markets in Partick and in other areas of Glasgow, which have grown substantially in popularity and use. Will farmers markets be included in the food policy that was debated yesterday? If so, will those involved in farmers markets be consulted?

I would have liked to begin by expressing the hope that the members who are here today have come with an open mind on the merits, practicalities and consequences of today's motion. Sadly, the speeches that Labour and Liberal members have made suggest otherwise. I say to Labour and Liberal members that the Government will take no lessons from the previous Executive, which presided over Scotland for eight years and delivered nothing but failure, which is why they lost the election. Perhaps they should take heed of that and learn from it. I see that Jackie Baillie is talking to her partners in crime, the Lib Dems; perhaps she is asking them to drop their amendment. Surprisingly, I agree wholeheartedly with the ringing endorsement of the Parliament's committees that is contained in Jackie Baillie's motion, which recognises the important role that they play in scrutinising the budget and, hence, the spending priorities of the Government—regardless of who is in Government. I may be making assumptions, but I believe that each member is aware of the procedure for the Parliament's budget process. However, in case some members have forgotten, I will take the opportunity to remind them of it. The 2005 agreement between the then Scottish Executive and the Finance Committee states: "Once the Scottish Ministers have submitted their expenditure proposals, the Finance Committee will, in consultation with other committees of the Parliament, produce a report. This will comment on the Scottish Ministers' proposals and may include an alternative set of proposals." I assumed that all members know that. To clarify the matter further, each committee is charged with debating, evaluating and making recommendations on the budget priorities for each cabinet secretary's portfolio, as they apply to that  committee's remit. I see that procedure as robust and practical.

We have that opportunity. I thought that every member realised how the budget process works. It is pretty sad that members of the previous Executive never gave others the opportunity that they are now seeking. The Lib Dems are asking for money for civil servants to help them to scrutinise the budget. When they were in Government, they did not give that to anyone else. Wendy Alexander is asking for more money for Opposition leaders. Labour and Liberal Democrat members cannot have it both ways.

I will not give way, as I need to finish. If the member allows me to continue, he will find that what I have said is true. In committee, members are able to call on expert witnesses, to call ministers to account—as has been mentioned, one minister has already appeared three times before a committee—and to spend many hours on deliberation before making recommendations to the Finance Committee. Plainly, it is impossible to achieve that in a parliamentary debate. Practically, it would be impossible to duplicate the work that the committees do. For that reason, the motion is not desirable. The Labour motion that is before us has not been scrutinised and is ill thought out. In its legacy paper, the Finance Committee recommended that we implement with due care and attention the many recommendations in the Howat report, which has been mentioned. That is the correct course of action. Acting in the best interests of Scotland is also the best course of action. Two weeks ago, the Finance Committee questioned the authors of the Howat report, to seek their expert opinion. That could not be done in a parliamentary debate, which is why the committees are so important. Elaine Murray mentioned other issues in her speech on the motion, but at the committee meeting in question she concluded "we"—the Finance Committee— "should ask ministers for their road map over the next three years for reaching the position at which the budget review group's recommendations on changing the culture have  been reached."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 23 October 2007; c 79.] She said nothing about having this debate or about debating the budget with ministers in the Parliament. Elaine Murray and others who have spoken today should look to themselves—we are talking about the Scottish people and the Scottish Parliament.

Perhaps Labour members should have thought of that before lodging such a ridiculous so-called motion, which makes no sense whatever.

No, I want to continue. As we know, the changes to the budget process that are recommended in the Finance Committee's legacy paper were proposed through the proper channels, which is right. Any other method that is used to bring about changes is disrespectful to the Scottish Parliament and to the people who have elected its members. It also sets a dangerous precedent, as it undermines everything that we have all worked so hard to make successful in the Parliament. If a member of the Parliament wishes to change the budget process, they must approach the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. If a member of the Parliament wishes to propose chamber business, they must approach the Parliamentary Bureau. [ Interruption. ] I see that certain members are doing another grubby deal—they cannot do it out in the open, but must do it in secret closes in the corridor. [ Interruption. ] Jackie Baillie can shout from a sedentary position, but the truth of the matter is that they are making another deal out in the corridor. Sadly, today's motion seeks to circumvent the proper parliamentary procedures. I hope that today we will all stand up for the integrity of the Parliament, as that is the issue. The Labour motion is not about integrity—in fact, it would bring the Parliament down. Labour members should be ashamed of themselves.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When will the member address the motion? Nothing that the member has said—

To ask the First Minister whether improving links between Glasgow and Edinburgh will lead to substantial economic benefits for the whole of Scotland. (S3F-236)

As a frequent traveller between Glasgow and Edinburgh, I welcome those substantial announcements, as I am sure everyone in the two cities does. What is the proposed timescale for the projects? Will the First Minister consider measures to ensure that people who are completing modern apprenticeships benefit from those excellent projects?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide further details of the working group that is to be set up to examine issues surrounding the replacement for Trident being based in Scotland. (S3O-1020)

I thank the Government for hosting the summit at Òran Mór in Glasgow, which allowed many views—diverse and otherwise—to be expressed, including my own. The summit was a huge success. As a matter of interest, who was invited to the meeting to discuss the serious issue of weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde?

The minister will be aware that the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 placed great emphasis on public  consultation. Is he aware that the proposal for sale of land in the Broomhill area has never been put out to public consultation and that the local councillor was never consulted on it? Does he agree with local people, a local councillor and me that the land should not go on sale until proper consultation has been carried out?

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. It is an important issue for not only the community of Milton in Glasgow, but all communities that suffer from or have suffered from activities of the same nature. I also congratulate the local people, past and present, who Bob Doris has already mentioned; without them a serious situation would still be on-going. I urge all parties—Glasgow City Council, the police, local groups and the community—to work together and to be transparent and open, because that is what the people in Milton and Chirnsyde want. They want transparency and openness to ensure that the situation does not arise again and that the bullying and intimidation that occurred in Milton and in Chirnsyde over the years never happens again. I join Bob Doris in thanking the media, and the Sunday Mail in particular, whose voracious appetite for the truth kept the Chirnsyde story on the front pages. It made sure that the activists, who were desperate for some truth and transparency, were able to turn to someone. Without the Sunday Mail exposing what was going on in Chirnsyde, it would have disappeared from the public eye.  I first visited Chirnsyde when I was elected in 1999 and went there often. I also often visited Maryhill police station—so often that I think I was there more frequently than Glasgow's finest. I met community groups and individuals in the area, as well as Glasgow City Council. I was going to bring in my correspondence today, but it amounts to four box-loads and would be too much to bring into the chamber. Bob Doris has given a report of some of the incidents that took place in Milton. The confidentiality that I owe to constituents prevents me from raising other incidents, including intimidation and threats by certain people who have been mentioned and by others who have not. From 1999 until a couple of months ago, certain people had a community minibus, which they drove around Chirnsyde while wearing bullet-proof vests. We all have ice cream vans and community buses visiting our areas. I did not know where they had got the bullet-proof vests from, but they were driving the community bus while wearing them. One has to ask to why. When the recent shootings that Bob mentioned took place, I again asked Glasgow City Council to intervene and remove the minibus from Chirnsyde and close the community initiative. I was told that the council could not do that because it had no jurisdiction over the management committee of the Chirnsyde community initiative. That community activists can do something is great, but questions must be answered when we reach the stage at which the council can do nothing about people wearing bullet-proof vests running about in minibuses. I have looked for answers. In fact, until the council recently impounded that minibus as a result of pressure from the local community relating to health and safety matters, it was being driven along the road to pick up kids to go to football clubs, and people were still wearing bullet-proof vests. I conclude in the same spirit in which I started. We want a fresh start for Chirnsyde and Milton, but people must be accountable for their actions. I reiterate: we want truth and transparency about what has happened in the Chirnsyde area. It cannot be allowed to happen again. As elected members, we must ensure that our communities are safe. When communities come to us, we must ensure that they are given answers to the serious problems that they have raised.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Is it not the case that, if a member names another member in the chamber, that member is allowed to reply to whatever they have been accused of?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The brass neck of the Labour Party is truly amazing. It is suggesting that everyone else is responsible and to blame. I say to the Labour members that they orchestrated what has happened, they put forward the policy and they have left us, the Government, to deal with the mess. They should not give us or the Glasgow people any platitudes. They are responsible and they cannot wriggle out of it. Given that Wendy Alexander had the courage to apologise to the Labour Party for its election defeat in Scotland, I had hoped that she would have had the courage to apologise here to the people of Glasgow who voted for the stock transfer. They did so in the belief that transferring Glasgow's housing stock to GHA would give them new-build housing—nothing has been built yet—more social rented homes, more good houses for rent and local and accountable community ownership, but they have had none of that and they are bitterly disappointed that the promises have been broken. We should not forget Glasgow City Council's role in all this. One of its chief people, who played a leading role in the stock transfer, is an MSP. It was not just the Parliament, Wendy Alexander and the Labour Party that were responsible; Glasgow City Council played a role, too. The fiasco that it has presided over has been allowed to continue because of inaction and cowardice by the Labour members, who did not challenge it. I am not holding my breath, but the people of Glasgow deserve an apology and a commitment from the Labour Party to work with the Government to sort out this mess once and for all. However, the Labour Party amendment makes it clear that it is unwilling to accept responsibility for its past failings and is unable to look to the future.

I am sure that the minister will answer that question in his summing up. I am sorry if Margo did not quite catch the cabinet secretary's opening speech in which she laid out those differences. I have only five minutes, but the cabinet secretary had 11 minutes. GHA will not be let off the hook. I am sure that the minister will be able to respond to Margo, who I thank for the intervention. Back in 2000, Wendy Alexander, commenting on the stock transfer, said: "Power will cascade down to local level, with tenants playing a pivotal role in managing their own communities". It certainly looks more like a trickle than a cascade. Those were grand words, but they were only words. I hope that the member or her colleagues can explain why we did not see any cascading in their years of power. I might not be able to put it as grandly as Wendy Alexander did, but I will work to ensure that second-stage transfer takes place and that GHA works itself out of existence and hands over responsibility to the people who should have had it: the LHOs, many of which are waiting in the wings with years of experience and costed plans. They must be given the opportunity to deliver SST.

I thank Bob Doris for his intervention, as I thought of intervening on Paul Martin on that point. In areas such as Springburn and Maryhill, people were moved here and there and had to live in limbo because plans were not costed or put forward properly. I welcome the cabinet secretary's comments on owner-occupiers and her recognition that more needs to be done to address their concerns. No one should be subjected to the horrors to which owner-occupiers have been subjected, particularly by social landlords. All that people asked for was fair and equitable treatment.  Wendy Alexander is fond of delivering fairytales—indeed, she delivered one to John Swinney one day. This is not a fairytale; this is a horror story that has been written by Labour and perpetrated on the people of Glasgow. They deserve better and that is what the Government will give them.

I thank Patricia Ferguson for securing this very important debate. I pay tribute to her tenacity in pursuing justice for the families and others who have suffered greatly from this terrible tragedy. She has shown us all what an MSP for an area can do when a tragedy such as this one happens. She was one of the first ones down there—I was there as well—and I congratulate her on all the hard work that she has done. I also want to praise many individuals and groups—for example, the fire brigade, the ambulance crews and the workers of Community Central Hall. In particular, I praise Gary Gentle for the excellent work that was done and for the comfort that was provided to many people. As Patricia Ferguson said, Community Central Hall in Maryhill was open for 24 hours on those days. Staff sometimes went for 24 hours, or even longer, without any sleep, just so that they could offer food, tea and coffee and could provide basic comfort. They set up an incident room so that people could have access to emergency telephone calls from the police and the ambulance service. Those people cannot be praised highly enough for the comfort that they gave to suffering people. I went along—Patricia Ferguson was there too—to talk to people who did not know what had happened to their family members. Nobody knew who had been involved, and nobody knew who would come out alive and who would come out dead. Speaking to those people was gut wrenching. The comfort that was provided by ordinary individuals as well as by groups was something to see. Patricia Ferguson mentioned someone who was killed in the explosion who was an acquaintance of my brother. I was not directly affected as relatives were, but I know exactly what people were going through. That is why I signed the motion; I also signed a petition on the matter, and I whole-heartedly support a full public inquiry into the disaster. Patricia Ferguson went into great detail about the evidence that has emerged. I believe that the Stockline disaster was caused by years of neglect by the company. The Government watchdog was meant to regulate the factory but, according to reports out today, it did not do so in the proper manner. According to the Sunday Herald , "Eight experts from four universities have condemned ICL Plastics and the Health and Safety Executive ... for failing to prevent the gas explosion". Those are not my words but the words of experts, who said that conditions in the factory were poor, safety rules were broken and corners were cut to  save money. That is why we need a public inquiry. Lots of questions need to be answered, and we need to ensure that such a tragedy does not happen again. In a public inquiry, questions would have to be asked of the HSE's role in the matter. Were assessments properly carried out? Were workers' concerns listened to? Should spot checks be carried out by the HSE? All those issues have to be raised, and only a public inquiry will bring the truth out. The families of the people who died in this terrible tragedy deserve to know the truth. I urge the minister to press for a public inquiry.

I raise an anomaly faced by clinical psychologists in health boards throughout Scotland. The problem has been going on much longer down south. Clinical psychologists with three to five years' experience are still on a low grade and have not been regraded, yet new starts in October 2007 are automatically being put on a new grade. Will the First Minister look at the issue and perhaps write to health boards regarding that anomaly?

I draw your attention to the first clause of Hugh Henry's motion: "That the Parliament regrets that education has not been given a higher priority by this administration", or this Government, as I would call it. I will give Mr Henry a few facts about how the previous Labour-Liberal Administration gave education a high priority. Like him, I have one researcher at my disposal—as you know, Hugh, I am a back bencher—and my researcher and I  discovered that, as Christina McKelvie mentioned in her speech, the previous Administration had very few debates on education. There was one in 2002 and then one in 2006. In 2002, when Cathy Jamieson was Minister for Education and Young People, she said: "It would be easy to resort to knee-jerk reaction or political sloganising; indeed, some people already have done so." If the cap fits, Mr Henry, I am sure that you will wear it. Presiding Officer, I am sure that that is not deemed to be unparliamentary language. Cathy Jamieson went on to say: "We have choices and we need to know where our priorities lie. Let us have a debate."— [ Official Report , 6 November 2002; c 14940.]  I could not agree with her more. The motion is indeed a knee-jerk reaction. Sadly, it simply attempts to achieve political gain on a serious subject and contradicts the Labour Party's claim that education is its top priority. It is easy for everybody inside the Parliament and outside it to see from the motion what Labour's priority is. It disappoints me and I am sure it disappoints many people in Scotland that, instead of using parliamentary time to discuss the important choices that we face in the Parliament and in Scotland, as you always said yourself, Mr Henry—the best way forward for our children, our schools, nurseries and universities and, ultimately, the success of the Scottish public—you have chosen to take a negative approach.

I apologise, Presiding Officer.

I always respect what Hugh Henry and, in particular, the Parliament says. I am sure that the minister in summing up will have an answer. I echo Adam Ingram's words regarding funding and will explain to the previous Administration exactly what they mean and the responsibilities that they bring with them. Future levels of funding will be announced in the upcoming budget. We have heard all about the comprehensive spending review. It must be completed and any other course of action would be imprudent and incorrect. I am  sure that Labour and Liberal Democrat members are aware of that fact. The Finance Committee will rightly scrutinise the budget and report to the Parliament. That scrutiny is a parliamentary process and will ensure that all parties will have the opportunity to express their opinions. I am certain that the Opposition is not suggesting that we should spend money before we know exactly how much we have in the purse and that we should bypass the proper parliamentary procedure. Mr Henry's comments made a good case for the Parliament to have further powers to ensure that we do not have to wait for the money to be doled out to us once again. I am sure that he is aware that, as the First Minister stated last week and in the weeks previous to that, we will work to deliver all our manifesto commitments over the four-year session. We must ask ourselves why students are the only people in the country who have debts before they even get jobs. Apprentices get paid but students do not. We must address that. I am appalled at the Opposition's attitude towards smaller class sizes. We are considering our children's future. Bill Butler waxes lyrical on all the numbers that came from Glasgow City Council, but it takes a piecemeal approach to smaller class sizes. It must produce a paper on a long-term strategy and its implications, but so far it has not done that. I urge Glasgow City Council and the other councils that have not produced strategies to go ahead and do so. I am appalled at the attitude of the Opposition parties, particularly Labour and the Lib Dems, because it is not impossible to do what we propose. Smaller class sizes can be achieved and student debt can be eradicated. We cannot tell our children and students that education is the best way forward for them without backing them in it. The language that the Opposition parties are using—cannot do and will not do—is what lost them the election. The Government says that it can do and will do. We will carry on over the next four years, as the First Minister said.

I begin by thanking all the members who have stayed on to discuss such important issues and those who signed my motion, which enabled me to secure the debate. I also thank the Scottish Government for setting out its position on asylum seekers, which I am happy to say echoes the changes that are called for in the motion. I welcome the people who should be in the public gallery by now—they must have been delayed; they are travelling through from Glasgow—many of whom have first-hand knowledge of the many difficulties that asylum seekers face. I hope that other people in their position and organisations that work with them, such as the Scottish Refugee Council in Glasgow and other voluntary organisations, will take heart from the fact that the first members' business debate after the summer recess will highlight the fact that in Scotland the situation of asylum seekers is an issue of the utmost importance and one that is taken extremely seriously by the Parliament. Today I will concentrate on the motion before us and, in particular, on what it says about the right to work. Simply by granting asylum seekers the right to work, we can radically change how they are perceived and the conditions in which they find themselves. It is clear that granting asylum seekers the right to work offers fundamental benefits. Rightly or wrongly, many people perceive asylum seekers to be a burden on society and think that their sole purpose in coming to Scotland  is to claim benefits, to the detriment of society as a whole. As we all know, such attitudes lead to a fractured society, in which asylum seekers are viewed with distrust and, often, open hostility. Members of the Scottish Parliament and people outside the Parliament have worked and continue to work towards creating a Scotland that is free from prejudice or hatred. To that end, let me dispel the myth that asylum seekers are simply benefit seekers. Asylum seekers want to work. Research shows that the money generated for the local economy by asylum seekers would far outweigh the cost of benefits. The message is clear: by granting asylum seekers the right to work we can help to grow the economy and, which is more profound, help to create more harmonious communities throughout our areas. Many asylum seekers are highly skilled. Recent United Kingdom figures show that more than 900 doctors, 150 nurses and 100 dentists are unable to seek work. The current skills shortage in some professions, especially in health, has led to a bizarre situation in which recruitment schemes are run abroad. We could go some way towards solving the problem if we granted asylum seekers the right to work. The Scottish Refugee Council said that a change in policy would have a major impact on people's future integration into Scottish society. That conclusion is borne out by research that was carried out by the previous Scottish Government, which found that denying asylum seekers the right to work increases the risk that their skills will become outdated, increases isolation and makes it less easy for people to be integrated into the labour market. We cannot let a situation continue that leads to public mistrust, represents a missed opportunity to grow the economy, perpetuates the skills shortage and risks alienating people who will eventually be granted asylum. I welcome the Scottish Government's support on such matters and I thank Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, for writing to me to outline the Scottish Government's position, which is to press for full implementation of the March 2006 agreement; to ensure that young people from asylum seeker families have the same access to full-time education as is afforded to Scottish children; to call for families with children who arrived before March 2006 to be granted leave to remain; and to press for alternatives to the much-deplored dawn raids and to the unacceptable detention of children and their families. The motion refers to the right to work and to an amnesty for families who arrived in Scotland before 2006. I will raise wider issues, which no doubt other members will mention in more detail. As I said, by effecting change we can continue to  work towards creating a Scotland that is free from prejudice or hatred. We can also work towards a Scotland in which inhuman treatment of anyone is not tolerated, by ending the barbaric treatment that many asylum seekers face at the hands of the Home Office. I have seen at first hand the effect of Home Office policy on asylum seekers. People become depressed because they cannot work, which affects their families and communities. Some asylum seekers have been in Scotland for many years. Their children were born here and they have formed friendships and relationships. Many asylum seekers regard themselves as Scottish, yet they live in fear of dawn raids, detention and deportation. We must end those barbaric practices and ensure that an amnesty is granted to families who have become valued members of their communities. For too long, asylum seekers have been regarded as people who arrive here with no hope. I want to give families the hope that in future they can be valued members of Scottish society. Scotland is held in high regard throughout the world, but the use of dawn raids and the detention centre at Dungavel seriously calls into question our claim to be warm and welcoming. Will the minister consider the issues that I have raised? Will he also consider the situation at Dungavel, especially in the light of the alarming reports in today's press, in which it is claimed that children are being held alongside criminals—rapists and traffickers—awaiting deportation. Even today, after such reports, the Home Office refuses to give figures on detainees. Members of the Scottish Parliament pride themselves on fulfilling their duty to ensure that there is justice, fairness and accountability to all people in Scotland. Asylum seekers deserve no less. When the minister responds, I ask him to give further information on the legacy review that is going on. I presume that we will hear the results by the end of the month or in October, but we have received no update on the cases involved. Will the minister also tell us about the correspondence between—I think—the First Minister and members of the Westminster Government? Is there, as I believe, a perception that doors are opening for the Scottish Parliament and at Westminster? Too often, asylum seekers do not get an opportunity to put their case. I am grateful and proud to be able to do that.

I begin in a different vein from other members by congratulating the people of Scotland on electing an SNP Government. I also want to thank the Parliament—this new, SNP Parliament—for raising the game, not just for the Parliament, but for the hopes and aspirations of the Scottish people. A healthy mind needs a healthy body, and people are enthused by the actions of the SNP Government, which will go a long way towards promoting health and well-being. I am sure that other members speak to people in pubs, clubs and restaurants. The people I speak to are full of new hope, ambition and confidence in the future. [ Interruption. ] Opposition members may shout, but if they spoke to people in the street, they would know that confidence—not just in the people, but in Scotland—is booming. The previous Administration never gave the Scottish people that confidence. For too many years, the Scottish people were told that they were not good enough; that they had to limit their hopes  and ambitions. The SNP Government has raised the bar, not just in Scotland, but throughout the world. It is seen as a world leader for its commitment to and aspirations for the Scottish people. With that new-found belief come responsibilities. I know that the Government realises that, and I welcome the commitment to ensure that the national health service is run for the people and not for profit. The public desperately want that and that is why Labour paid the price.

We need take no lessons from Johann Lamont after the fiasco of Glasgow Housing Association. She was told in 2004 that there was not enough money for second-stage transfer, but led the people in Glasgow astray until December last year by saying that second-stage transfer would go ahead. The NHS pay award was mentioned. The Health Board Elections (Scotland) Bill was proposed by a Labour member. Such elections would go a long way towards fulfilling the commitment to transparency and honesty. As a Glasgow member, I welcome the proposal for a Commonwealth games bill—that will improve the confidence of the people of Glasgow. I echo Pauline McNeill's comments. I have met and written to the cabinet secretary about the fact that there are only two accident and emergency departments in Glasgow. I urge the cabinet secretary to consider that and perhaps to meet interested and concerned people from across the parties. The FSB report to which Angela Constance referred paints a worrying picture of Glasgow, showing that it has the poorest ratings of all local authorities for education, health, employment and inequality. That is after 10 years of Labour rule at Westminster and eight years of Labour and Liberal here at Holyrood. Glasgow has been portrayed as the sick man of Europe—a sorry portrayal that it is time to rectify. I welcome the announcement of a task force and a summit, and I hope that Glasgow will be looked at in particular. It is imperative that we close the gap between the rich and the poor, and I urge all Glasgow members to sign my motion on an action plan to consider why, despite the money that has been spent over the years on various issues in Glasgow, the health and well-being of the people have not improved. Many initiatives have been promoted—throughout Scotland—but the gap between the rich and the poor is getting bigger. In some areas, initiatives are not working, and we need to find out why. That  is why I am taking on board the need for an action plan. I do not want any extra money from the Cabinet or elsewhere; I just want all-party support to consider exactly what is happening in Glasgow. In the short time in which the SNP has been in Government, we have gone a long way towards improving the health and well-being of the country, with free school meals for children in deprived areas, the extension of free nursery care, the abolition of the graduate endowment fee and other positive measures that have been mentioned. The SNP Government has given the Scottish people renewed hope and confidence. That will go a long way towards improving their health and well-being.

The minister will be aware that Glasgow Housing Association is insisting that owner-occupiers repay moneys for repair within one year. Many people are left in dire financial circumstances as a result. Will he consider that situation, with a view to increasing the time for repayment?

Why was second-stage transfer never taken forward when the member was in charge of housing? Will she confirm that she was told by the Glasgow Housing Association in 2004 that there was not enough money for second-stage transfer to go ahead?

Does the First Minister share my concern about the plight of Sana Hussein and her four children, one of whom is a nine-month-old baby, who were taken to Dungavel on Friday and then had to suffer being transported by van to Tinsley house—a journey of 14 hours—on Sunday? Does he agree that that is totally unacceptable? Will he join me in welcoming Sana, who was released yesterday and who phoned me last night, back to Glasgow?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned countries that are looking to develop nuclear weapons. How can we persuade them not to do that when Britain is renewing its nuclear weapons?  Is that not a hypocritical stance?

I remind members that Trident is a weapon of mass destruction, is evil and has no place in a fair and civilised society. It is hypocritical of the Westminster Government to verbally and physically attack any country for having any remote connection to nuclear weapons while it is retaining and renewing weapons of mass destruction on its own soil. It is also immoral and dishonest of Westminster to sign up to the non-proliferation treaty that calls for complete disarmament while ignoring its obligations by voting for the retention and renewal of that category of weapons. It is also dishonest to claim—and I want to lay this one to rest once and for all; I hope that Jackie Baillie will listen—that removing Trident will cost 11,000 jobs. The removal of Trident will cost just over 1,000 jobs, and it is an absolute fact that those workers can be redeployed through a programme of diversification for a peaceful world, and not just a peaceful Scotland.

No. The member would not take an intervention so I will not take one. Many members say that Trident is a reserved matter—we have heard that from George Foulkes and members of other unionist parties. I and a majority of the Scottish people say that it is not a reserved matter. Trident is on Scottish soil down there on the Clyde, and we in the Scottish Parliament have to decide to get rid of nuclear weapons and Trident for the sake of the Scottish people. How do we go about that? Bruce Crawford touched on the powers that we have over transport, planning and the legal system. This Parliament can do lots of things to thwart the  progress of Trident with the legislative tools at our disposal.

No, I am sorry. We could insist that we become an observer at the non-proliferation treaty committee on the ground that we wish Scotland to be nuclear-free.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Patrick Harvie and others have reminded us that some local authorities are already nuclear free. We could make our representation to the non-proliferation treaty committee before 2010, when the real decision will be made. I have not just plucked this idea out of thin air; precedents have been set. I mentioned Palestine in a motion previously, but Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan all signed up to the NPT after the break-up of the Soviet Union, and Palestine has observer status. Undoubtedly, George Foulkes will say that Westminster must have something to do with it, and perhaps he will run down to his Westminster masters and tell them exactly what is happening in this Parliament. I hope that he does. Maybe they will object, but it is worth exploring the issue to ensure that we highlight Scotland's people's wish to be free of nuclear weapons. We are here to serve the people of Scotland. Our neighbour, Ireland, which is also a signatory to the NPT, said: "States should not develop new nuclear weapons ... or undertake the replacement or modernisation of their nuclear-weapon systems" while they are committed to the non-proliferation treaty. That is the reality. This Parliament must show Westminster and the rest of the world that Scotland will not put up with nuclear weapons on her shores, and the decision that we make today could have a great impact on Westminster and the rest of the world by showing that.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned that he respected the judgment of the Scottish people, yet he does not respect their wishes. The vast majority of the Scottish people do not want Trident on their shores, down the road on the Clyde. Will he explain his position?

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing the debate on the continued use of Alimta, and on his tenacity in pursuing the matter tirelessly throughout his parliamentary career and before it. As we enter the third session of Parliament, in which consensus seeking and co-operation have been talked of, it is interesting to note that back in March, all parties came together to support the Right of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill. In February, at stage 1 of the bill, I expressed concern that the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence's rejection of Alimta would lead to the drug's being withdrawn in  Scotland, given that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland had never before gone against NICE guidance. However, the high incidence of the disease in Scotland means that NHS QIS would be in an excellent position to reject any such advice that was offered by NICE. In this instance, it would be quite right to do so and NHS QIS would, based on the vote not so long ago on treatment of mesothelioma, have the support of 93 per cent of Parliament. I am optimistic that NHS QIS will reject the advice from NICE and I am glad that that view is shared throughout Parliament. Des McNulty mentioned support from the party leaders. The First Minister, Alex Salmond, said in his letter to the Clydebank Asbestos Group: "To deny access to a drug which can extend their life and greatly reduce the worst features of the disease would be unacceptable." The former Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr, said: "We will make sure NHS QIS has considered the impact on Scottish...sufferers" The Liberal Democrats offered this welcome statement: "We want to see the SMC decision remain in place." and Annabel Goldie said that "It is not reasonable to blindly follow rulings elsewhere." I am glad that my colleagues throughout Parliament have reached agreement on the issue. The sentiment is shared throughout Scotland by people whom I meet. The Scottish medicines consortium promotes the Scottish interest. We in Parliament will demand that NHS QIS go forward with the recommendations that the people want regarding Alimta. I call on my colleague in the Scottish Government, Shona Robison, to make a firm commitment to seek ways to ensure that the drug continues to be available for present and new sufferers. I am sure that everyone is aware of the terrible consequences of mesothelioma, the highest incidence of which is in Scotland. Therefore, I believe strongly that we should say to NICE and NHS QIS that NICE cannot interfere in NHS QIS. It is a Scottish decision and we in the Scottish Parliament have said that we support NHS QIS on sufferers' access to the drug. I thank Des McNulty for his continued efforts in pushing for the drug to be made available.

The subject of sex offenders, particularly those who abuse children, is emotive. Naturally, the public are enraged when they hear of people such as Peter Tobin being able to evade the law and commit more heinous crimes. I thank the police for all the work that they did to capture Peter Tobin, who had been looked for a number of years ago in Paisley. I was not involved in that instance, but I knew of the incidents there when I lived in the area. Like Gil Paterson, I was a bit sceptical when I first saw the proposals about tagging and releasing pictures of sex offenders. However, when I looked into the matter, I realised that these people are devious and that we must do something to prevent them from reoffending and evading the law. Therefore, I whole-heartedly welcome the proposals that the minister has outlined. In particular, I welcome the traffic-light system, which will enable the police and procurators fiscal to act much more quickly than they have done before to inform and protect communities. We are here to protect communities and to ensure that sex offenders do not commit further evil deeds, so I hope that the traffic-light system will be rolled out  across Scotland. For too long, the approach of not just the police but procurators fiscal towards sex offenders has been seen by the public as piecemeal. People have seen that the legislation is not particularly coherent and joined up, so I hope that the legislation that the minister proposes will have a much more coherent and joined-up effect. We need to ensure that the proposed legislation is adequately funded, and I ask the minister to make a commitment in his closing speech to give adequate funding to the agencies that are involved in dealing with sex offenders. Too often, we introduce specific proposals but, when we speak to the agencies that are involved in implementing them, they say that they do not have the funding to do so. I would like a commitment that funding will be put in place. The minister mentioned housing in the community. Will he consider seriously the allocation of housing to sex offenders to ensure that the housing provided is not near schools or nurseries and that we do not end up with groups of sex offenders in particular areas of the city? Groups of offenders are often housed in the most deprived areas, although I will not name them. As Gil Paterson said, we are talking about heinous crimes that are committed by people who often groom their victims; I read about an offender who groomed single mothers to get to the children. Most adults would not condone that. Given how serious the issue is, legislation by this Parliament must be considered carefully. Will the minister consider creating a specific sex offender sentence and providing for supervision for life in certain circumstances? As I said, sex offenders try to evade the law and, in certain circumstances, they should be supervised for life if they are not jailed for life, because they are a danger to communities. Will the minister consider providing for sex offenders to serve at least three years—depending on the severity of their crimes—before they are given a parole hearing, rather than being released automatically? I know that that is a touchy subject among various agencies and politicians alike, but, if we are going to consider the issue seriously, we cannot say that such offenders could be sentenced to four years but be released automatically after two years. That is not acceptable in this day and age, given what is happening in communities. I ask the minister to take on board my suggestions. If he cannot respond when he sums up, I ask him to send me a letter or to arrange a meeting with me to discuss them.

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing the debate, not only because this is the first members' debate in the new session, but because the issue is important. I thank her for raising it. I pay tribute to George Parsonage, who has rescued more than 1,500 people from the River Clyde, and who was awarded a silver medal by the Royal Humane Society—the first of its kind in more than 100 years. The society was established in 1790 and is said to be the oldest life-saving society in the world. It has been forced to withdraw from Glasgow because of health and safety regulations, if members can believe that. George Parsonage, who continues to live beside the Clyde and is constantly vigilant, can no longer do his excellent work, which is very sad. I pay tribute to George for all his hard work. As Roseanna Cunningham said, the situation in respect of rescue requires urgent review. I accept  Strathclyde Fire and Rescue's point that it "currently provides a Water Rescue capability throughout its area". Roseanna touched on that, but the capability covers a very small area rather than the whole Clyde. No separate budget is allocated to water rescue training—costs must be absorbed by the central training budget. That cannot be right. The anomaly can be traced back to the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 which, among other things, gave ministers—maybe the minister will listen to this—the power to make an order conferring additional functions on the service, under its duty to respond to other, non-fire emergencies. Unfortunately, after consultation no order was made to deal with water rescue, except in the case of serious flooding. As a result, dealing with water rescue is left to each FRA, as has already been pointed out. I urge the minister to consult all FRAs, with a view to laying an order that would apply throughout Scotland and which would require FRAs to deal with water rescue. We must address the serious issue that people may be disciplined for trying to do this humane work. We must also ensure that resources for training are not taken from central budgets but are allocated independently by the minister to each FRA. I hope that the minister will look favourably on those suggestions.

rose—

rose—

rose—

I, too, congratulate Mark Ruskell on securing this debate on reconnecting communities by rail. I hope that other MSPs will not mind a Glasgow MSP intruding on their territory. They will not be surprised to learn that I am going to mention the Glasgow crossrail link. I have mentioned it before and I make no apologies for that. Crossrail, as a rail link and not a tunnel, has been mentioned by others. As a rail link, it is feasible, affordable and realistic. It has been studied for over 30 years and it has been costed. It would be a crossrail not just for Glasgow but for the whole of Scotland. It would give communities the opportunity to travel from the north and south of Glasgow to the north and south of Edinburgh and to Aberdeen. Some communities do not have public transport at all, so the link would be all encompassing. That is why I wanted to speak in this debate. As I have said, crossrail is not just about Glasgow but about the whole of Scotland. If the  link went ahead, it would be the equivalent of a heart bypass for Scotland. I hope that people will accept that that comment is sincere. The link would benefit the whole of Scotland, just like the Glasgow airport rail link that the Parliament has recently passed. What would be the cost? It would be only up to £200 million. That is very good value. It would be cheap when compared with other rail links. I said up to £200 million, but it is actually £120 million to £200 million, so there is leeway. There is cross-party support from politicians and there is support from Strathclyde partnership for transport and the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce. The Evening Times is campaigning to ensure that crossrail becomes a reality. All that we really need is support from Transport Scotland—I have spoken to the minister about that—and from ministers. The draft endorsement will be with ministers in July and will go for finalisation in September with costings. I will urge whoever is the transport minister in the next session of the Parliament to back the crossrail project. It is not the Glasgow crossrail but the Scotland crossrail, and we desperately need it in communities throughout Scotland.

Can the member clarify for the chamber which version of the motion she will discuss?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether its capital investment group agreed at its meeting on 6 March 2007 with the recommendation of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde's expert body that public-private partnership/private finance initiative should not be the preferred procurement route for the modernisation of maternity services at Glasgow's Southern general hospital. (S2O-12341)

I thank the minister for his support in opposing the use of PPP in this case. Lack of ability to profiteer was one reason for rejecting PPP as the procurement route. Will the minister ensure that private companies do not continue to make huge profits from PPP projects? The initial cost of the Edinburgh royal infirmary was £180 million, but the final cost will be £900 million. Will the minister commit the Executive to rejecting the use of PPP in Glasgow's new children's hospital?

To ask the First Minister, further to his reported comments on hospital car parking charges at a recent "Ask Jack" event, what intervention the Scottish Executive plans to make to address the concerns of hospital staff and users. (S2F-2779)

I thank the First Minister for his reply, but I had rather hoped that he might take the issue to the Labour group and come back with a more positive recommendation. Does the First Minister agree that many workers, because of the nature of their job, cannot access public transport and have no option other than to use the car? Does he further agree that deducting money from wages by charging up to £12 a day is nothing more than a tax on health service workers and is simply not acceptable? The First Minister mentioned recommendations and reviews. When will he publish the Executive's review? Will it be published before or after the election?

Cathie Craigie says that the evidence shows widespread support for the bill. Will she clarify why, under amendment 2, more evidence taking will be necessary, which I assume is the position that we will all vote for at decision time at 5 o'clock?

The minister said that the debate is about loan sharks—illegal moneylenders who do not have a licence to lend money. However, does he believe that it is okay for so-called legal moneylenders—credit companies and banks—to charge extortionate interest rates for credit, mortgages and so on? Surely, by his own admission, those moneylenders must also be considered. Many forms of loan shark have been mentioned. In that context, I want to talk about my personal, first-hand experience from when I worked in various areas in Glasgow and Paisley. I want members to know how moneylenders operate. When I worked in the east end of Glasgow, there was a shop—which I will not name—that kept family allowance books in a drawer. Therefore, families or mothers had to use that shop. The prices were extortionate, but it was the only shop that they could use. That was one form of moneylending. Obviously, there were terrible consequences for the families that were involved and for the community at large. In Paisley, long queues of moneylenders would wait outside post offices to take money or benefits from people collecting their money or benefits. The police were eventually called. Those are two examples from my first-hand experience of illegal moneylenders or loan sharks, but such things still happen today. Money is taken from people not only on street corners, but in front of shops and post offices, and families are left destitute. They have no money left for clothes, food or anything else. I welcome the figures that  the minister gave in reply to the question that Stewart Stevenson asked, but such things still happen, and it is a terrible indictment of today's society that we must put up with such moneylending. Credit unions, citizens advice bureaux, Money Advice Scotland and other organisations have been mentioned. I agree that those organisations do an invaluable job and I welcome the loan-shark hunters—I think that that is what they are called—because we need to protect people from illegal moneylending, which can have terrible consequences for them. I turn to the Scottish National Party's amendment. Kenny McAskill was right about the effects of the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007. People's houses can be taken off them as a result of debts of as little as £3,000. Sometimes the debt will not even be of their own making. I will give an example. Hundreds of people are being taken to court for debts of between £3,000 and £7,000 relating to bills for repairs to their houses. I am sure that the minister knows what I am going to say next. Those people did not ask for the repairs to be done, they did not want them to be done and they could not afford them. However, Glasgow Housing Association, which the Labour Government set up, is taking them to court. The GHA is a predatory company. It insists that people pay for things within a year and says that, as it is a charitable institution, it cannot afford to extend payment periods. Even Communities Scotland has said that that is not the case. Will the minister, in summing up or in an intervention, confirm to people who are suffering under the GHA that that is not the case? The GHA is taking people to court to pay back money within a year, which may lead to bankruptcies. People could lose their homes under legislation that the Labour Government passed. The minister cited Lloyds Bank as an example of a good creditor. However, the funny thing is that that is the very bank that the GHA advises people to go to for the £5,000, £6,000 or £7,000 loan that they need to pay back GHA because it has refused to extend payment periods. I am not one for conspiracy theories, but I certainly want the minister to clarify that point. We must deal not only with illegal but with legal moneylenders. By that, I mean not just banks and credit companies but what I would call the Executive's own illegal moneylenders, such as Glasgow Housing Association, which is putting people into debt.

Members can intervene, if they wish.

Owner-occupiers are quite happy to pay for repairs to their homes, but they simply cannot afford to pay £7,000 within a year. I want the minister to clarify that point. The member talks about repairs, but I know of one case in Cardonald in Glasgow in which apex roofs were going to be put on houses. When a survey was carried out, it became clear that if those so-called repairs were carried out, the roofs would fall in. That is the kind of workmanship that I am talking about. The whole project has been disbanded, and those flat-roofed houses will remain flat-roofed. The member should get her facts right. The Labour Government needs to do something about this problem. Mr McNulty might well shake his head, but he should go along to some of the meetings that I have attended with 250 people who desperately want to pay but who cannot do so within a year. They are being made bankrupt because of the Government's policy and ideology, and I want the minister to clarify the whole issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the statement by Glasgow's new children's hospital clinical advisory group that "procurement of the adult and children's hospital as a joint PFI project was seen to be the most appropriate way forward". (S2O-12000)

The minister will be aware that, throughout the consultation period, the people of Glasgow were continually assured that the hospital would not be financed privately. The minister's predecessor, Mr Chisholm, pledged £100 million to that end. Now we are being told that, without more money, the new hospital will have 25 per cent less land capacity, which will lead to a reduction in services. Does the minister support private finance for the project or have the people of Glasgow been seriously misled—yes or no?

As others have rightly pointed out, the need to legislate was brought about by the dilemma facing sufferers of mesothelioma and their families. The unstinting work of Clydeside Action on Asbestos and others to bring justice to victims must be applauded and commended, as everyone else has said. I am also glad that interested parties' concerns about the bill have been resolved, which has cleared the way for unanimous support for the bill at stage 1. I further welcome the commitment that was made by the Executive to amend the bill at stage 2 so that it will apply the provisions retrospectively and thus end the uncertainty that sufferers experience. I hope that the Executive's consultation of the Court of Session, the insurance industry and solicitors on the possibility of victims proceeding with one court action rather than two, as Mike Pringle mentioned, will be fruitful. Pursuit of a single action would be in the best interests of all parties and would lead to a more expedient and less harrowing process. The Public Petitions Committee, of which I am a member, has dealt for several years with petitions on the issue from concerned groups. The evidence that we heard about victims' suffering was truly harrowing, as other members mentioned. I commend those groups on their contributions to the Public Petitions Committee as well as to the Justice 1 Committee. They contributed to the debate and highlighted the need for the bill. There is no doubt that the bill is welcomed by all members from all parties, for which we are grateful. Although the provisions in the bill are welcomed by everyone, the bill will not put an end to the suffering. We must be ready to face other challenges, about which the Public Petitions Committee has received petitions. One of the great concerns that has been expressed by petitioners is about the need to provide adequate medication for people who suffer from this terrible disease. That is especially necessary when we consider the terrible death that is suffered by the victims. At present, Alimta is the only drug that is available to treat the condition. It has been available in Scotland since July 2005, based on the advice of the Scottish Medicines Consortium. However, the drug is not freely available in England, where the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence—the United Kingdom-wide authority that has responsibility for licensing the drug—rejected its provision through the NHS. The drug is not part of the bill, so it is important that we consider it in that context. An appeal to NICE is currently in progress, but if that appeal fails—NICE has never overturned a ruling—there is, because  NICE guidance supersedes that of the SMC, a real danger that mesothelioma sufferers in Scotland will be denied the only treatment that is available to them. We all accept that we should consider that situation. That concern was put to me by the same people who lobbied for the bill, not just through the Public Petitions Committee, but at meetings and through letters. Those people ask that we consider availability of Alimta as we consider the bill. Although I recognise that the problem does not relate directly to the bill, I urge the Executive to take this opportunity to allay sufferers' fear that the SMC's decision will not be upheld in the event that NICE rejects the provision of Alimta for the treatment of mesothelioma. Many sufferers have voiced concern that enactment of the bill will make it easier to withdraw free provision of the drug—which has been free since 2005—because sufferers will be considered to be able to pay for the treatment out of their own pockets, which would avoid the need for free provision on prescription. Although I support the bill whole-heartedly, as all members do, I would like the Executive to reassure us that the provision of Alimta will remain free in Scotland, regardless of the NICE decision.

I was shocked by the minister's speech. Now that he has come back to his seat, I will tell him why. I thought that part of his speech was sheer scaremongering. To use words such as "dangerous" is quite inflammatory. I was  disappointed in the choice of words that he used when making his points.

I take on board what the minister says but patients' best interests are what lies at the heart of this bill, which is why I think that the minister's speech was inflammatory. The minister talked about postcode prescribing and cancer strategies not being delivered. However, as Roseanna Cunningham and Jean Turner said, that is the situation at the moment. The Public Petitions Committee receives petitions almost every month on the issue of postcode prescribing. It exists under the present system, so the minister cannot use that as an excuse. Like many others who have spoken, I agree with the principles of the bill, which will be an immensely positive step towards restoring people's faith in our health service. Everyone in the chamber knows that the state of the health service is one of the voters' main concerns. For too long, people have felt ignored in relation to decisions that will directly affect them. If one of the principal aims of Bill Butler's bill is to redress that situation, we should all support it, particularly at stage 1. I remember campaigning on the Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill hospital—Gordon Jackson will probably remember that as well. I see that the minister is leaving us; he does not need to come back to hear the rest of my speech. I remember being assured by the health board and the minister that the replacement facilities would be as good as, or even better than, those provided at the Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill hospital.

It would result in better decisions because board members would be directly elected and the public would have a say. Health boards would not be made up of placemen. That is the guiding light of the proposal.  I return to the situation with maternity services in Glasgow, although the same thing has happened throughout the country. We were assured that the service would be as good as or better than the one that we had before, but the number of beds is already being cut because of financial constraints. Staff and the public have been alerted to that and they are concerned. During the health board's consultation, however, we were never told that that could happen. Where does that leave us? It is easy to see why change is needed. One of the Executive's objections to the bill is that changes have been put in place to make the health service more transparent and responsive to what people want and that time is needed for those changes to bed down. That is ironic, given that the Executive objects to the bill.

I understand from what Bill Butler has said that we will examine the cross-border issue at stage 2. The situation is not as simple as Mr Purvis suggests. We have to examine the detail. Another example of the problems with consultation—again, such problems have happened not only in Glasgow but throughout the country—is the centralisation of accident and emergency services. Jean Turner mentioned the ambulatory care and diagnostic units that are sprouting up all over the town. The downgrading of the great Victoria infirmary and Stobhill hospital to ambulatory care and diagnostic units will leave Glasgow with only two full accident and emergency departments. Regardless of what Gordon Jackson said, we have to look at that carefully. There will be trouble ahead if we have only two full A and E departments in the Glasgow area. Many people took part—in good faith—in the consultation. The consultation process went on for a number of months and cost nearly £1 million, but all that happened was that the health board's original proposal went through. As Nanette Milne said, the health board saw it as a fait accompli. We can understand why people want directly elected health boards. In his evidence to the Health Committee, the minister said:  "The bill is an attempt to address a concern, which I think that we share, through a mechanism that I am not sure will solve the problem." —[ Official Report , Health Committee , 7 November 2006; c 3189.] That sounds a bit of a conundrum to me. I am sure that members agree that to have doubt about whether something will work is, in itself, no reason not to try to make it work. I urge the Executive and the other parties to rethink their stance, to offer more constructive input and to support the bill. We have to consider all the details of the bill if we are a truly democratic Parliament. We should support it at stage 1 and continue to examine it. Let us listen to the concerns, consider the evidence and make up our minds at stage 2. I ask members not to stop the bill at stage 1. It is a worthwhile bill. I certainly support it and I look forward to hearing further evidence on it. The people out there—the public—elected us to look after their interests, but we will not do that if we fail to support the bill at stage 1.

To ask the Scottish Executive which ministers plan in their official capacities to attend constituency events organised by MSPs from their own parties in the period up to dissolution and what guidelines apply to such visits in a pre-election period. (S2O-11745)

I thank the minister for his interesting answer. Recently, I asked the Minister for Justice to attend a public meeting in Milton. I am still waiting for a reply to my request. She was able to attend a public meeting in Kelvin; prior to that, she attended a Labour Party election campaign meeting in Kelvin. Will Mr Lyon allay the fears of Scottish people who do not want ministers to be used as electioneering tools? Will the relevant minister accept an invitation from a member of the Scottish National Party to come to a public meeting to allay the concerns and fears of the many people in Glasgow who are affected by the operations of Glasgow Housing Association? I assure him that there will be a full house at that meeting.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate. I know of his long-term commitment to the Dennistoun and Springburn area. Everyone is aware of the misery that is sometimes caused in communities. The two areas in Glasgow where dispersal orders have been used—Knightswood and Dennistoun—are looked upon by most people as good, hard-working areas that have been blighted by antisocial behaviour. It is important to get across the message that we have to break up the gangs that drink, fight and, in some instances, carry knives. We must remember that, as Paul Martin said, it is not just young people who are involved in antisocial behaviour. It is all age groups. For example, my sister lives in Dennistoun, and I was in Alexandra park a number of weeks ago when I took her young children to the play area. It is a good park, but at the side of the play area there were broken bottles. Four 50 to 60-year-old men were standing there throwing bottles from which they had been drinking. I call that antisocial behaviour, and perhaps dispersal should be considered in that area, too. From my point of view—it is not political—dispersal orders simply move the problem somewhere else for a short time. They are not a permanent solution. What is needed is proper, council-run facilities with a range of activities. We must ask the young folks and others what they want and provide a range of facilities that are open after school, in the evenings and at weekends. I have hit my head against a brick wall on numerous occasions when asking why schools with gyms, swimming pools and other excellent facilities do not open for the benefit of the communities that they serve. I hope that the minister will respond to that question. I have received answers from local councils—

I thank Paul Martin for providing that information. However, people come to me from the Knightswood area and say that there are no after- school facilities for their kids, and that their kids go to other areas in Knightswood when dispersal orders are being used. I am pleased that people are not being dispersed to somewhere else from Dennistoun, but perhaps I will speak to the police about the matter because dispersing people to somewhere else is simply a short-term solution rather than a permanent solution. However, I take on board what Paul Martin said. Why cannot schools open? Perhaps other schools could follow the lead of Whitehill secondary school and open at certain times. Paul Martin talked about subsidising the police, but even the Scottish Police Federation has said that that is not the way to go. People in Govanhill pay rent to Glasgow Housing Association and extra moneys for two police officers at weekends. The problem is a national problem rather than a problem for one area. We should not ask people who pay the same taxes that everyone else pays to pay extra money for extra police. The view of people in Govanhill and everybody else I speak to is that we need a properly funded police force and bobbies on the beat. I live in a city centre and I assure members that there is a lot of antisocial behaviour there. I doubt that a dispersal order would work in that city centre. Seeing extra police on the beat works. People do not commit crimes when police walk around on the beat. As Paul Martin said, locals have welcomed the dispersal order, but locals also always say, as websites and newspaper cuttings do, that police on the beat are needed and that trouble is stopped when police are seen on the beat. Locals mention dispersal orders, but they constantly talk about having more police on the beat, which is the answer. There should be more local police whom people look up to, respect and are not afraid of. That is the way forward. Young people should see the arrival of the police not as a reaction, but as something that is normal. Having a couple of police officers walking around on the beat is the way to tackle antisocial behaviour. I worry that we talk too much about dispersal orders and dispersing antisocial people from areas and about such orders being imposed throughout Scotland. People will be made to pay twice, which is not right. Extra moneys should be made available, but I ask the minister to provide extra moneys throughout Scotland for extra police on the beat.

I welcome the fact that the issue of prostitution is being addressed. I also echo other members' observations on the purpose of the bill. The Executive's policy memorandum states that the purpose of the bill is "to protect our communities from antisocial activity associated with prostitution in public places." Prostitution is violence against women. It is harmful to women, it is harmful to children and it is harmful to communities. Although I appreciate that this is a large and complex issue, I am disappointed by the narrow scope of the proposed legislation. I hope that it will be the first step in the right direction towards achieving the objectives that were identified by the expert group on prostitution. I remind members that the expert group had four objectives and that the bill's aim is just one of them. I hope that further legislation will be introduced to achieve the other three objectives, which have not yet been addressed. I welcome the Executive's commitment to amend the bill in response to the concerns that  have been expressed not just by the Local Government and Transport Committee, but by the various agencies that have given evidence to the committee. I thank the committee for its scrutiny of the bill, and I thank the many people who contributed evidence towards that. I was a member of the Local Government Committee when Margo MacDonald's bill was introduced, and I agreed with some—but not all—of what she and others had to say. I am therefore pleased that the issue has returned to the committee and I look forward to debating the Executive's bill at stage 2. I commend the Executive for agreeing to make robust and serious amendments to the bill, and I welcome the commitment to use the bill to target the other areas that I have mentioned—the other three objectives that were identified by the expert group. One of the good features of the proposed legislation is the criminalisation of the buyer. That is a sensible provision, and I welcome that aspect of the bill. I turn to the area in Glasgow that other members have mentioned—I am sure that more members will mention it. Of the women whom we know to be involved in street prostitution in Glasgow, 95 per cent are drug users and have other very serious issues that need to be addressed. Unlike the buyers, those people do not have a choice; in many cases, prostitution is the only way they can survive. It is a sad state of affairs that exposes one of the failings of the bill, in that it does not back up action to help and support those very vulnerable women. The Executive should have focused on the need to promote ways out of the terrible trap, rather than introducing legislation that could, in some cases, make things more dangerous for the women involved. Glasgow saw the effects of that approach when prostitution was forced out of the city centre and Glasgow Green, when residential areas were sprouting up around the harbour and waterfront in a way that is similar to what happened in the Leith area. At the time, many prostitutes simply moved to the Calton area, and we have heard evidence about how communities had to deal with that. The witnesses from that area who spoke to the committee demonstrated the terrible effect that prostitution had on their community, and it is terrible that people have to put up with it. I am reminded of one of the people from the Leith area who gave evidence about that area being designated as a tolerance zone. A woman who was walking to her house one night was knocked down by a car because she would not turn round to speak to the man in the car. Her leg was broken and he just drove away. Because the area was marked as a tolerance zone, he assumed that anyone—young women as well as older people—walking there would be fair game. That cannot be tolerated.  When we consider the legislation, we have to be careful not to repeat some of the mistakes that have been made in Edinburgh and thereby drive prostitution further underground. Prostitution is not as it was shown in the movie "Pretty Woman". That should be made very clear to some in the media who discuss the issues around prostitution. I do not believe that Margo MacDonald's tolerance or management zones—call them what we will—are the answer. We need to enable women to escape from a never-ending cycle of violence, and tolerance or management zones are not the answer.

I was just going to come on to that. I do not agree with Margo MacDonald at all, although I welcome the establishment of the 218 centre in Glasgow and the various other agencies that women who are reduced to prostitution through no fault of their own and who are suffering violence can be told about, without the need for a management or tolerance zone. I am speaking about Glasgow because that is the area I know about. The Executive should make a real commitment to the re-education of men and women so that they accept that prostitution is not acceptable: it is violence against women, regardless of what the media say. I would like the other objectives proposed by the expert group to be looked into as soon as possible. The bill is a step in the right direction, but we have to enable the women to get help for their drug addiction, and to educate women and men that prostitution is wrong and is violence against women, no matter what is said about it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what knowledge it has of complaints that Glasgow Housing Association's acquisition of commercial properties in 2003 was in breach of competition law. (S2O-11655)

The minister is aware of the petition, but is he also aware of correspondence from the European Commission to United Kingdom authorities regarding the transfer, to which as yet it has received no reply? Has the minister or the Scottish Executive entered into correspondence on the matter and, if so, what does that entail?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is not the member supposed to address the motion?

I, too, offer my condolences and deep sympathies to Cathy Peattie. I welcome the people in the public gallery who helped the committee with the report and gave evidence to the committee. I thank everyone who was involved in the production of the report, particularly the clerks, who worked extremely hard, and the members of the committee. I joined the committee a year and a half ago, which was about six months after it started its inquiry. However, I am able to say that the hard work that was done by members from all parties does credit to the Parliament's committee system. I pay tribute to the people from various  organisations who we heard from as the committee travelled round the country; they told us a lot about the experiences of disabled people. Sometimes we take it for granted that we can access leisure facilities, education, work and transport, but some of the people whom we met found it difficult to do so. As the title of the report suggests, many of the difficulties that are faced by disabled people relate to access to leisure facilities, education and work. We looked at the issue in considerable detail. It was heartening to see that some of the problems are being recognised and that action is being taken on them in various areas. However, many people expressed their great disappointment about the fact that, although the solutions had been recognised, too little had been done to rectify the situation. That feeling echoes the research that the Executive undertook this year, which set out that "despite solutions being known, a clear problem still remains" and that many recommendations that have been made "continue not to be implemented." I hope that the report acts as a catalyst to bring together all the previous and current research that we looked at, and that it will make a difference. As I said, one of the main issues was access to services. That is particularly true in the case of transport, on which I will concentrate in my speech. As we heard, each committee member took on an area; mine was transport. As our report identifies, transport is one of the most important cross-cutting issues; it has great influence on many of the other areas that the report addresses. If people are unable, or feel that they are unable, to get from A to B, it does not matter if B is accessible to them if they cannot get back to A. That situation was raised many times in our evidence taking. People asked the question: what is the point of making places accessible if disabled people experience barriers to accessing them? In such situations, much of the work that has been done on accessibility is wasted. We took evidence from the providers of leisure facilities who are increasingly aware of the need to cater for disabled people. Obviously, people want to belong to society and to participate in leisure activities. In our evidence taking, it became clear that some people found it very difficult to access leisure facilities. They told us that that had a big effect on their lives. We have to look at the accessibility not only of leisure facilities—other committee members will address that—but of transport to and from those facilities.  The report highlights that point and identifies the fact that, in this and other areas, a joined-up approach is needed. As we said, it is not good enough for us to concentrate on one thing or to change one thing; we need to look at the big picture. The two previous speakers mentioned that, too. A key recommendation on transport is that the Scottish Executive should develop a Scotland-wide strategy for achieving equality of mobility for disabled people. The committee believes that the work that is being done on the national transport strategy offers an ideal opportunity in that regard. I am heartened by what the minister said. The report identifies a lack of regular, reliable, fully accessible public transport and the need for staff to be trained in identifying the needs of disabled passengers. In addition, we need to address the misuse of disabled parking bays. If able-bodied people abuse that provision, it is not helpful to disabled people. Having a reliable public transport system is fundamental if disabled people are to feel confident that they can go out and about. If someone has been immobile for some time but finally gets out and about only to find that public transport does not work for them, the progress that they have made will suffer a setback. The committee was given a simple example of that, which concerned a transport provider using a mix of accessible and inaccessible buses on a bus route. Disabled people could go somewhere on the route using an accessible bus, only to find that they could not make the return journey because another bus on the route was not accessible. That example demonstrates how much need there is for joined-up thinking. Able-bodied people naturally assume that, if we can get on to a bus to go somewhere, we can also get home again. Unfortunately, disabled people have to plan their journeys carefully. That should not be the case nowadays; people should be able to access transport as and when they wish to do so. As we heard, the committee recommended that the Executive should ensure that transport providers offer effective pre-journey information in which the accessibility levels of their services are made clear. Providers should ensure that they produce their information in all formats. In that regard, the committee heard a particularly crude example of how transport providers should not communicate with disabled people. The person in question, who was carrying a white cane, asked whether they were on the right bus only to be told by the driver that they should read the timetable. That illustrates the need for staff to have disability training. The evidence suggests that such things happen because staff are not made sufficiently aware of the issues. The committee recommends  that all staff should attend disability equality training. The minister mentioned that training. The committee welcomes the fact that the Scottish Executive has given a commitment to improve train stations and to make them accessible to disabled passengers. However, I would like the Executive to set targets to make all our railways accessible within a given timescale. The Executive could look at that in greater detail. One major issue to emerge from the inquiry is demand-responsive transport. Although DRT is not so much of an issue in our big cities, many people to whom we spoke in the rural areas believed that they could get about if only they were given access to a door-to-door bus or taxi service. Witnesses pointed out that the reduced availability of the transport that has traditionally been made available to take people to hospital appointments and so forth makes DRT increasingly important. The Presiding Officer is indicating that I must wind up. In conclusion, I am heartened by the fact that many of the problems and potential solutions have been identified, although I am also slightly wary as a result of that—it makes the job easier in one way, but more difficult in another. We must look closely at the recommendations in the report and ensure that they are implemented. That must not be done in a piecemeal fashion. We must remember that the problems exist and that they do not exist in isolation. We must take a joined-up approach. There is a golden opportunity to ensure that everyone—without discrimination—can become involved in and participate in society. I sincerely hope that the Executive will take on board the recommendations that the committee has made.

In a debate on this issue in 2004, the then Minister for Transport stated that local authorities had the necessary powers to prevent the misuse of disabled persons' parking bays. Will the minister clarify for the many people who are angered by that misuse whether that is still the case?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans are in place to reverse the decline in playing fields in local authority areas and how much money is earmarked for the provision of sports facilities and coaching in local communities. (S2O-11246)

Is the minister aware that, since 2000, the number of applications to build on playing fields has increased by 100 per cent? Is he aware that Dawsholm park in Glasgow, a public facility, is to be sold to a private school by Glasgow City Council, which had already turned down an offer by Broomhill sports club—a community sports organisation? I therefore ask the minister whether he will go further in his proposals to protect public spaces throughout Scotland.

I will try to be quick so that as many members as possible can speak. I thank Jackie Baillie for securing the debate. It is incumbent on us all to do our utmost to end child poverty. It does not matter whether it is called relative, absolute or persistent poverty—it is poverty. It is unacceptable in the 21 st century that one in four children in Scotland is living in such conditions and is disadvantaged through poverty. We cannot imagine just how difficult it is for them. Other members will have met, as I have, constituents who have no form of heating in their homes, who cannot clothe their children and who are dependent on benefits or are on low wages. Tackling child poverty is a Westminster issue, but we have to force Westminster into doing something. I do not want to be political because we are talking about poverty, but for me the one  way to get people in Scotland out of poverty is to have an independent Scotland. I will perhaps touch on that later. Jackie Baillie's motion says that 100,000 children have been lifted out of poverty by certain policies—I acknowledge that. Equally, however, motion S2M-5198 that was lodged by Karen Whitefield mentions that 100,000 Scottish children now live in fuel poverty simply because of the rise in energy prices. Therein lies our dilemma. We can propose policies—Jackie Baillie mentioned various policies that the Executive could adopt and said that we should have a joint working party with Westminster—but we have a dilemma. Low pay, child benefit and other benefits, energy prices, debt and the so on are all the responsibility of Westminster. We do not have control over them. I fully support Save the Children's campaign, Barnardo's and all the other organisations. I particularly support Save the Children's campaign for seasonal grants and I wish it every success. I condemn Scottish Power's obscene profits, which are up by 77 per cent to £483 million. We have the added concern of the Spanish takeover—we do not know what will happen. Barnardo's says in its briefing that "Both Westminster and Holyrood policies contribute to poverty reduction. It is reserved matters—Treasury and Social Security—that have greatest potential to impact on poverty." Jackie Baillie said that Gordon Brown, the chancellor, is considering winter fuel payments for the poorest families, and other matters that are reserved to Westminster. That is good—something may come out of that. However, the people whom I speak to want decent jobs, access to decent houses and access to decent education. They do not want handouts, but we constantly tell people that they must take handouts. When people take a low-paid job, their low pay is backed by the child tax credit. If winter fuel payments are offered, they will have to apply for them. All those payments are handouts. In an independent Scotland, people would not need to rely on that. Jackie Baillie mentioned power companies' profits. Gordon Brown and successive Westminster Governments have had the power that she described for years but have done nothing with it. I support Jackie Baillie in asking Gordon Brown to do something, but the basic problem lies in our own country in that we do not, unfortunately, have the necessary powers. It is sad to say that, but until we have control over our own moneys and until we have our own benefits system, we will have poor people and children living in poverty. I do not want that to continue, which is why I believe that independence is the best way forward. That is not electioneering, but a belief, and I hope that families listen to it.  I hope that we as a Parliament lobby Westminster and the next Prime Minister—who might not be Gordon Brown; he might be John Reid or anybody, for all we know. We should lobby Westminster if we are not independent, because we need that success and that power over our own affairs so that our people can live decent and independent lives.

I thank Marlyn Glen for her explanation. I was concerned that there would not be disabled spaces in the NCP car park, but she has clarified the situation.

I will try to be as quick as possible. Wendy Alexander's politicking this afternoon does not become her: I fought for the Glasgow airport rail link when I lived in Paisley and continued to fight for it when I moved permanently to Glasgow. The proposal has been around for years and years and, thanks to the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, it has achieved the support of all parties, not just of one. I thank  the committee for its hard work. As Margaret Jamieson said, from its inception, the bill has taken only 10 months to reach the final stage—a feat on which the committee should certainly be congratulated. The case for GARL has been well made for many years, and I thank not only the bodies that have lobbied me and other members on the matter, but the Glasgow Evening Times for its unstinting campaign to make the link a reality. I am sure that, either now or once construction of the line begins, the newspaper will launch a campaign for a Glasgow crossrail, which is, as Brian Adam said, the missing link. Once that line is in place, the west of Scotland rail network will be complete. I fear that, without the crossrail, the Glasgow airport rail link will not be used to its full potential. Previous speakers highlighted GARL's economic benefits not just to Glasgow and Paisley but to Ayrshire and beyond. We must not forget that its impact will extend to Ayrshire, and it would be absolutely—

I thank Margaret Jamieson for her intervention. I know that she comes from Ayrshire, but I have to say that I did not mention a specific area. In any case, I do not think that it matters whether the corridors are in the north, south, east or west of the county; the whole of Ayrshire will still benefit from this excellent proposal. The benefits of the link are overwhelming, but one of its greatest benefits is that it will be a major feature in Glasgow's bid for the 2014 Commonwealth games. I believe that, with such an asset, we will win the bid. Brian Adam said that I would mention disabled access. Under the current proposals, three disabled parking spaces will have to be removed to extend what is called platform 11a.

Margaret Jamieson says that the spaces "are being relocated". As far as disabled people are concerned, they are being removed, because the spaces are in an area that they have always used. Even able-bodied people find platform 11a to be quite a distance from the main concourse. I know that the committee has no say on the matter and that it will be a planning decision for Glasgow City Council. Although Margaret Jamieson might well be right to say that the spaces "are being relocated", disabled people feel that they are simply being removed. They will  certainly find it very difficult to get to platform 11a. Although I praise the bill—as I said, I have fought for it for many years—we have to be realistic and get the link right for everyone in our society.

I rise to speak to amendment 130 and to move amendment 130. In fact, I shall move all my amendments.

I shall speak to amendments 130, 131 and 132. I specifically lodged three separate amendments to enable each to be taken on its own merits, and I remind members that only persons and communities that had originally made representations against consent for planning permission would be able to make an appeal. Amendment 130 is on the environmental impact assessment—a simple condition in planning but one that, if ignored, can have devastating effects on a community. Amendment 131 is on land that the authority owns or has interest in. That is perceived by communities to be one of the most contentious issues, because they can see a complete conflict of interests with local authorities. Although local authorities may engage with communities, they have the right to go against their wishes, which can be a contentious issue with communities and the public at large. Amendment 132 is on strategic and local development plans, which are another highly contentious issue; I am sure that members' postbags must be full of issues raised by the communities that they represent throughout Scotland. Communities are asked to take part, sometimes for many years, in local development plans, only to discover at the end of the consultation process—we have seen this with hospital consultations, too—that a development is pushed upon them against their wishes. That cannot be right. I remind members that my amendments are for a limited third-party right of appeal. I remind the Executive that 86 per cent of the respondents to its consultation supported some form of third-party right of appeal. I welcome early consultation—I am sure that communities, too, will welcome it—and the scrutiny of planning permission, which is included in the bill, but communities still will not have the right of appeal if a bad decision is made. I will pick up on some of the issues that have been raised. It cannot be fair that communities do not have the right of appeal. Authorities can consult to death if they wish to do so, but there must be an end point, and communities do not have that end point. The third-party right of appeal is not anti-development, nor is it against economic  growth. The third-party right of appeal would enhance the planning process and ensure that communities were brought in, not just at the beginning of the process but at the very end. I ask members to consider all three of my amendments seriously, on their individual merits, when I move them. I urge members to support some form of appeal in order to give communities the support that they deserve and to ensure that they are heard and listened to. That is only fair and just.

I support amendment 22 because I believe that it will reinforce the need for sustainability in our communities, which was an issue that arose in our earlier discussion of HMOs. We need more affordable housing—after all, young people, in particular, simply cannot get on the property ladder—and more rented accommodation, and amendment 22 will help us to achieve that. Affirmative action must be taken on this matter. We cannot keep on talking about it, because people out there are suffering and need this accommodation. I certainly hope that the amendment will find support.

I concur with everything the Executive has set out in its motion. I am pleased that the debate is being conducted under the heading "Violence Against Women" and not under the heading of domestic violence. Regardless of who the violence is against, it is a crime. For far too long, because it was perpetrated by men against women, domestic violence has been looked on as a form of second-class violence. I have always had the notion—the absolutely correct notion—that violence of any kind is a crime and should be treated as such. We  must not look on violence against women as anything less than that. I admire the commitment that the Deputy Minister for Communities and the Minister for Communities give to the issue and to the sincerity of that commitment. I share Carolyn Leckie's view of the minister. She did not say that he is her favourite minister, but mentioned his sincerity. Johann Lamont is also sincere in her commitment; I know that for a fact. Both ministers are passionate about the subject. I applaud Carolyn Leckie and Cathie Craigie on their contributions; they were spot on. I have never understood why someone's past relationships or what they wear should be used to tarnish their reputation, particularly when the attacker is set free as a result. Rosemary Byrne referred to the tragic case of Lindsay Armstrong. Some weeks ago, I met Mrs Armstrong. Not all members may agree with the proposal, but consideration should be given to changing court procedures. The debate has been excellent and every speech merits a response. I will attempt to pick up on all of them, but members will forgive me if I do not manage that. We have debated the subject of violence against women since 1999, at which time the debate was billed domestic abuse. Since 2003, the Parliament has held an annual debate on the issue. I welcome that. I also welcome the many projects that aim to stop this terrible crime that have been launched and the money that the Executive has made available. As Christine Grahame said, violence against women has increased over the years. We have to ask why. Cathy Peattie and Nora Radcliffe, among others, touched on possible answers, including the fact that women are more aware of what is happening and where they can report the crime. Another possibility is the upsurge in lad mags, lap-dancing clubs and the accessibility of some forms of pornography. We need to look more deeply into why violence against women is not diminishing but increasing. The figures speak for themselves. Many members, including Shiona Baird and Rosemary Byrne, talked about funding. I agree with their comments. The SNP amendment mentions funding for refuge places. Some women are lucky enough to have relatives they can stay with, as Bill Aitken said when he talked about refuge places in Glasgow, but many women do not. There should be refuge places for such women and funding is crucial if we are to help them. I remind the minister that Ranald Lindsay, who is the convener of the Law Society of Scotland's access to justice committee, has talked about the emergence of legal aid deserts. As a result of a change in how civil legal aid is paid, many victims  are unable to access lawyers to take on their case. He said: "Our consciences are basically being exploited by the Executive on this. They know that it's difficult for us to turn away Mrs Jones who's been battered black and blue, saying that we're not being paid enough." The minister should consider the problem of people's inability to secure representation, which happens not just in Glasgow, but in Edinburgh, Stirling and elsewhere. Other members talked about the lack of long-term funding, which causes serious difficulties for people who are trying to do their best in organisations that cannot access funding that lasts longer than two years. I received a letter from the Glasgow presbytery, which is part of the interagency working group that is funded by the Executive and Glasgow City Council. The initiative provides a fantastic support network for women before, during and after court cases, but it has to submit a bid for funding every two years. Many other groups are in a similar situation and do not know whether they will be funded in two years' time. That is unsettling. I have written to the minister to ask him to consider how such groups can secure long-term funding. In his speech, he said that money is available, but it does not seem to filter down to the many agencies that need it. Perhaps he can consider how they might access funding. Cathy Peattie and Shiona Baird made valid points about the international situation. They referred to Afghanistan and other countries. It is imperative that we do not take an insular view of violence against women by talking only about domestic violence or violence that takes place in Scotland and Great Britain. The problem is international. Trafficking of women and abuse of children is taking place abroad, for example in Russia and its neighbouring states. We should consider how to alleviate the problem. If we cannot provide money, as Shiona Baird suggested, we can surely contribute by highlighting the problem. Operation pentameter tackled trafficking and was a great success. We need more such forward-looking action to prevent women from being trafficked to this country, as well as action to protect women from violence in their home countries. Stewart Stevenson and other members, including Shiona Baird, made important points about violence that takes place behind closed doors, which has a seriously detrimental effect on children. As Rosemary Byrne said, we do not know what is going on in the lives of children who come to school. I have no doubt that exposure to violence at a young age sends a message to kids that it is okay to be violent. There are education programmes, but we must improve education for  children so that we send a clear message that violence is not acceptable. If we emphasise that message to male schoolchildren, perhaps it will filter through. As everyone else has said, this has been a good debate. I hope that we will not have to debate violence against women next year, because that will mean that it has been eradicated. However, like others, I think that it will be a long time before that happens. As far as I know, this is the only Parliament that has raised these issues year after year since 2003 to keep them on the agenda and which funds projects such as Scottish Women's Aid to deal with the problem specifically. I hope that the funding goes from strength to strength and is made more long term. Every one of us here hopes to eradicate violence against women, which is a crime against humanity, not just against women. I look forward to the day when we do not have to debate it, because it has been eradicated. Thank you for the opportunity to speak in the debate, which has been excellent, because lots of good points have been raised.

We think that Duncan McNeil and those on the Labour benches protest too much. The proof is in the pudding: they should go and ask the tenants how they are suffering.

You have had your say, Duncan. I want to comment on the Executive's amendment, which in particular proposes that the Parliament "supports the principle of housing transfer to community ownership to improve the quality of existing housing where this has the support of the tenants". I cannot disagree with that. However, it later proposes that the Parliament "recognises that transfer is indeed now delivering substantial new investment for tenants". Although that may be in an Audit Scotland report, I can disagree with it. If the amendment had referred to "some tenants" rather than all of them, it would have been fine and dandy. Let us look at the reality in Glasgow with the GHA—not propaganda or scaremongering like Duncan McNeil, but the reality that people are living with. Let us take tenants first. Tenants have been put into groups. Some tenants are getting improvements, but others are getting none. Some tenants are on lists and do not know whether they will have a house next month or next year, and some tenants have been moved three or four times within the Glasgow area. When a house is demolished, they are moved again, and there have been wholesale clearances of communities. It is not a happy life to live if, coming into winter, older people do not know whether they will be in their house. That is the reality for some tenants in  the Glasgow area; it is not scaremongering or propaganda.

Sorry, Colin. I have got only a short time. Let us consider the owner-occupiers, who have been mentioned not so much by Labour but certainly by people on the ground. Because of the GHA—a huge monolithic supposed transfer vehicle, set by Labour—old-age pensioners are being forced to go into debt to pay for housing repairs that they say they do not need. People enter their homes and tear up their gardens. They then give them a bill for £5,000, £6,000 or £7,000 to be paid within a year and tell them to go to a bank to get a loan. What kind of fairness is that to anyone, let alone an old-age pensioner? That is the reality in Glasgow right now, and the Executive seriously wonders why other areas do not want to go down the road of transfer. It has made a mess of the situation in Glasgow through the GHA—a Labour policy—but it will not admit it. Let us look at second-stage transfer, which has been mentioned by many today. Second-stage transfer is supposed to be completed in 2007, but we are not even near it yet. I will ask the minister a couple of questions, and perhaps whoever sums up will be able to answer them. Has the minister sought independent, external advice on the financial shortfall for second-stage transfer, which the GHA's own financial report said was £500 million? If it has not, the second-stage transfer will not go ahead. The minister said that 2006 would be a pivotal year for second-stage transfer. Does she still believe that? We are nearing the end of 2006, and nothing has happened. When will we see second-stage transfer in Glasgow? The minister cannot hide from the issue—neither can anyone in the Labour Party. For years, they have been talking about second-stage transfer. The process started in 2003, and we are nearly in 2007. It has been an unholy mess in Glasgow and no one will trust the Executive simply because of the situation. It should be apologising to the tenants and owner-occupiers who put their trust in it for both stock transfer and second-stage transfer. They have been sold a pup and sold down the river. Ministers should hang their heads in shame.

I thank the independents group for choosing today's debate—Scotland international—although I am tempted to rename it Scotland international plc, which has a nice ring to it. I will not rename the debate, but perhaps we can think about that in the future. I also thank the minister for attending and responding to the debate. We seldom get a minister for such debates, and I am pleased that he is here. I take on board what he said about devolution, but how can Scotland be international if it is not independent? From my introduction, members will sense that I will talk about independence, which is closely linked with internationalism. Tomorrow morning, Parliament is going to be lobbied by people who are against dawn raids and the destitution faced by asylum seekers in  Scotland. If Scotland were truly international, would we be dragging people out of their homes at 6 o'clock in the morning, in some cases handcuffing them, taking away their medicines, and terrifying their children and locking them up in Dungavel detention centre? That would not happen in an independent international Scotland. We would have our own immigration and asylum legislation. The First Minister would not be sitting waiting for instructions from Westminster under his much-vaunted protocol, because we would have our own protocol. That is what I call true internationalism. Would an international Scotland have taken part in an illegal war in Iraq? I do not think so. Would we be following America blindly and be her wagging tail? I do not think so. An independent Scotland could have played a role in the international community and been a voice of reason and justice against the scaremongering and warmongering that was perpetrated by Bush and Blair. Would Scotland, as an international country, have allowed her airports to be used by rendition flights taking people to other countries to be tortured? Would we have allowed our airports to be used to refuel planes that were carrying to Lebanon the cluster bombs that killed a young child as recently as Monday? I think not. An international Scotland would not have put up with that at all. I returned from Lebanon on Sunday. The warmth expressed to us there was absolutely overwhelming. Wherever we went, no matter whether we were speaking to the media, meeting people in the streets or speaking to Government officials, we were referred to and introduced as a Scottish delegation. To pick up on Des McNulty's point about identity, he said that we are how we are seen in the world and we should not be antagonistic. It might not be the case in a British context, but in a Scottish context we are seen as being against antagonism. I am proud to have visited Lebanon as part of a Scottish delegation. We need to play to our Scottish identity. Scottish people are welcomed throughout the world regardless of what happens on the international stage. If we were truly independent, we could go forward on the international stage. I am sorry that Des McNulty is no longer present in the chamber, but we have nothing to be ashamed of in saying that we have an identity. We may all be internationalists, but until we put forward the case for an independent Scotland, we will not be able to be so in the international arena. I am reminded of the debate that I saw on Monday between—I am sorry to take people's names in vain when they are not in the chamber— Jim Mather and Wendy Alexander. In the debate, which took place in a television studio, we were told by the interviewer that an independent Scotland would have no say anywhere as it would be outwith any international community. Why is it assumed that if Scotland became independent, England would take over all the powers of Great Britain? Is it not the case that England also would need to renegotiate as an international body within the international community? We should bear that in mind. Scotland has always had a reputation as an international, outward-looking country. One reason why I have always harboured a desire for an independent Scotland is that we could do things internationally and help other people. We could promote our Scottish values, which are very much valued throughout the world, to other countries, without being part of a British state that simply props up America. Scotland could promote its values very well. As I mentioned, when I was in Lebanon I saw some horrific sights, but I also met some very interesting and fantastic people. The resilience of the Lebanese people was overwhelming. Within 24 hours, people returned to bombed-out houses, looked into the abyss that had once been their house and scrabbled in the rubble for school books and family pictures. They were resilient because they want to have their own country. They want the freedom to make their own decisions without the interference of America, Israel and, to a certain extent, Britain. I was honoured to visit Lebanon—I thank all those who organised our visit and took us to meet so many people—but I was ashamed when I saw the destruction that had taken place. It has now been proven that the plane that refuelled at Prestwick airport had cluster bombs, which are the bombs that killed that young boy on Monday afternoon. I am ashamed of that, but I was glad that I could say that an independent Scotland, as part of the international community, would have taken no part in that whatsoever. I saw the excessive destruction that Israel caused in Lebanon, the economy of which is in tatters. Israel blew up bridges so that the north of Lebanon could not get supplies through to any part of the south. Cluster bombs were dropped on the banana plantations and olive groves from which the Lebanese make their money. An oil refinery was blown up, so two thirds of the beaches are now covered in oil and are unusable—although they are being cleaned up with help, I might add, from the European Union. Women and children were killed. A particularly poignant incident occurred in Cana, which has suffered greatly over the past 20 years. A nine-month-old baby and all the members of its family  were massacred by Israeli bombs. However, we heard not one word from our so-called Prime Minister Blair about the need for an immediate ceasefire or about the excessive force that Israel used. I find it insulting to be part of a so-called British community whose Government has issued not one word of apology to the people of Lebanon and the children of Cana. Scotland has always had an international outlook, but until we achieve independence we cannot get it on the international stage.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it will give to Glasgow being granted metropolitan status. (S2O-10636)

Perhaps the minister should tell that to Glasgow City Council and its ruling Labour group. The council uses the term in "Metropolitan Glasgow—A Vision for a Region" and a document that was sent to the minister and to the Finance Committee refers to metropolitan status for the city of Glasgow. Is the minister aware that if metropolitan status or, as it is sometimes called, city status, is granted to Glasgow, council tax payers would save £150 per year on their houses? Is it not time that Glasgow was considered for metropolitan status? Will the minister take up the issue?

I thank Bill Butler for securing the debate—a debate that has been raging for about 30 years. One of the first debates in the Parliament was on the subject of crossrail. There has been a feasibility study, for which I did some research. Nothing has changed. We desperately need crossrail. We have been dragging our heels over it for 30 years. I thank Alistair Watson, SPT and all the other so-called amateurs who provided us with information on crossrail. Crossrail is desperately needed, not just by Glasgow but, as Bill Butler said so eloquently, by the whole conurbation. Crossrail has been years in the waiting and everyone knows the facts. In 2002, an excellent demand study was completed. It said that we should go ahead and have crossrail. Then a central Scotland transport corridor study was done in 2003 and a technical feasibility study in 2005. In fact, crossrail has been studied so much that it is a wonder that it has not been studied completely out of the Parliament. However, Bill Butler and others in the cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail have been pushing hard to ensure that the Executive realises that the project must be completed. The technical feasibility study must be adhered to. The crossrail project has the potential to accommodate services that could radiate not only throughout Glasgow and its conurbation but throughout Scotland. We must remember that not only Glasgow, but the whole of Scotland, would benefit from crossrail. The technical feasibility study, which I think is an Executive paper, says that crossrail can be delivered by 2011-12. If we are talking about the Commonwealth games coming to Glasgow in 2014, we must get crossrail on the drawing board as quickly as possible. In fact, we should really have it on the drawing board now to ensure that it is ready for the 2014 Commonwealth games. I mentioned that the crossrail project has been a long time in coming, even to reach the Parliament and go through various committees, but I must also mention that it fulfils all the criteria to help the city to expand and reach its full social and economic potential. Crossrail would connect the rail network and subway north and south of the Clyde. The low-level station at Queen Street would also become more useful with crossrail, which would also provide increased integration with the subway system at the West Street station. The crossrail system would support social inclusion projects, because areas such as the Gorbals and Oatlands would benefit from being  able to link into it. That must be good for the economy of Glasgow and the conurbation, but one of the most telling aspects of the scheme is that some of the areas that the system would connect have low car use. If the crossrail connection existed, the people there would be able to access the city centre and other areas. That would mean that they would not be so socially excluded and we would not need to use cars as much. In March, I wrote to Malcolm Reed, who was the director general of SPT and is now the chief executive of Transport Scotland, and pled with him to ensure that the crossrail scheme was included in the strategic planning review. I finished my letter by saying that "it would be organisational neglect" if the crossrail was not put on the cards as quickly as possible. I repeat that to him and the minister. If we do not go ahead with crossrail, not only Glasgow but other places will suffer. I beg the minister to consider it and give us a definite date when the project will be completed.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether its Environment and Rural Affairs Department was advised at the time about any risk of impact on the marine environment from serious and significant "nuclear safety events" at Faslane and Coulport, which are reported to have significantly increased in number, and, if so, what information it received. (S2O-10550)

I am not just surprised but disgusted by that answer. The minister is telling me that he is not aware of 45 serious incidents in 2004-05, which is double the number of serious incidents in previous years, or of the fact that 13 of those 45 incidents were directly related to Trident nuclear submarines. Will he ensure that he is advised of such events in future? Further, does he support a referendum on Trident nuclear missiles?

The minister and Maureen Macmillan referred to the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. Will the minister confirm that all schools can apply through the additional support for learning scheme for support for children whose first language is not English?

The minister mentioned guidance to NHS boards, but that is simply guidance. Does he agree that many hospitals have blatantly ignored it? Will the Executive introduce statutory powers to enforce its guidelines and thereby end the anomaly that exists and the disgraceful situation in which cancer patients have to pay parking and transport fees?

I was absolutely appalled by Karen Whitefield's rant. It merits no reply from me. The people of Lanarkshire can reply to her; I have no time to do so today. With all due respect, I say to the minister that his amendment is one of the most insipid that I have ever seen. It does nothing to alleviate the fears of the people of Lanarkshire about the downgrading and eventual closure of Monklands.

No; I was not allowed to intervene earlier. As Euan Robson said, this Government has continually avoided dealing with the impact of the downgrading of Monklands A and E unit on other areas, particularly on Glasgow royal infirmary. The decision to downgrade Monklands was taken without any studies being conducted into the effect that the decision would have on Glasgow. That is worrying, particularly as Glasgow is downgrading to a position in which it will have only two full A and E units. NHS Lanarkshire said that, during the consultation, it was able to tell patients what hospital they would go to in order to avoid overcrowding other hospitals. However, anyone who is in an emergency will go to the nearest hospital, which, for people in the area that we are discussing, is Glasgow royal infirmary. They will  not be guided by lectures from the health board. One of my worries about the proposal with regard to Monklands is the impact that that will have on Glasgow and other areas. We must have a real debate on this issue so that we may re-examine the decisions that have been taken and—I hope—overturn them. I said that Glasgow was downgrading to a position in which it will have only two full A and E units. It is also downgrading Victoria and Stobhill as well. That will take place in 2009. The redevelopment of Glasgow royal infirmary is not anticipated to take place until 2013. The decisions that are being made will put even more strain on our services in Glasgow and the wider area. The GRI is currently operating at 80 per cent of its capacity and Victoria and Stobhill will also have to cope with an influx of patients if Monklands closes down. Currently, Victoria deals with more cases than the GRI does, and Monklands deals with about the same amount of cases as the GRI. It does not take an expert to work out that a disaster is about to happen. I pointed that out to the minister in a question that I put to him on 4 May this year. Before Monklands hospital was opened, the GRI was running at 150 per cent of its capacity. We cannot possibly go back to that situation. The "Delivering for Health" document, which has been mentioned, is all very well, but Glasgow royal infirmary cannot cope with the extra influx. I am not scaremongering when I say that lives will be put at risk if something is not done about the situation. I find it incomprehensible that one of the most major impacts of the downgrading of Monklands—the effect that that will have on surrounding areas—was not mentioned until a week before the consultation closed. That makes me wonder whether there is a legal ground for challenging the health board's decision. The minister has to consider the situation seriously. The views of the Scottish health council and the bodies that I would call quangos that this Government has set up are being taken into account. However, surely the public should have the final say. They are the ones who will suffer as a result of a bad decision being made. The figures for the money that was spent by the health board on the hospitals—£56 a head at Monklands, £70 at Wishaw and £72 at Hairmyres—show that Monklands was the cheapest to run. Why, then, was a decision taken to close it down? I ask the minister to address, in his summing up, the issue of the admissibility, or inadmissibility, of the consultation, given the fact that the major issue of the impact that the downgrading of  Monklands would have on the rest of Scotland was not mentioned until a week before the end of the consultation.

Will the member give way?

I thank Pauline McNeill for securing this debate, which is on a subject that has caused anger in communities in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. I agree with what Pauline McNeill said about the successful campaign that was run by the Evening Times —I congratulate the paper on its campaign. We talk about accountability, and the Evening Times certainly brought some of the bus companies to account and ensured that the public, at last, got some reaction from them. I look forward to seeing what the Competition Commission has to say about the comments that the public made during that campaign. I know that the minister has been sent a letter by a constituent of mine regarding the service—or, rather, the non-service—that he received. The motion talks about poor services after hours; Rob Gibson talked about the problem in his area. Similarly, in some areas of Glasgow, there is no service whatever after 6 o'clock, which means that people are stranded and are unable to visit relatives. More important is that people can get a bus to Gartnavel hospital, but cannot get a bus back. Elderly people who go to the hospital to visit relatives have to get taxis back. That is ridiculous, given the subsidies that bus companies receive from the Executive. I would like that to be investigated by the Competition Commission. Last year, FirstBus made £100 million profit, but what has it done? It has withdrawn services from various areas, including low-level bus services, which are useful to infirm, disabled and elderly people and to people with prams. Limited as those services might have been, some people cannot access them any more. I wrote to the minister on the subject and have received a reply, which mentions that powers relating to such services are reserved to Westminster. That is an absolute nonsense, which we should also consider. On greater accountability, I will read out part of a letter that a constituent of mine—Mr McGrath—wrote to the minister. This elderly gentleman, who was using a concession ticket, had to wait a number of hours to get on a bus because the  operator told him and the other concession ticket holders who wanted to get on the bus that only people with valid tickets could get on the bus. He wrote: "I was never so badly treated, or made to feel so demeaned in front of people in all my life by this policy of Control by the bus companies. I assume the Scottish Executive would not accept this is what should happen to Old and Disabled people?" At the same time as bus companies are failing to provide an adequate service, they are also discriminating against people who are using their concessionary tickets, in respect of which we pay the bus companies a lot of money. There needs to be a review of exactly what is happening with the bus companies. The review can examine the London model or another form of franchise, but there needs to be a review that gets people round the table. It is clear that the bus companies are not behaving in accountably. Parliament must legislate to ensure that bus companies are accountable to the public and Parliament.

I thank Jamie McGrigor for his speech. I was at the meeting with Robina Qureshi to which he referred in the St Francis Centre in the Gorbals. There were some raised eyebrows when Jamie McGrigor was introduced as a Tory MSP, but his sentiments went down well. I am sure that he is most sincere, particularly on the issue of children. I thank other members for their speeches, too. I completely abhor any form of racial discrimination or violence. I am proud to be a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. As Jamie McGrigor and Linda Fabiani pointed out, more people are assaulted in this country just because of the colour of their skin and while they are walking about the streets than all the other people who are assaulted. If we wish to go down the road of mentioning particular nationalities, we should also mention Muslims, Jews, Scots and Sikhs. Donald Gorrie summed up the matter when he said that it is ignorance that makes people do that. It is not inherent in the Scottish race that we are violent people who attack others simply because they have a strange accent or a different colour of skin. Jamie McGrigor mentioned some measures that Highland Council has taken to welcome people into the area. We should celebrate some of the positive attitudes in Scotland and the measures that we have taken to welcome people here. I include refugees, whom I find to be a fantastic bunch of people who love  Scotland, particularly the Glaswegians. Glasgow is not known as the friendly city for nothing. I will speak about that more in a moment. I turn to the motion on race equality in the name of Malcolm Chisholm. I welcome much of what the minister said, including his comments on the development of a national strategy—I look forward to its publication. I also welcome the race equality, integration and community support fund. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned a sum of £2 million. I welcome the fact that the fund is targeted locally and designed to support cross-community integration, which is important for communities. Jamie McGrigor mentioned that we want to act not from the top down but from the bottom up, which is what targeted community initiatives help to do. Such initiatives help not only to bring people and communities together but to tackle racism and promote equality. That fund is to be applauded. The Scottish refugee integration fund is also most welcome. It has been strengthening support for refugees, asylum seekers and communities since, I believe, 2003—I am sure that someone will correct me if that is not right. The fund supports more and more projects—21 projects now benefit from it, which is to be admired. I give the minister credit for the expansion of that fund, but we need to examine the funding and expand it even more. Linda Fabiani mentioned data collection, with which some people are not happy. I would like improved collection of data on racial inequalities in the labour market. The minister said that a group was to be set up on the labour market. I want to know whether it will consider data collection issues, by which I mean not just collecting data in Scotland, but saying exactly what the data mean and monitoring and totalling them. That is something that is lacking. I have asked questions on that issue previously. We need data to know exactly what is happening in our society, particularly in relation to inequalities and racial issues in the labour market. Dave Petrie and, I think, Nora Radcliffe compared the percentage of people from ethnic minorities who are employed to the percentage of people from other racial groups who are employed. We need to pay attention to that, but we need the appropriate data to do so. Businesses also need to understand the benefits and advantages of racial equality in the workplace. If we had the data available, we could provide information to businesses to encourage them to employ more people of different ethnicities, which is important. I ask the minister whether the group that he mentioned will consider data collection issues. Many members have mentioned education, which is important, not only for people from ethnic  minorities but for others who live in our country. We need greater involvement in schools by ethnic minority parents, but we must encourage them to get involved. I know what it was like when I ran a play scheme. Trying to involve people who came from two streets away was difficult. Those people were not from ethnic minorities; they were people who lived in the area. If it was difficult for parents to make that one step, it is even more difficult for people from an ethnic minority background to do so. Schools and parents must encourage ethnic minority parents to have greater involvement in schools. We can work together on that. Cathy Peattie, Nora Radcliffe, Mark Ballard and others have mentioned Gypsy Travellers. As Cathy Peattie and Linda Fabiani said, the issue has been going on for years. Something must be done. We have heard some tragic stories. Young Gypsy Travellers have told us about the life that they led and what was expected of them—or what was not expected of them, which was the saddest part. They had confidence, but nothing was expected of them. We should consider that issue. I am glad that Maureen Watt, a list MSP for North East Scotland, mentioned Gypsy Travellers because it shows that representatives of the Aberdeen area are not frightened to raise the issue. The media must be told that it has a responsibility to society. As others have said, there has been some ridiculous newspaper coverage of Gypsy Travellers; for example, apparently rubbish was put in the middle of a roundabout and blamed on the Travellers, yet they did not even live there. That is terrible. I cannot speak in the debate without mentioning an issue that has been mentioned in the SNP amendment and by other members, which is asylum seekers and immigration. I remind Bill Aitken that Catalonia, which is not yet independent, has control over immigration. We will see how it gets on. It has given leave for asylum seekers to remain in Barcelona, in particular. That benefits not just asylum seekers, who cannot now be used as cheap labour, but the economy too, because those people are now paying taxes and there are no underground, hidden workers. I congratulate countries such as Catalonia that have done that. I am sure that the minister is aware of the issue that I am about to mention. I attended a meeting last night in Pollokshaws in Glasgow, where it was standing room only. It was about the new national asylum support service contracts in Glasgow, 20 per cent of which are going to be privatised. Some people in Pollokshaws have been there for five or six years, and have three, four or five children and no money whatever. Last night, I stayed behind to speak to various people. My surgery was full today, simply because NAAS has said that people must accept the accommodation that is offered to  them. If they do not accept the accommodation, their benefits will be taken away. They were offered a YMCA in Glasgow, which is a soft Dungavel, because people are not allowed visitors, they have to sign in and there are no washing machines. What frightened the asylum seekers even more is the possibility of having 300 asylum seekers in one high-rise tower block, where it would be easy for NAAS to come along and deport them. Some of those people have been living in communities in Pollokshaws for six years and their kids are integrated into the school. The issue of integration is mentioned in the motion. The communities into which those people and their kids are integrated will be destroyed by what is happening. I praise Labour councillors Stephen Curran, from Pollokshaws, and Irene Graham, who sent out a letter and, through the media and through various meetings, such as the one that I attended yesterday, managed to get three months' grace for the asylum seekers. Some of the councillors at Glasgow City Council are doing good work to promote the cause of the asylum seekers. We now have three months to fight the issue and to ensure that those people stay in Pollokshaws.

I agree with Bill Aitken that that is cruel, but I point out that it is not only the present Government that has had such immigration laws. I think that the policy was started by Mrs Thatcher and other Tories—in saying that, I note that Jamie McGrigor and others have genuine feelings with regard to this subject. It is unfortunate that that those policies have been continued by Tony Blair and will be continued by his successor, who will probably be Gordon Brown, regardless of his coin to celebrate the union of 1707 and his flying of the union jack. Perhaps we might have something to say to him. The fact of the matter is that the dispersal system, which was started down south, has not worked. I would genuinely like the Scottish Executive to have control of immigration policy. I acknowledge the good work that the Executive has done in relation to immigration. The voucher system was stopped in Scotland because of the pressure that was applied by the Scottish Executive and MSPs from all parties. We managed to get the three-month period turned around through the work of Labour MPs, MSPs, Labour councillors and members of the SNP and the Scottish Socialist Party. We worked together  and achieved that. I do not understand why people such as the doctors, nurses, engineers and scientists to whom I spoke last night and to whom I have spoken over the years cannot work in this country and have to languish in unemployment with no money and five or six children. It is inhumane—not just disgraceful—to treat people like that. Basically, they are being shunted about to enable other people to make profits. I do not want to be part of a Government that does that type of thing. That is why I think that immigration should be within the powers of the Scottish Parliament. Immigrants should be allowed to work in Scotland and Dungavel should be closed. I ask the minister to speak to Glasgow City Council regarding the present situation. It is dire at the moment and we have three months in which to rectify it. I would be pleased if the minister would give the council a phone and find out from Irene Graham and others exactly what is going on.

I welcome Wendy Alexander back. Her babies are beautiful; I am sure that she concurs with that. Wendy Alexander said near the beginning of her speech that we are here to agree in principle on a rail link. Every member who has spoken from every party has said the same. Although my comrades in Renfrewshire agree in principle with the rail link, they have concerns about the scheme. That is all there is to it.

I thank the committee for all its hard work and hope that there will be a Glasgow airport rail link. I thank those who have supported such a link for years—decades, even. In particular, I thank Councillor Alistair Watson, who has done an enormous amount of work in pushing the GARL proposals through, and on the proposals for the Glasgow crossrail. I also thank the Evening Times for its campaign and continued support, which it has given every week to ensure that Glasgow gets the rail link. I think that all members who have spoken have said that a rail link is overdue, and Charlie Gordon explained why it is overdue. We know that bids were submitted years ago, but that no scheme has come to fruition because of civil servants, inactive Labour Governments or whatever, which is absolutely disgraceful. We cannot agree that there should be inaction; we must say that the project must progress, so why are some members so inactive? They seem to be living in the past, but we cannot live in the past for ever. Members have mentioned the economics that are involved in  terms of costs, passenger numbers and so on, but we must start somewhere—we will not get a Barcelona-type air link and integrated transport if we do not. Stewart Maxwell mentioned East Kilbride. Perhaps when planners were considering new towns years ago, they should have thought about including rail links. People cannot blame everything on the fact that there is no rail link to Glasgow airport, but we must start somewhere. We wanted to start on the Glasgow airport rail link many years ago, and we have now done so, for which I thank the committee. We should not look at the matter in a parochial way—other Glasgow members have said that Glasgow people are not parochial. The project is not only for Glasgow; I was going to say that it is for Inverclyde, Paisley and Ayr, but I should not now mention East Ayrshire, South Ayrshire and so on; I will simply say, therefore, that it will benefit parts of Ayrshire. It will certainly bring benefits not only to workers in those areas—it is bound to bring more tourists. A person who has come off a plane at Glasgow airport and who has stayed at a hotel in Glasgow might stay the next night in Paisley, Ayrshire or Inverclyde. If the scheme is properly marketed, which we should consider, people will have options. We should be much more forward thinking and forward looking. Members have said that people were not forward thinking many years ago. The scheme could have been up and running right now if there had not been inertia among members of the United Kingdom Parliament, members of the Scottish Parliament and civil servants. The proposals are the right way to go. We are talking about a fantastic project that must go ahead. Why is it that in the 21 st century, Glasgow international airport does not have a rail link? It is an absolute disgrace. We should not be arguing about figures such as 15 per cent or 20 per cent and about whether the economics are right, because the proper thing to do for the whole of Scotland—not only for Glasgow—is to proceed. As I said, it is a disgrace that we have not already done so.

Obviously, a price must be paid to produce any link, but I cannot simply pluck a figure from my head and talk about 15 or 10 per cent of a figure being the right figure, for example. Mr Monteith is probably one of the members to whom I have referred as being stuck in the past. He is not looking forward. He and other members, including some who are not present, are not  enthusiastic about pushing forward the scheme. Scotland—not just Glasgow—desperately needs the link. It is also imperative that the crossrail link be built. Bill Butler mentioned the 2005 crossrail progress report, but crossrail proposals have been around for decades. One of my first members' business debates—back in 1999—was on the crossrail. I am a member of the Scottish Parliament's Glasgow crossrail cross-party group, which is trying to progress the crossrail as much as possible. The crossrail report said that the crossrail would be open for the end of 2009. The SPT, Alistair Watson and many others have put lots of work into the project, but it was scuppered at the beginning of, or halfway through, the process. Plans exist and were costed in 2004, but we should not say that because proposals will cost £X over budget we cannot go ahead with them. It is imperative that we progress the crossrail and the Glasgow airport rail link. The Commonwealth games will take place in 2014 and we need those links. I appeal to the minister, as I did at a meeting of the cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail. The strategic planning review is coming up, which is when the matter will be decided. Perhaps I have overstepped the mark, but I wrote to Malcolm Reid in March, pleading with him to give the project high priority. I declare an interest in the project. The crossrail will not only link parts of Glasgow as part of an integrated transport system, but will link the rest of Scotland to the city. It will provide the people of Aberdeen and other places with a link to the airport link. At the moment, we do not have a link between Glasgow Central station and Glasgow Queen Street station, but we should not overlook the fact that there are plenty of tunnels underneath Glasgow. Most Glasgow people know about the tunnels underneath the city and about viaducts and so on that have not been considered—there are tunnels underneath the botanic gardens, for example—which can all be considered and linked up. That is not impossible. I support the Glasgow airport rail link, but it must be complemented by the crossrail, which will open up not just the whole city but the whole of Scotland, and will enable us to have integrated transport links. If we are serious about attracting the 2014 Commonwealth games, we must ensure that that link exists. I attended a meeting that was hosted by Dennis Canavan this afternoon, at which it was mentioned that we need such transport links to ensure our that bid for the Commonwealth games in 2014 is watertight. I plead with the minister and members of every party to get behind the airport rail link, the Commonwealth games and the crossrail: with  those three together, we can go forward. I plead for support for the proposal.

I am pleased that Charlie Gordon gave that explanation about the civil servants, but will he clarify whether that was under a Labour Government?

The minister spoke about not interfering in local health boards. However, will he intervene if he receives evidence from groups such as SCOD that provision is not being made?

I congratulate Adam Ingram on securing the debate and I thank the Scottish Council on Deafness, particularly Drena O'Malley and Lillian Lawson, for their tenacity. The Scottish Council on Deafness is based two floors below my constituency office in Hope Street—bumping into Lillian every day and being told that we must push this issue forward can sometimes be too much to bear. Lillian knows exactly what I mean, because I have been to her office quite often. I first came across the issue when it was raised at the Public Petitions Committee, of which I am a member. I have the petition with me and I will confine my remarks to the subject of the petition and to Adam Ingram's motion. The petition asks that deafblind people should receive a decent service. It does not just want services to be provided in the community; it wants there to be a unit for deafblind people, in particular for those with mental health problems. When Drena O'Malley gave evidence to the Public Petitions Committee, some of the stories that she told were horrifying and heart-breaking. She told of deafblind people with mental health problems who had been taken to prison because there was no one in the police station or anywhere else who could tell exactly what had happened. Those people were put into prison or psychiatric hospitals, and some of them were never given an explanation of why they were there. Sometimes it was 24 hours or a couple of days before an interpreter could be found. I commend Drena O'Malley for all the times that she has responded when she was called out in the early hours of the morning because she was the only interpreter whom people could rely on. There is a great dearth of people who can help with the communication problems of this branch of the community in our country. I cannot understand why the John Denmark unit, which has been providing services—they might not have been the best services, but at least something was being provided—is under threat of being taken away, with nothing to replace it. I know that the minister has mentioned to the health boards that access should be made easier, but as  Adam Ingram pointed out, access is subject to a postcode lottery—it depends on the health board area in which someone stays. We need to give these people a decent service. No other members of our community would put up with such totally inadequate psychiatric, mental health or health services. I appeal to the minister to take that on board. We are here to represent all our communities, but deafblind people, particularly those who have mental health problems, are being served the least well. I remind members of the evidence that was given to the Public Petitions Committee. We heard about people who did not know what was happening suddenly being taken to a psychiatric hospital and not having a clue why they were there; there was no one there to interpret for them and to tell them that they could contact their family. I ask the minister to put himself in their shoes and imagine what that must be like. Stewart Stevenson highlighted the length of time that deafblind people, in comparison with other folk, spend in institutions. Please try to imagine what it must be like if access to services is not available. Finally, I ask the minister to say tonight when we will get a replacement for the service that is currently provided by the John Denmark unit. It is surely inadequate that deaf and deafblind people are required to make appointments on an ad hoc basis with specialists who come up from Manchester.

I welcome the recommendations in the Finance Committee's  report. Des McNulty's speech was very honest and I look forward to hearing the minister's response. I sincerely hope that the Government will consider seriously the recommendations and implement most of them, because the report is good and gets to the heart of the matter. If Frank McAveety wants regenerating, he should fight for independence for Scotland. I am sure that independence would regenerate not just Frank McAveety but his constituency, Shettleston, too. The statistics on deprivation throughout Scotland—particularly in Glasgow, which I will come back to—demonstrate the need for a serious overhaul of the funding system, as the Finance Committee acknowledged. Given that 22 of the 25 poorest and unhealthiest areas in the UK are in Scotland, it does not take a genius to realise that the system is not working. No amount of reports and spin can alter that. As we approach the 300 th anniversary of the acts of union we should think about what Scotland gained from the union. Scotland has the highest percentage of poor, deprived and unhealthy areas in the UK—that is the legacy of 300 years of the union for the people of Scotland. Glasgow is a fantastic city and the driving force of the Scottish economy, but a third of the city falls within the 5 per cent most deprived areas in Scotland, accounting for seven out of the country's 10 poorest areas. Life expectancy figures in the city are the lowest in Scotland. As Frank McAveety knows well, on average men in Shettleston do not reach the pensionable age of 65, let alone the pensionable age of 68 that is his Government's new policy. The Labour Party should think about that. We should not ignore the fact that we have had decades and decades of Labour rule nationally and locally in Scotland. Before members try to intervene, I acknowledge that there has been regeneration in Glasgow. However, which Glaswegian can afford the £250,000 houses that are being built by the Clyde? Only a few people can afford such houses.

People have everything to contribute and can live happily beside one other. However, I know people from Laurieston and half the  population was moved out of the area before the regeneration started. Where did those people go? They should have been given the opportunity to stay in the area years ago, not just now. There is hardly anyone left in the Gorbals and Laurieston areas who was born and bred there. The same goes for Anderston and other parts of the city. I will take no lessons from the Labour Party on that point. The regeneration is a small drop in the ocean of deprivation in Glasgow, and Labour members should hang their heads in shame. Houses that cost £250,000 and £500,000 are being built in the waterfront development. What Glaswegian can afford such a house, even if they are working? What about the people who are unemployed, to whom Frank McAveety referred? What can they look forward to? What deprivation do they face? Sergio Arzeni, the head of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, said: "Without sustained effort to increase employment, Glasgow will struggle to meet other economic objectives. It is not possible to develop a modern, dynamic, twenty-first century European economy ... while maintaining a position where one in three residents relies on benefits." We need to consider that seriously. What happened to the huge national apprenticeship scheme? I am not talking about jobs that last for just six weeks or six months. I take my hat off to Glasgow for starting an apprenticeship scheme, but there should be a national scheme throughout Scotland that offers decent jobs with decent wages. We need an evaluation of the policies of all the agencies that are involved in regeneration and employment to find out whether those policies are working. I commend the Finance Committee's call for a review of the national priorities action fund, the excellence fund and the antisocial behaviour programme. Those must be reviewed, as they were intended to benefit deprived areas but that aim does not appear to be reflected in the allocation to authorities with high levels of deprivation. That is a marvellous part of the committee's report, which I welcome. Des McNulty mentioned that the Executive is considering establishing a single deprivation fund. The Executive should establish such a fund. The minister said that he would look upon that favourably and I hope that he will do so. He has acknowledged that we need joined-up thinking. There is no point in spending money all over the place through various agencies if we do not have an outcome. However, as I said, such a review will not address all the problems of deprivation. Money must be allocated on the basis of deprivation, not population, because Glasgow absolutely loses out with that method. I hope that  the minister will acknowledge that fact. I take on board the point that Mike Rumbles and others have made that there are many forms of deprivation, but we cannot get away from the fact that Glasgow is the most deprived area in Scotland. Something must be done to tackle that. Once we tackle the deprivation in Glasgow, we can get the powerhouse working, which I am sure will have a ripple effect throughout the economy. An evaluation must be done of the success of funding projects. People must be taken out of poverty, ill health and deprivation, so that they can make the contribution that they want to make to their country. Most important, the only way in which we will achieve that is through independence, not through looking at reports and through small agencies here and there. It has been proved that the treaty of union is an absolute disgrace. Three hundred years down the line, let us turn the position round and let the people of Scotland be proud to be Scottish. Let us give them jobs and let them have a real and meaningful life.

I congratulate Trish Godman on her heartfelt speech. We should campaign vigorously on the issue; I have no doubt that most members of the Parliament do so. Sex trafficking is one of the most evil and lucrative illegal activities conducted around the globe; it is second only to drug trafficking. The revenues from trafficking are an estimated £5 billion annually. I will talk about prostitution, which is linked to trafficking. I disagree with Margo MacDonald when she says that the matter is not about prostitution. It is reported that there are 7,000 sex workers in Scotland and 85 per cent of them are believed to be trafficked victims—a majority of them from eastern Europe. Scotland is a target destination for traffickers because of its reputation for tolerating prostitution. There is a great link between prostitution, sex trafficking, organised crime and the drug industry. I hope to be able to prove to Margo MacDonald exactly what happened in one enlightened country, Sweden, which used to have an open-border attitude towards prostitution. Since Sweden outlawed the buying of sex and decriminalised the selling of sex in 1999, the number of prostitutes in the capital dropped by two thirds and the number of men who bought sex dropped by 80 per cent. Most important, there is a clear correlation between the legislation on prostitution and the incredible drop in trafficking. I will mention some figures.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that information, although whether I believe it to be correct remains to be seen. As far as I can see, I have up-to-date figures.  Only between 200 and 400 trafficked women were in Sweden after the buying of sex was criminalised, whereas Finland had between 15,000 and 17,000 trafficked women. That speaks for itself. It shows what happens when prostitution is targeted. After all, what are these poor women trafficked for, if not for prostitution? They are not trafficked to wash dishes or sweep the streets. They are trafficked for prostitution and the extreme forms of violence that go along with it. We have to address the problem and protect those women. I think that Cathy Peattie might say something about that if she can stay to speak in the debate. Exhaustive studies done throughout the world show that 92 per cent of sex workers would leave prostitution if they could. That figure refers not just to trafficked sex workers, but to other people who are involved in prostitution. We have to educate men about the fact that prostitution does not exist because women want it to be there. It is an evil trade that exists because men want these types of services. I have evidence—Margo MacDonald might be able to agree with this point—that prostitutes on the streets and in saunas say that, years ago, they were asked for simple sex but that they are now asked to perform the most horrendous acts simply because trafficked women are being brought into this country. Men are using the services of trafficked women and when they go to pay for a prostitute they are asking for the same sort of services. Years ago, they would not have asked for them. There is a clear correlation between prostitution and trafficking. I have no doubt about that. I congratulate Glasgow City Council on the work that it is doing. I think that Trish Godman mentioned that. The council is doing a fantastic job and other councils should learn from it. Like Trish Godman, I ask the minister to ask the Westminster Government to sign up to the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. It says that we cannot sign up to the convention because it will affect the immigration laws, but the immigration laws are an absolute mess, as John Reid said. While he is considering those laws, we should sign up to the convention and sort out trafficking once and for all. It is an evil, vile trade in which women are used as a commodity and treated worse than animals. We have to put a stop to it, not just in this country but further afield, and one way we can do that is by signing up to the treaty.

Will the minister admit that the GHA transfer has been an absolute shambles? Apart from second-stage transfer not going ahead, people are being asked for £6,000 or £7,000 to pay for repairs—elderly people in the Knightswood area have been given 12 months to pay that. The GHA has built no new houses for rented accommodation and some houses—particularly the Winget houses in Carntyne—still await a pilot scheme that was supposed to start two years ago. Will the minister admit that it is a shambles and do something about it?

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. We have debated this subject on many occasions, and now the Executive is listening. Thankfully, it has proposed its 18-point action plan, which Bill Butler mentioned. I know that Donald Gorrie will also discuss the work that he has done to introduce legislation on sectarianism. Bill Butler said that we should be honest. I agree that we have to be honest, as Bill Aitken was. We cannot shy away from the fact that, for years and years, Scotland—Glasgow in particular—has suffered sectarianism, violence and abuse, all because of two football teams. Things have certainly changed to an extent, but I have never for the life of me understood why the teams called Glasgow Celtic and Glasgow Rangers never seem to fly the saltire—although that is changing in some respects. We must challenge those football clubs on that. Like Bill Butler, I see a great deal of violence on Saturdays in the city centre. There is no point in hiding the fact. The other weekend, we watched Heart of Midlothian v Gretna. The fans came out in their thousands and walked along to get their trains from and back to Glasgow Central. There was not one bit of trouble. The fans, including kids, were all joining in, singing and dancing in the streets. We must ask ourselves this: they are all football fans, so why is there such a big difference when it comes to the rivalry between two certain teams? Apparently, in Edinburgh, there is some form of bother to do with football clubs and religion, too. However, at rugby matches at Murrayfield, we never see any trouble. The Executive's 18-point plan notwithstanding, we must look deeper into the problem and find out why, while some people can support football teams such as Partick Thistle without any bother at all, others cannot support teams such as Rangers and Celtic without coming to blows and engaging in violence. Offensive artefacts and  articles have been mentioned. Supposedly, their sale has now been stopped, and there was legislation to tackle that aspect of the problem, but it still goes on—I still see articles and artefacts being paraded about the streets of Glasgow and being sold quite openly outside certain football clubs. They are still there, albeit that they are now slightly underground. We should acknowledge that. I welcome those representing the churches and other bodies who are in the public gallery. Helen Miller of Nil by Mouth has campaigned tirelessly to stop this problem happening, and Cara Henderson has also campaigned tirelessly for years. As Bill Butler rightly said, it all comes down to education. We can do whatever we want, as long as we educate the kids. That is where the effort must come from. I have visited schools throughout Glasgow and have spoken to pupils from both sides of the divide. I have tried to understand why they have such a hatred for people who come from another area and support a different team. Some of the kids are trying hard with the help of the 18-point plan and the £100,000 that the Executive has allocated to help to stop sectarianism in schools for 2006. Initiatives to combat sectarianism must begin at school level. We must speak to the kids and stress that it is not the be-all and end-all. The same message must come from the football fans. Sectarianism does occur in other areas of life, but the majority of it relates to those two football clubs, which, financially, seem to gain a lot from the number of fans that they attract. I often wonder whether they would profit as much without the sectarian element. They must ask themselves that question too. Are enough changes being made? Are fans speaking to each other? It has been said that the only way to stop domestic violence against women is to have men raise the matter with each other and say that it is not acceptable. The only way that we can target and bring an end to sectarianism is to educate the kids at school and get the football fans to talk to each other and point out those who are singing sectarian chants at football matches, which has happened. The Executive, MSPs and the whole of society must be involved in education, but football fans must say to each other that sectarianism is not acceptable. I look forward to the day when I can bring visitors to Glasgow and walk about the streets without fear of their being abused verbally or physically just because they are wearing a particular football scarf or belong to a particular religion. We cannot get away from the fact that the vast bulk of sectarianism in Scotland affects the west of  Scotland and Glasgow in particular. We must tackle that seriously. I welcome all the work that the Executive is doing and I am glad that the Minister for Justice and Deputy Minister for Justice are here. As Bill Butler said, there is no point in our not telling the truth. We must be up front and honest about the problem. The situation has changed slightly, but it has not changed enough. There is still an element of sectarianism in our city and we must put a stop to it.

Like Eleanor Scott, I want to know what has happened since the Kerr report was published a year ago. I remind members of some of the report's recommendations, which were that high-quality services should be maintained locally; that local needs and expectations should be met; that options for change should be developed with people, not for them; and—this one is close to my heart—that the Scottish Executive should review its guidance on public consultation, with a view to promoting best practice. A number of weeks ago, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde held a workshop about the new sick kids hospital, which I and others were not told about. However, being the type of person that I am, I found out about it and managed to go along. In light of my experience, perhaps the Executive should review its guidance on public consultation. On the maintenance of local high-quality services, I point out that Glasgow has gone from having five accident and emergency departments to having only two. Given the threat to Monklands hospital, which I mentioned last week, and the state of the services in Argyll and Clyde, I have to ask what kind of local services we can expect in Glasgow. When people have to travel three quarters of the way around Glasgow and beyond to get to what should be local services, I do not think that local needs and expectations are being  met. How would having only two maternity hospitals in Glasgow meet local needs and expectations? It is proposed that the new site for maternity and sick kids' services should be at the Southern general hospital, but it is in dire need of modernisation. Operating theatres are closing down there because of modernisation. Maternity wards are being closed because they need refurbished and fixed—they are falling down. How can people be comfortable with that situation? I would like the minister to look into that particular issue. Margo MacDonald and Eleanor Scott mentioned the training of staff. That is an important point. I recognise the fact that staff have to be trained to do outreach work. However, at the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde meeting that I referred to, certain fears were raised regarding specialised paediatric nurses. Obviously, if facilities are closing, parents will themselves diagnose their children, deciding whether to take them to the sick kids hospital across the river, an ambulatory care and diagnostic centre or local services—of course, we should bear in mind the fact that the ACADs and local services will not be open at night. When I asked a question about the specialist training of paediatric nurses, I was told that that was being looked at. It is an important point and I would like the minister to tell us whether the Executive has any figures regarding the training of staff. Like Mary Mulligan, I think that the Kerr report's recommendations in that regard were important. We do not seem to have any monitoring or evaluation of any of those aspects of the Kerr report. The Kerr report mentioned the fact that we have to look after people in deprived areas. However, I do not see any more outreach work being done in the deprived areas that I represent, such as Drumchapel. There is no evidence of extra nurses, doctors and health workers being able to do outreach work in those areas. I would like the minister to tell us whether there are any updated figures on outreach work or recommendations about how we can get the health professionals to work in the areas that I mentioned, so that people there get the services that they deserve. The Kerr report says that services should be localised to meet people's needs. I do not believe that closing down three hospitals and having only two maternity hospitals is meeting people's local needs in Glasgow. I would like the minister to revisit that issue.

Is John Home Robertson saying that the 86 per cent of people who responded to the minister's and the Communities Committee's consultations who wanted third-party right of appeal, and the 95 per cent of those who attended the conference in the Parliament in December who wanted that right of appeal, are immature and should not be able to put forward their views?

As a substitute member of the Communities Committee, I, too, thank the staff and members of the committee and the various agencies who gave evidence on the bill. Everybody worked hard and deserves thanks not just from the Parliament, but from the general public. We all agree that the planning system needs to be modernised and overhauled, because at present it is stuck. However, one issue on which we do not agree—although perhaps we can persuade the Executive—is the need for the new system to be democratic and transparent to all, not just to those who will benefit from it. Members have mentioned some positive aspects of the bill,  such as the fact that the local plans will be examined every five years and the front-loaded system with pre-consultation—there will be as much consultation as the public want. However, Christine May put it nicely when she said that, in some areas, "consultation" is not a very nice word, because people feel that they have been not consulted but just told what will happen. Whether the consultation process will be a success remains to be seen. I support the good aspects of the bill, but I look forward to amendments at stage 2. Many issues have been raised by members today, the Communities Committee in its report, the Finance Committee and various agencies. Secondary legislation is a big issue that has come up time and again. We do not know what will be in the secondary legislation, and we will not have the meat on the bones until that secondary legislation is produced. I and others are concerned about that, so I hope that the issue will be addressed. The Finance Committee raised issues about the bill's financial implications. The minister said that he will speak to COSLA about those implications, but I hope that, in summing up, the Deputy Minister for Communities will give us more information on that. When I first read the bill and saw the measures on good neighbour agreements, I thought that they were great and would go a long way towards helping communities and developers. However, when I questioned witnesses in the committee, I discovered that the agreements will be voluntary, so if a developer does not want to go into an agreement with a community, all will be lost. The minister has said that he will consider the issue further. We have a golden opportunity to take good neighbour agreements further in the bill.

They were not intended as a substitute. I welcome the enforcement proposals. What was clear about the good neighbour agreements was that if communities and developers came to an agreement and either side deviated from it, the other party would have the right of appeal. That is fantastic. It would be close to having a third-party right of appeal. However, when I commented on that, I was told that many developers might not enter into such an agreement if the appeal part of it was introduced. That brings me neatly on to the third-party right of appeal. As members know, I proposed a bill on the TPRA. Communities out there want the TPRA. I say to Karen Whitefield that the TPRA is SNP party policy.

I would need to speak to Jim Mather. I have not seen him, but I can tell the minister that third-party right of appeal is SNP policy. Karen Whitefield mentioned her community. I am sure that she received the e-mail from Ann Coleman that other committee members received, in which Ann says: "Early involvement will not address the issues that concern communities like ours or the general public ... there is nothing new in this." That is someone from Karen Whitefield's constituency. People are still sceptical about early involvement. Let us lay to rest the myths that surround the third-party right of appeal. Scotland will not become an economic basket-case. It will not go down the tubes. The latest from the Lord Provost of Glasgow Liz Cameron, the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and various businesses is that the TPRA will put us at an unfair disadvantage compared with England. I wish that somebody would explain why New Zealand, Sweden, Finland and Austria have far greater gross domestic products than the United Kingdom has, yet they all have the third-party right of appeal. Let us stop the constant scaremongering by developers and big business and have an honest, transparent, open and democratic planning system. At stage 2, the SNP will introduce amendments to the bill on a limited third-party right of appeal, community right of appeal or whatever we call it. The Deputy Minister for Communities has mentioned that she will scrutinise councils' conflict of interest in relation to development and I would like more information on that. All people want is a level playing field. If developers have a right of appeal, why should communities not have a right of appeal too? The bill should introduce a level playing field, democratic decisions and transparency. I hope that the Executive will introduce amendments on TPRA at stage 2; if not, the SNP and other parties will do so.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it shares concerns of MPs and MSPs in respect of the reorganisation of health services in Glasgow and the West of Scotland. (S2O-9712)

Is the minister aware that, before Monklands hospital was opened, Glasgow royal infirmary was running at around 150 per cent capacity? It is proposed to have only two full accident and emergency units in Glasgow, and Monklands is under threat of closure. Will the minister tell us what will happen to GRI capacity if Monklands closes? Further, will the minister tell us, regarding his ex-health minister colleague John Reid, whether he and this Executive and the Scottish Parliament intend to go down and save the health service in Westminster and in England, because of the situation down there? Will he emulate them?

I have heard nothing in the debate from any of the British unionist parties that convinces me that they will uphold article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Only an independent Scotland can rid Scotland and the British isles of nuclear weapons and it is imperative that we do so—[ Interruption. ] Members are laughing, but when Labour members say that nuclear weapons are a Westminster issue, I  become even more convinced that only an independent Scotland can get rid of Trident.

I said that an independent Scotland would rid Scotland of nuclear weapons and could help to rid the British Isles of them—[ Interruption. ] Members are demonstrating their unionist principles, which proves that the unionist British parties will stick together, regardless of the fact that 80 per cent of the Scottish population want to get rid of Trident. Members might laugh, but Trident is not just a Westminster issue; it is an issue for everyone in Scotland.

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time. The fact that four Trident missiles are based just outside Glasgow at Faslane is a Scottish issue and not just a Westminster issue. We should consider the reality of Trident's capability, which is thousands of times greater than that of the bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima, which members have mentioned. However, some members think that this is a British, unionist, Westminster issue. Nuclear weapons are an issue for humanity and a moral issue. A Trident missile can be launched silently and reach places as far away as Russia and China—and everywhere else in the world—but members say that that is a Westminster issue. We should be honest about the fact that, as Bruce Crawford said, we have no say in where weapons of mass destruction are deployed. However, America will have a say, because when Bush tugs at the leash, Blair follows. Nuclear weapons are not just a British issue; they are an American issue. We have nuclear weapons in this country because Aldermaston relies on the Americans for nuclear technology and training and for all the parts of Trident missiles. Bruce Crawford made that point very well. We do not have an independent nuclear deterrent and other people have said so, including Labour politicians, one of whom will be turning in his grave. Harold Wilson said that our nuclear weapons are neither independent nor British and are not a deterrent. Roy Hattersley has written: "No one seriously imagined that the British bomb ... could ever be used ... without American assistance." It is time that we realised that Trident is here to aid America in its aim of world domination. We are being used and Scottish people are suffering.  Jackie Baillie talked about employment. The maintenance of the Trident system currently costs us £1.5 billion every year and it would cost up to £25 billion to replace Trident. What could an independent Scotland do with that kind of money?

I will tell members what we could do with that money. We could provide an extra 5,000 intensive care beds every year for 10 years. We could pay for an extra 16,200 qualified dentists every year for 20 years. We could pay for 62,500 extra police officers every year for 20 years. The Scottish people want decent services; they do not want Trident. We should not kid ourselves about the British unionist parties; only an independent Scotland will get rid of Trident, which is what the Scottish people truly want.

I am pleased with the minister's positive responses. He mentioned the strategic projects review 2007. Can he tell us whether the Executive will commit to the crossrail project in that review?

I congratulate the Glasgow Campaign to Welcome Refugees and the Glasgow girls and other schoolkids who pushed this issue forward. As the First Minister is aware, the devil is in the detail. I await the precise details of the proposals that the Executive has agreed with Mr McNulty. Is the First Minister aware of the national asylum support service contract with Glasgow City Council? Basically, the service has been privatised, which threatens the provision of specialist language teachers for asylum-seeker children at schools in Glasgow. Will the First Minister assure us that there will be no loss of those valuable assets to Glasgow and to the children of asylum seekers?

As convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and aging, and as the age reporter to the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have always taken a keen interest in issues relating to aging. [ Interruption. ]

That was nice of Duncan McNeil—normally he does not hear me or, if he does, he does not listen. I will do my best, Presiding Officer, although I hope that I will not lose any time because of the interruption. The National Assembly for Wales launched a strategy on aging in 2003, and I have always said to the minister and others that Scotland should have a strategy. I am glad that we are now to have one. The strategy in Wales has been fully costed at £10 million for three years, and that sum has been committed by the Welsh Assembly. I hope that the Parliament, through scrutinising the  minister and his work, ensures that any strategy is fully costed to enable it to work so that the findings of the consultation can be turned into reality. The minister has outlined the aims and objectives of the strategy. I support those aims and objectives, but as I have said to the minister on previous occasions, some issues concern me. For example, I wonder whether the 12-week consultation period is adequate. Will groups and individuals be able to respond within that period? Will the 12-week period for the collation of information be sufficient to bring about the launch of the strategy in December? Will there be a national advertising campaign to alert groups and individuals to the consultation so that they can get hold of the forms and send them in? It is imperative that we get the strategy right at the start. My colleagues will focus on a number of the areas referred to in the Scottish National Party's amendment, but I wish to mention some of them briefly. First, food preparation under free personal care has become a postcode lottery. That problem must be resolved. The Executive said that it would issue revised guidance to local authorities but I believe that that has not yet happened. I would like a response from the minister on that. Secondly, care homes are closing almost weekly and older people have nowhere to go. There is a lack of secure tenancies for people in care homes, which leaves older people vulnerable. That issue should be covered in the strategy. I know that the issue is complex, and not just from a financial point of view, as we must also consider the suitability of buildings. Some exciting developments are happening, and I hope that the strategy will tap into developments in the Parliament, such as Scotland's futures forum. The forum, which is based in the Parliament, was set up to promote new and fresh thinking and is embarking on a project on age issues. I look forward to seeing its report. Members of the forum are going to an international conference in Copenhagen in June, and then the forum will host a conference in 24 November in the Parliament, at which it will launch the results of its work. I hope that that will be possible to feed that work into the Executive's strategy. We should congratulate the forum on its ingenuity. I have an article here entitled "Lords condemns government attitude to ageing". Obviously, that is a reference to the Westminster Government's attitude to aging, as the Scottish Parliament is at the forefront on aging. Perhaps Westminster can learn something from us—we will lead rather than follow. The Lords said that the Westminster Government seems to consider an aging population a burden, not an opportunity. I believe  that an aging population represents an opportunity. That brings me to pensions. The SNP amendment says that moneys and autonomy should be handed over to the Scottish Parliament. Other countries have had innovative ideas. In Switzerland, for instance, people can work up to five years beyond the statutory retirement age to increase their state pension—all facilitated by the Swiss Government. We have to consider such ideas. At this week's meeting of the Equal Opportunities Committee, the minister said that if we do not have the powers to implement in Scotland ideas that emerge from the consultation, they will be fed back to Westminster. Other good, innovative ideas are being implemented in other countries. For example, we should consider ideas such as reducing hours at work with no financial penalty, job sharing or shortening the working week five years prior to retirement and using the pension fund—if one is still available—to top up salary levels. In Scotland, we are good at freeing up employees to undertake voluntary work without loss of pay in the pre-retirement period. We have been doing that for many years, and as we have just launched a national strategy for older volunteers, we should give more thought to that area. Older people want to volunteer but they do not want to be penalised by having to give up their work. We should feed that suggestion into Westminster if we do not have the powers to act on it in the Scottish Parliament. Growing older should not be thought of as a burden or anything negative; basically, it should be celebrated. The older people whom I have met celebrate their old age; they go back to education and, if they want to work, they should be allowed to. I sincerely hope that the evidence that we get from the consultation proves that, although older people have concerns, they are not all about care and health but about the fact that they want to contribute to Scottish society. It is up to us to enable them to do that. I move amendment S2M-4164.1, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "notes, however, the injustice of charging for food preparation under the free personal care legislation, ageism, fuel poverty and associated excess winter deaths, the punitive council tax and the discredited basic state pension, all of which deprive our elderly population of independence, security and choice, and recognises that until Scotland has power over tax and benefits many of Scotland's pensioners will continue to live in poverty."

Does the minister agree that, in the interests of democracy and fairness, if there is to be no right of appeal for third parties, the bill should remove the right of appeal from developers?

Professor Calder's report recommends that the Queen Mother's hospital should close before the new hospital opens. It has been said that that will leave a serious situation at Yorkhill, which will be a stand-alone hospital. Professor Calder has also recommended that the maternity unit at the Southern general hospital be gutted. Will the minister clarify whether that means that demolition work will be carried out while services at the Southern general hospital are still operational, or will the Southern general hospital maternity site be closed? That would leave Glasgow with only one maternity hospital—the Princess Royal maternity hospital—for an indefinite period.

I congratulate the independent group on using its time to debate poverty. As others have done, I pay tribute to the quarter of a million people who marched in Edinburgh last July to highlight the issues of poverty and to show support for the move to eradicate it worldwide. Many of the  people who marched live in poverty in Scotland and I will touch on local as well as international issues. We accept absolutely that there is no comparison between levels of poverty in Scotland and those in Malawi and other areas but, to people who live in deprivation in a country that is as rich in resources as Scotland is, their situation is very real. It has not yet been mentioned that the real reason for poverty is inequality in the distribution of wealth. Once we sort that out, I hope that we will start to eradicate poverty, not only in Scotland, but worldwide. It angers and saddens me that, as members have mentioned, my city of Glasgow has within its boundaries 17 of the poorest areas in Scotland, including the 10 most deprived areas. In Glasgow, 41 per cent of households live in poverty. Glasgow has three quarters of Scotland's poorest areas and one third of Scotland's worst council wards. Murdo Fraser mentioned life expectancy. Scotland's average male life expectancy is 64 years, which is lower than that in Bosnia, Lebanon, the Gaza strip, Iran and North Korea. I make that point particularly for Des McNulty and Helen Eadie. Labour has been in control in their areas and in Glasgow for decades. I ask the Labour members what they plan to do about the terrible figures that I have just mentioned. They cannot pat themselves on the back for their efforts to get rid of poverty in Glasgow and the rest of Scotland. I turn to the bigger issue of world poverty and the make poverty history campaign. I sincerely thank and pay tribute to Jubilee Scotland and the trade justice movement for their continuing work to ensure that the issue is kept on the agenda of all Governments, particularly ours. The issue is not only for Westminster; as has been mentioned, we can do a lot in Scotland. Jamie Stone mentioned the money that we have spent, but, as Linda Fabiani said, the Basque Country and Catalonia give money directly to tackle world poverty, so the Scottish Parliament could do more. As various members have mentioned, debt relief, increased aid and trade justice must be paramount. As Patrick Harvie said, Governments have choices, but, unfortunately, people in the poorer countries simply do not. It is not acceptable that countries that have been brought to their knees by poverty are even more disadvantaged as a result of the strict criteria that developed countries have put in place. Dennis Canavan mentioned some of those countries—the UK, the other EU countries and America are among them. Many members have mentioned trade justice, although perhaps we should rename it trade injustice. I concur with all the comments that members have made on the issue. How can it be  right that rich countries such as ours, and America and the EU, use subsidies to dump their products on poor countries and so stifle those countries' economic growth? Countries end up in a cycle of never-ending debt and borrowing, which leads to the collapse of their economies. All too often, western Governments blame the people and Governments in poor countries. As Linda Fabiani said, we must examine certain Governments, but not all Governments of poor countries are corrupt. We could say that some of the actions of our Government are corrupt, too. We must stop the spiral that is created when western countries set strict criteria on trade and debt relief. Rich nations have a duty to ensure that justice is delivered in poorer countries. We should continue our campaign, collectively and individually, to ensure that we bring justice and make poverty history.

I thank the minister for accepting the Scottish National Party's amendment. I support the Executive's motion and I am glad that it supports our amendment. International women's day is to be celebrated not just here in Scotland, but throughout the world because it represents recognition of the role that women everywhere play. In her speech, Christine Grahame will mention some facts about women in Africa and other countries. We should bear in mind that although women in Scotland have struggled on equal pay and various other issues, some women who live in Africa and other countries have a much more difficult time of it. On international  women's day, it is apt that we take account of the international aspect of the difficulties that women face. That is why I refer to equal pay and sex trafficking in my amendment, which I will deal with later. I welcome to Parliament the visiting representatives of women's groups and look forward to meeting them at tonight's reception. We must consider the various roles that women play in today's society, as well as those that they have played in the past and those that they will play in the future. The women who keep not just families, but whole communities, together certainly deserve our praise because they often get little help. Women frequently earn low pay, work long and unsociable hours, and cannot get on the ladder of success simply because they are women. The minister mentioned the various ways in which we have moved on over the years but, as she said, there is still much to do: we have much more to do to tackle sex discrimination, which, unfortunately, like low pay and the exploitation of women and children, is still with us. The figures show that 47 per cent of people in the labour market are women and yet women are underrepresented in positions of power. For example, only 22 per cent of Scottish councillors, 10 per cent of senior police officers and 18 per cent of secondary school heads are women. On hearing those figures, all members will admit that we have a long way to go, but if all members of the Scottish Parliament and everyone in the country works together, I am sure we will see some movement on the issue. I think that many members have signed Cathy Peattie's motion to mark international women's day this year. It says that "while over thirty years have elapsed since the Sex Discrimination Act was passed, the Equal Pay Act came into force and the Equal Opportunities Commission was established, the commission reports that the gender pay gap is the worst in the European Union". I am sure that Cathy Peattie will pick up on that in her speech. We should do everything in our power to rectify the situation. We should also put to industry the part that it has to play. It may be possible for training to be given that challenges gender stereotyping, and for careers advice to encourage young women to take up alternative careers. The modern apprenticeship scheme could also be used. One scheme in Glasgow now attracts a greater number of girls—it would have been unheard of in the past for girls to become apprentices. Obviously, the careers advice that those girls received led them to take up an apprenticeship, which will lead them to a good job  with decent pay. We have to look at the options, such as modern apprenticeships, by which girls can gain skills for work. It is no longer acceptable that women are expected to do certain jobs. As the minister said, women should not be directed into certain jobs just because they are thought of as women's jobs. Ultimately, those jobs are the low-paid jobs. We have to look at other ways of addressing the problem. We cannot allow the majority of the workforce to continue to be discriminated against in pay terms. Today, a committee of the European Parliament is debating forced prostitution in the context of Germany's hosting of the world cup. I congratulate the European Parliament on bringing the issue to the fore: trafficking and prostitution is an issue that we should address in the Scottish Parliament. At the European Parliament, the motion calls on the Parliament to have regard to article 5 of the European charter of fundamental rights, which states that "trafficking in human beings is prohibited". The motion asks the Parliament to have regard "to its resolution of 17 January 2006 on strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation" and welcomes the German national council of women red card to forced prostitution campaign, which I have signed up to. I am sure that other members have also done so. The aim of the campaign is to end the practice of forced prostitution. The motion calls for "transnational cooperation and exchange of best practice" and concludes by instructing the president of the European Parliament "to forward this resolution to the Council, the Commission, and the governments of the member States, candidates and accession countries." I congratulate the European Parliament on the motion. I hope that the Scottish Parliament will write to the president of the European Parliament to say that we will play our full part in the process. The world cup should not be used as a reason for increased use of trafficking and forced prostitution in Germany. We should also raise the matter with FIFA and with those who represent Scottish football fans. The background notes to the debate in the European Parliament include an estimate that 40,000 women will be brought into Germany to be used as prostitutes during the world cup. In the 21 st century, it is an absolute disgrace that people are talking about setting up portacabin brothels in  a city in Germany just because the world cup will be held there. I hope that members agree that we should write to the European Parliament with our congratulations. There is nothing worse than the exploitation of women, except when, as has happened in this case, the media are involved in encouraging that exploitation. It is unforgivable that that can happen in this day and age, especially given that Germany now has a woman chancellor. We talk about celebrating women. We have much to celebrate, but if we want to get to the crux of the problem that I am describing, we must target men. We must tell men that it is unacceptable that women should be moved into a country to be used in such a disgraceful way, just because some football matches are to be held there. I hope that members will support any measure to prevent such activity. As I said, there is talk of 40,000 women—they are described as prostitutes—being taken to Germany during the world cup. Trafficking is not new, unfortunately, but it seems to be the scourge of the 21 st century. In my home town, Glasgow, and in other areas, young girls who have been trafficked have been found in saunas and sex shops that were—eventually—raided. We cannot live with such a situation, which exists not just in one city but throughout the country. Trish Godman will probably mention trafficking, because she has lodged a motion on the trafficking of women into prostitution. The trafficking of women and young children is evil and degrading. Although we have much to celebrate on international women's day, we must all consider the unfortunate women who have been and are being trafficked and we must ask the Parliament to do everything in its power to end this degrading activity. I thank the minister for her support for my amendment and move amendment S2M-4063.1, to insert at end: "however, notes that 30 years after the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 came into force, the pace of change remains painfully slow; further notes with great concern the trafficking of women throughout Europe, and calls on the Executive to do all in its power to stop this horrific practice."

Any debate or policy that attempts to address regeneration and deprivation is to be welcomed. However, as always, the devil is in the detail and I will expand on that as I go on. My colleague, Christine Grahame, was right about the level of poverty in the population, particularly among children and pensioners. We should be reminded that if it was not for the legacy of past unionist Governments, our country would not be in such poverty. I do not know whether we are allowed to use the word "lies" in Parliament, but untruths were certainly told about the amount of oil and wealth that Scotland could have had in the early 1970s. Perhaps if we had been told the truth, we would not be having this debate today. We must recognise that. The Westminster Government should apologise to the Scottish people for what it has done. No other country would put up with it and we should all hang our heads in shame that a unionist Government was allowed to get away with it. Therefore, I congratulate Christine Grahame on her speech. I sometimes think that Glasgow—the area that I represent—should be renamed the phoenix. Glasgow has reinvented itself time and time again, and some areas have reinvented themselves very well. The minister mentioned housing. Of course, housing is being built along the banks of the Clyde, but only for people who can afford to pay £250,000 or more for it. At the same time, and straight across the road, the typical high flats—which are not unlike the £250,000 flats—are being bulldozed by the Glasgow Housing Association and people are being moved out of their communities. If we are talking about regeneration, let us think about communities as well—as Karen Whitefield rightly said. Communities deserve to be regenerated, but perhaps that should happen in areas that are actually communities; we must remember that. The GHA was set up by the Executive and it is an absolute disgrace. Local housing organisations are banging at the doors of the Executive and Communities Scotland asking them to look at the GHA because they cannot go on to secondary transfer. The Executive made a promise, but they are not able to move on to secondary transfer because there is a funding shortfall of £300 million. Let us also not forget that, although the GHA is  a social landlord, it has the highest rents of any landlord in Glasgow. That is an absolute disgrace. The minister talks about regenerating communities, but I would like to see him regenerate them by giving them proper control over their housing and not leaving the GHA to tell them what to do. On transport, Glasgow needs to have closure on the crossrail scheme, which would open up the whole of Glasgow and Ayr. Someone coming from Edinburgh would not need to change trains. The idea has been on the cards for 25 to 30 years. I ask the minister for an answer on that as well as on a transport strategy for Glasgow. Will the minister explain exactly what urban regeneration companies will do? Before he tells me that I have not read the document—I have—I will go through some of the organisations that already exist for regeneration. We have LECs. As we all know, Scottish Enterprise gets a block of money, takes out a large chunk for its own administration and hands the rest to the LECs, which take out large chunks to meet their administration costs. We used to have 48 social inclusion partnerships, and I could go on about some of them all day. They all had administration costs. We also had community planning partnerships, which are now community regeneration funds. I ask the minister, sincerely, whether the regeneration companies will be headed by someone. Will they be in a building? Will all the companies that I mentioned sign up to a memorandum of understanding, as mentioned on page 23 of the policy statement? Are we creating new bodies or simply duplicating existing ones? How many people will be employed and what exactly will they do? From reading the policy statement, I cannot see what they will do that is not already being done.

I thank Trish Godman for her honest, straightforward and informative speech. Having spoken to social workers, I am afraid that things do not change very quickly. They are still experiencing some of the unpleasant aspects of social work that Trish Godman experienced. However, I am sure that she also had some uplifting moments. Although a review of social services was long overdue, I welcome the group's report. Social workers have a demanding job. The focus is always on the failures of the system, which have been highlighted, and the tragic consequences  that those have. Often the invaluable work that social workers do goes unnoticed. Social work is a difficult job. Unfortunately, the press tends to concentrate only on the failures and never on the successes of social services. People should have more confidence in social workers and should recognise that they do a very good job. Social workers are not the only people who work in social services. As Carolyn Leckie pointed out, there are also carers, home helps, domestics and other workers. Social workers are on the front line. Theirs can be a hard and lonely career path to travel. The many strengths of the present system are recognised in the review group's excellent report. It is also up front in mentioning the challenges that social workers and the service face. I am usually the first to comment on glossy reports that are not written in plain English, but Susan Deacon has already made that point. This report is concise. It identifies both the strengths and the weaknesses of social services. If we want a modern social services system, we must take on the report's recommendations and the independent advice from social workers and users of social services. The minister recognises the challenges ahead and that it will take a long time to meet them. That is an honest answer. We cannot simply believe that three months down the line all the changes that the report recommends will have been implemented. Although joined-up thinking between the various agencies is needed, not just social work but society as a whole must be involved in making those changes. After all, we are products of the society in which we live. It is important that social workers should be allowed to use their experience and initiative, without being tied down by red tape. They should not have to spend all their time writing reports and must be given the flexibility to be involved in initiatives to deliver services locally, without having to seek a decision from the paraphernalia and bureaucracy at head office. That is one of the review group's most important recommendations. I have been talking about social workers, but such an approach would also give people who use the services of social workers and others confidence and pride in the services that they are receiving. I hope that the direct involvement of service users will give them the confidence to become responsible citizens and that the report's recommendations will bring about a shift from a dependency culture, in which services are simply received, to a system in which people can input into services and feel much better about themselves. Other members referred to social workers' lack of confidence in their management teams. Some social services staff feel that they are not fully  supported by their managers. The report states that "employing organisations should resource employees to deliver first class services." It also says that managers and line managers are bogged down by pressures of management and budget considerations, and suggests that those responsibilities be taken away from them, so that they can have a better understanding of the issues that affect front-line staff. Trish Godman said that social workers might not understand the "punters", as we might call them. People who go straight into social work from university may not know about life, so perhaps they should not be put into a one-to-one situation. Glasgow City Council does not have a policy on lone working for social services, but I do not know whether that is the case in every sphere of social work in every local authority. The council does not prioritise resources for simple things such as mobile phones for its social work staff. Housing officers get mobile phones, but social workers, who are often in threatening situations, do not. I will not name names, as I do not want to go into individual cases. However, I find it worrying that social workers in Glasgow may find themselves in threatening situations but be unable to contact someone immediately. Social workers who have not been trained in lone working may find themselves in a close in a deprived area with only one light. I would like that point to be taken on board, perhaps not now but in the future. Mobile phones and training in lone working should be compulsory for all social workers. Social workers should be furnished with other fundamental tools. Last night I attended a meeting in Glasgow about children's panels. People told me that there were still advertisements in social work departments advising them to attend a children's hearing if they want to find out what goes on there. Along with mobile phones and lone working policies, attendance at children's hearings should be a compulsory, fundamental tool for all social workers, to make life easier for them and to help them to serve their clients. Euan Robson said that social workers should learn to value themselves. That is fine and dandy, but social workers often feel that they are not valued by their employers. It is difficult for people to value themselves if they feel that their employer does not value them. Susan Deacon made that point and said that social workers should sing their own praises. I agree, but without a culture change in society that call will fall on deaf ears, among the public and social workers alike. I hope that the report will change attitudes. Adam Ingram, Carolyn Leckie and others mentioned the underfunding of social work  services. Professor Midwinter arrived at the figure of £135 million, which is significant. The issue must be looked at, because there is a 40 per cent shortage in the recruitment of front-line social workers in the Glasgow area. The retention of social workers is equally important. That is a big problem: we may be able to recruit, but we cannot retain front-line social work staff because of the difficult situations in which they find themselves. I agree with Robert Brown's answer to Patrick Harvie's question about funding. We must examine the funding provision that we are making.

I thank the minister for that information, but the letters that I have received and from which I am quoting say that there is a 40 per cent shortfall in front-line social workers. Social work encompasses many issues; it is not just a question of front-line social workers. Perhaps we should concentrate on front-line social workers who are involved at the coalface. We have to look at the money that we spend on social work. A shortfall of £135 million throughout social work is a serious matter. I welcome the report and am sure that the minister and others will take on board all the good points, as well as the criticisms that it makes. I hope that they will work towards giving us a 21 st century social work service for a 21 st century Scotland.

I note the minister's reply to Paul Martin's question, for which I am grateful. He will have received a letter from me on the same issues, especially the announcement by First that it is going to axe 37 routes in the Glasgow area and the subsequent reply from the SPTE, which basically says that First's pricing is unable to meet the requirements, meaning that those routes will have to be axed. Does the minister agree that the pricing of the so-called subsidised routes that has been put into the SPTE by First is far too high, which is why many of the routes and buses are being withdrawn? Will he meet me, as well as Paul Martin, and will he look at this in any future transport strategy?

I am pleased that the minister recognises the importance of play, but is he aware of the growing call from communities, particularly in deprived parts of Glasgow, for derelict land to be turned into play and recreation areas for their children? Does he agree that that call from local communities and people is commendable? Will he agree to meet local groups and perhaps help them to turn the derelict pieces of land into areas in which their kids can play and get physical exercise?

When I saw that we were going to debate volunteering, I and others, not just in my party, thought that this was an ideal opportunity to question ministers on core funding and strategic funding. I am sorry that  the ministers seem more interested in the Tory plot over there than they are in the speeches, but perhaps that tells us something about the ministers. We come here to debate and we expect answers and announcements from the Executive; it is not about platitudes or patting people on the back. I am not being dismissive of volunteers; I am saying to the ministers that they should take volunteering much more seriously. It has been mentioned throughout the debate that volunteers come to us every other day about core funding. We want answers. Here is a ministerial statement, but no motion on which to vote. We are speaking in a debate that gives no answers to people out there. The Executive should consider closely its agenda and not waste the Parliament's time on a debate such as this, when a members' debate on volunteering would have had the same outcome. I thought that there might have been consensus in the debate, but the Tories have broken it. If Mr Cameron wanted his name constantly mentioned here, why did he not stand for the Scottish Parliament? It is a disgrace that the Tories mention Mr Cameron. On behalf of the many thousands of volunteers in Scotland who want an answer from the Executive, the Tories should tell Mr Cameron to stand for the Scottish Parliament and to stop electioneering. The Tories are no better than the Executive. As other members have said, we must celebrate volunteering, but it is also important to give volunteers something to celebrate. Core funding has been raised time and again in the debate by members from all parties. I would like the minister to answer a couple of questions on funding. Strategic funding was first mentioned in 2000; then the Executive said that it hoped to report back in 2004. Now, six years down the line, we have the minister's admission that "The Strategic Funding Review aims to improve the availability" of funding, but that it "will be implemented over the next year to 18 months." Will the minister be more specific about the date? We have waited six years, only be told that the plan "will be implemented over the next year to 18 months." The volunteers out there want to know an exact date and they want to know exactly what is happening with strategic funding. That is what debates in the Parliament are all about: getting answers, not platitudes. I commend the minister for considering older people in volunteering. Although, quite rightly, he mentioned youth volunteers throughout his speech—the aim of ProjectScotland is to encourage young people to begin volunteering— we all know that the vast majority of volunteers are older people. We have an ageing population and a golden opportunity to produce a strategy, so I welcome the minister's announcement that he will produce a paper. I have raised it time and again with the minister, while older volunteers have also asked for the matter to be addressed. However, we do not have a date for that report either. That makes two issues for which no date has been given: the strategic funding review and the report on a strategy for older volunteers. I would like answers on those issues. We have missed out another great swathe of the population: disabled volunteers. The report on volunteering and disability is good; I hope that the minister will try to take its recommendations further, one of which is as simple as improving access to buildings to enable disabled people to volunteer. Another recommendation concerns engaging in information. Those are two core issues that are raised in the report—I hope that the minister will take them up. We welcome and celebrate volunteering, but it must not replace core services. We must take it on board that that is happening in various areas. The Executive is making cuts to councils left, right and centre, and some core services that are run by councils, such as after-school care, are having to be taken over by volunteers. If that is the Executive's approach to volunteering, we will struggle dearly to get more people to volunteer. People volunteer because they get great pleasure out of it and learn from it; they do not want to be used to replace core services. I would like answers, not only to my questions but to those of other members.

I thank the minister for his truthful answers and hope that Glasgow City Council was also listening to them. He will know about that council's proposals to remove all qualified teachers from nursery schools. By his own admission, it is excellent to have qualified teachers in nursery schools. The curriculum for excellence and the three-to-18 curriculum stress that there should be smooth transitions between educational stages. Bearing in mind the minister's answers today and his evidence to the Education Committee, will he meet Glasgow City Council and tell it of our concerns, the concerns of the Education Committee and his concerns about the removal of qualified teachers from nursery schools, which is being done to save around £370,000? The proposals are budgetary and are nothing to do with children's welfare.

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing this evening's important debate. I also welcome representatives from Enable and other providers. I know from experience that Enable and other voluntary organisations are always in the forefront of any scheme that will help people with disabilities, as well as those with none. I must admit that, were it not for my role as SNP spokesperson on equal opportunities and disability issues, I would not have heard of the thistle scheme either. It is only through my work in this area over the past three or four years that I have discovered the thistle scheme. As other members have said, awareness has decreased rather than increased. When he first announced the thistle card scheme in 2002, Lewis Macdonald said that it would make a huge difference to the thousands of people who are disabled and may not have the confidence to use public transport. We welcomed with open arms the scheme and the £50,000 the Executive gave to it, but awareness of the scheme, among users and providers, has waned since then. As Fergus Ewing said, simply holding today's debate will raise awareness of the scheme, and I am grateful for that. I worry that, although the scheme was successful at first, it seems to be waning. Providers and users must come together and produce some figures. As Jackie Baillie said, evaluation is important. The scheme must be evaluated, not just from the users' point of view but from the providers' point of view. We need to know how many providers are still aware of the scheme, so that it can be rolled out to all transport  systems in Scotland to give people with disabilities, or elderly people who are unsure and perhaps not so confident about using public transport, a bit of the equality and fairness that we take for granted. Evaluation is certainly important, as is awareness, and that theme has been raised umpteen times by everyone who has contributed to the debate. Perhaps we could raise awareness using posters, or even a radio or television campaign.

We need more advertising on buses too, as Fergus Ewing says. Perhaps there can be advertisements on buses, on the underground and on trains. We need a rolling programme of awareness-raising measures. Perhaps a questionnaire could also be sent out to voluntary groups and to transport providers, asking how aware they are of the scheme. We have all seen advertisements for various schemes that have Executive backing, and they are very successful, so I think that we should consider having another pilot scheme to raise awareness for the thistle scheme. I know that the thistle card is helpful and have spoken to a number of people in Enable and in Capability Scotland who had high hopes for the scheme when it was rolled out in 2002. I think that there is still hope for it yet, but the providers must be aware of it, not just so that they can provide the scheme and advertise it but so that they can train their staff. Unfortunately, as Jackie Baillie said, elderly people and people with disabilities or learning disabilities who are asking about the fare on the bus do not always get the treatment we would expect them to get. Training must also be part of the evaluation and awareness-raising process. I hope that the minister and the Executive will take that on board and actively promote an awareness training day or an advertising appeal to let people know that the thistle scheme exists and that it works well. We need more people to be aware of the scheme and to use it.

I hear what the minister says, but if he went out to communities, he would find that they do not feel that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill will enhance their right of appeal; instead, it is filling them with real dread and frustration. Is he aware of that  frustration that communities feel on planning matters? For example, in Hyndland in the west end of Glasgow, 800 objections to a proposed development were lodged through a petition, as well as 100 individual letters, yet no site visit took place and the reporter refused to take the objections into account in the decision. Does he agree that that is absolutely unacceptable? Will he look into the application and meet the residents concerned?

I apologise to Nanette Milne and everyone else that my mobile phone went off during her speech. That is one form of communication that we can all do without at times. I also congratulate her on securing the debate. As Nanette Milne mentioned, an estimated 250,000 people in Scotland suffer from a communication impairment. I use the word "estimated" because, unlike deaf or deafblind people and people with hearing or visual impairments of other sorts for which figures are available, no accurate figures exist for people who need communication support. We desperately need the research that has been carried out to be taken further, as such information is essential for developing a framework to address the needs of people who have a communication impairment. Communication impairments can affect anyone. People can develop a form of communication impairment—such as a stammer, which Ken Macintosh mentioned—after suffering head injuries in a car accident or after suffering a stroke. It is very sad that not enough support is provided to help such people. Like Ken Macintosh, I want to raise the issues that affect people who have a stammer. We need only imagine what it would be like to be unable to communicate properly such that, in attempting to communicate, one became a laughing stock. That is the impression that people have of those who have a stammer and that is very sad indeed. We perhaps need a policy whereby people are made more aware of certain types of communication problems. If we had that, people would perhaps not be ridiculed or become the butt of jokes in the way that we see happening all too often on television and in the media. The issue of communication impairment should be looked at rather than laughed at. Basically, if we had more speech therapists for people with stammers and other forms of communication impairment, that would go a long way towards rectifying the problem. I hope that the minister will take on board the need for more speech and language therapists. If we started with people at an early age, we could do something to help them. Such help is sadly lacking, as has been mentioned time and again. When people with a communication impairment access education and health services, they are  sometimes looked on as being incompetent. However, as Eleanor Scott mentioned, the mental health services that are provided in Scotland are not guaranteed to meet the needs of such people, especially those who are deaf or deafblind. There is a petition before the Parliament that seeks some form of unit for deaf and deafblind people who have mental health problems. At the moment, some of those people get no help whatever when they have a mental health problem, whether they are in Aberdeen, Glasgow or anywhere else in Scotland, because there is no dedicated service for them. I hope that the minister will look into that. The issue of employment has been mentioned. If someone with a communication impairment goes for a job, they are sometimes not given the job or given a lowly job. They are looked on as being less intelligent than others, but I am sure that if people were educated about their impairment that would satisfy the employer as well as other employees. We must address that issue. Much has been said about the inquiry into how many people suffer from communication impairment. As Nanette Milne and others have mentioned, the social research unit has produced figures on that. It would be helpful to know from the minister when proposals will be brought forward. I know that the Executive has been considering them for five or six months. I plead again for more speech therapists and for language therapy services to be made available.

The motion proposes that the Parliament should welcome the Executive's "intention to work with the United Kingdom Government". We must welcome that intention at the moment because Westminster holds the macroeconomic and benefits system purse-strings and is the greater force in getting people back into work. I hope that in any meeting, the minister will mention the benefit trap in which many people find themselves and its debilitating effect on people who are trying to get into work. That is important and must be raised time and again. One way of getting people back into work is through an overhaul of the benefits system. In his opening remarks, the minister said that opportunities should exist for all and that no one should be left behind. We must ensure that that happens. I endorse everything that the minister said. There was a tiny mention of ethnic minorities in his speech, but he did not mention disabled people or people with impairments, although I am sure that that was not deliberate. He may shake his hands, but disabled people and people with impairments are important. The minister did not mention refugees either. If he is serious about not leaving anyone behind, he should agree that such people should be actively targeted in order to get them back into work; they provide a great pool of talent. Such people want to work, although they cannot do so at certain times. That is not only the result of the benefits system, but because they are least likely to get good training and a good education. Access to employment is difficult for  them and when they get back into work, they are sometimes actively discriminated against. What prevents disabled people and people with impairments getting into work? People want to work, and there is a huge amount of untapped talent out there. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee I participated in its disability inquiry. During that inquiry, the issue of the benefits system was constantly raised. The second issue that was raised is the lack of information. If there is information, people do not know how to access it. There is a lack of training for people and an inability to get into work. In that context, I wondered whether the minister would consider a one-stop shop or a national strategy.

I am sure that the minister did not mean not to mention certain people, but I wanted to mention disability because I and other people continually raise it. The big problem is that there may be good access to work and education in certain parts of the country, but no such access in others. I wonder whether the minister will take on board the idea that there should be a national strategy throughout Scotland that would take into account such matters. As I said, the minister touched on ethnic minorities. There is a 21 per cent gap between the employment of white women and women from black and ethnic minority backgrounds. I wonder how the Government in Scotland will measure and tackle such inequalities. The Government set itself a target date of 2013 to eradicate such inequalities, but how will it do so? I certainly have not received any answers to the questions that I have sent Malcolm Chisholm. In June 2005, the Government committed itself to setting up a strategy group, which was to meet in October and to report back to the Parliament in March 2006. However, as far as I know, that group has not even been set up yet and so has not met. Malcolm Chisholm said in answer to a parliamentary question of mine: "the main task of the strategic group will be to produce an action plan to address the current inequalities that exist".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 3 October 2005; S2W-19177.]  I could continue, but I want to know whether the minister can give me an answer today. I have heard that the group has not been set up to  consider inequalities, but research. I would like the minister to clarify matters. Perhaps that is unfair, as the minister is not the Minister for Communities—Malcolm Chisholm is—but I would like clarification. Is the group just for research? Obviously ethnic minority groups are fed up with being constantly researched—they want some action.

I thank the minister for that answer because I was worried that the group would look only at research and that it would not come up with a strategy. I did not want another group to be set up and us not to know what is happening with it. I welcome the information from the minister and I look forward to finding out who is on the task force and who will be the chairperson. In conclusion, I want to mention refugees. We must congratulate the refugees into teaching project at the University of Strathclyde and the University of Paisley, among others, which has won a prestigious award from the Home Office. It has achieved the highest status. We should mention that to show what can happen with refugees and asylum seekers. I ask every minister why the fresh talent initiative cannot be broadened out to include some of those projects that have received such a high rating from the Home Office. Why can we not act in conjunction with the fresh talent initiative and some of those projects and give opportunities to the refugees and asylum seekers who bring so many skills to this country? Why can we not open out this area? That brings me back to the SNP's amendment. Unless this Parliament has the powers I am afraid that we cannot fully access the benefits of the fresh talent initiative and other projects. I know that the UK Government is considering having a fresh talent initiative—I would not like to use the word "nick"—so perhaps the minister could ask the UK ministers why we cannot expand the fresh talent initiative to include refugees and asylum seekers. After all, this is a multicultural country and it would give those people the opportunity to show that they can and want to work.

Is the minister aware of the removal of the Hakobian family from Scotstoun in Glasgow and the events that led to eight-year-old Naipi being given his mother's medication and having to be rushed to Bedford general hospital, where he was put on a heart monitor? Does he agree that that is totally unacceptable and merits not only an investigation but the collection and collation of information on asylum seeker removals? Malcolm Chisholm said in answer to a question from Linda Fabiani: "The Scottish Executive does not collect or collate information on asylum seeker removal."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 15 December 2005; S2W-21228.]  Does the minister further agree that that is inadequate and that it will do nothing to prevent such situations arising in the future?

Will the member give way?

I have here a copy of a letter from Maher Arar to the First Minister. Mr Arar is a Canadian citizen who was arrested in New York's JFK airport, put on a CIA plane in the middle of the night, flown to Jordan and then driven to Syria. There, as has already been mentioned, he was subjected to one year's imprisonment in a tiny cell where he was repeatedly tortured. I have the letter with me because I would like to quote from it. Mr Arar says: "Allowing flights like the one that took me off to be tortured in Syria to land in Scotland risks Scottish complicity in practices that contravene international law ... These flights must be stopped ... Firm action by Scottish authorities ... can help ensure that my nightmare is not repeated for others." That is a direct plea from that man to this Parliament for help. Much has been made about a lack of evidence and information, but we should look at the facts. According to information that has been obtained from the United States Federal Aviation Administration, since 2001 75 rendition flights have landed in Prestwick, 74 in Glasgow, 14 in Edinburgh, six in RAF Leuchars in Fife, five in Inverness and two in Wick. That evidence comes from America, and my colleague Christine Grahame has further evidence to submit. However, when I asked a question under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 about those flights, the answer was:  "In relation to your request for 'the date on which officials and/or Ministers became aware that flights carrying US prisoners were landing in Scotland for refuelling', the information that you require is not held by the Scottish Executive because the Executive has no information to substantiate the claims that such flights have landed in Scotland. However, the Executive first became aware of allegations from press reports in December 2004." The Executive has been aware of such flights since December 2004—good on the press for picking up on that. Why have we done nothing about information that came to light a whole year ago? I would ask the ministers to answer that question, if they were here. Ministers seem to have a great facility for disappearing when something very important crops up. I also received a reply—

We have become used to ministers disappearing when something crops up that is too hot for them, so that they do not have to answer questions about it. That is as per normal. About an hour ago, I received a reply to a question that I asked Strathclyde police and Sir William Rae: "In relation to the first issue, matters pertaining to civil aviation, I can advise that this force has no locus in the arrangements that are made to enable flights to pass through Scottish airspace ... In relation to the allegations of criminality, you will be aware that where there is evidence that a criminal act occurs in Scotland ... the local police can investigate. However, in order for any investigation to get underway, there must be more than speculation. In this regard, nothing in any of the material provided to me thus far provides an appropriate basis for me to commence an inquiry." The Council of Europe, Spain, Sweden, Iceland and the police in Manchester have said that they will launch inquiries, yet we in this Parliament receive a letter from Strathclyde police telling us that they will not launch an inquiry. That is why it is important that ministers should be here today—

I am sorry, but I have only half a minute left. We and the country wish an inquiry. The Scottish people want to know the truth, yet we receive a letter from Strathclyde police saying that they will not launch an inquiry. Why are no ministers here today to answer our questions? Why is Colin Boyd not here today to answer questions about the legality of such flights?  There is evidence from Amnesty International and from America that such flights land on Scottish soil, yet we are still denied the right to an inquiry. We and the Scottish people demand to know the truth, and we should hear it today. We support the SSP motion and we urge everyone else to support it too. I ask Jim Wallace and the Liberal Democrats whether they will back an inquiry by this Scottish Government if the inquiry by the UK Government that their amendment calls for is not forthcoming. It is about time that this Parliament grew up and acted on behalf of the Scottish people. We must stop the torture flights that are happening every day in our country.

Will Jim Wallace give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Paul Martin for securing the debate. I also thank Help the Aged for producing such excellent documents; I spoke at the organisation's annual general meeting just a few nights ago. I thank, too, Age Concern and all the many voluntary groups whose members give of their time and expertise to help our elder people throughout the year, but particularly during the winter months. The debate is timely, given that the predictions are that we will have the worst winter for 40 years. That is very concerning, given the excess winter deaths that that would cause throughout Scotland and in Glasgow in particular. A study that was done by Energy Action Scotland and the University of Strathclyde found that most pensioners in Glasgow were at risk and that the over-65s in Glasgow were more at risk of dying in  the winter months than over-65s anywhere else in Scotland. We must take that very seriously. I hope that the minister and others will look at that issue. Like Paul Martin, I recognise the work that the Parliament is doing; we should be grateful for that work and welcome it. However, when one in 36 of Glasgow's over-65s dies every winter, it is obvious that not enough is being done. There are benefits to the work that the Parliament is doing, but there are also barriers. Elderly people find it very difficult to access benefits, and I would like the minister and the Parliament to look at the forms that have to be filled in. Pensioners are very proud people and sometimes they do not want to access benefits. However, that is an argument for another day. Filling in forms is very difficult. I have difficulty when I am helping elderly people to fill in forms and I know that they find it difficult too. We must put more emphasis on providing advice on what people can claim and how they should fill in the forms. I agree with what Paul Martin said about the utility companies. That relates not just to fuel poverty, but to the multiple deprivation that is creeping in. Despite what the First Minister said earlier, there is multiple deprivation and it accounts for the excess winter deaths in the Glasgow area. The Scottish index of multiple deprivation, which is published by the Scottish Executive, names Glasgow as the worst region in terms of multiple deprivation. We need a holistic, joined-up approach. We have to target the agencies that target the pensioners. Those agencies link health, housing and social issues. We should not consider fuel poverty and benefits in isolation. I ask the Scottish Executive to examine the Welsh Assembly Government's "The Strategy for Older People in Wales", which led to the establishment of a Cabinet sub-committee that considers older people's needs and experiences and what it is like to be an older person. The strategy, which highlights the issues that affect older people in Wales, is an excellent document and I ask the minister and the Executive to emulate it. The Welsh Cabinet sub-committee considers the issues in a co-ordinated way and takes a holistic approach. It considers not just present needs, but changing demography and the ever-changing needs of elderly people in Wales. The strategy forms an important part of the Welsh Assembly Government's plans. We have heard that one of the huge post offices in Glasgow is to close down and we are looking at similar closures throughout Scotland, including in rural areas. One item that is included in the action plan in the Welsh strategy is:  "Develop Post Offices as community economic development centres." Instead of being closed, post offices are being opened up so that people can access not just their pensions but community facilities. I ask the minister to look carefully at the Welsh strategy. She might not be able to commit herself today, but I ask her seriously to consider producing a similar strategy for older people in Scotland.

Does the minister agree that, despite the obligations that the Executive has placed on public bodies, especially local authorities, and the promises that have been made, the recent racial discrimination rulings strengthen the case for having statutory inspection bodies monitor and audit fully the duty to promote racial equality? Will he give a commitment to that today, to ensure that public bodies adhere to equality legislation?

The debate is timely, not only because of the international 16 days of activism but because it is the start of the festive season. Domestic violence, or violence against women, rises at this time of year, which is unfortunate. I hate the phrase "domestic violence" because violence is violence regardless of whether it is perpetrated in the home or elsewhere. I hope that people will remember that. I ask the Executive whether it will use the debate as a springboard for a media campaign against  violence against women in the lead-up to Christmas and the new year. It has done that in the past. At the Public Petitions Committee this morning, we heard moving evidence from Hazel Reid, who had been a victim of domestic abuse. Her husband ended up being charged with attempted murder. His sentence was three years in jail—and, obviously, he got out on early release. Even more harrowing is the fact that, when Hazel Reid tried to find out under the victim notification scheme when her husband would be released, she was told that she had no right to find out. Unless the sentence is more than four years, people have no right to find out the release date. The police cannot find out either. The victim notification scheme really has to be revisited. If someone has perpetrated that type of violence—attempted murder—they should get more than three years. All violent assailants should be given sentences that fit the crime. Once again we see how the judiciary seems to look on violence against women as a lesser crime.

I do not support automatic release but I am talking about the notification scheme. People should be able to access information on release dates. I ask Margaret Mitchell to bear with me while I go on to a point that Elaine Smith raised. She spoke about rape crimes—another example of the judiciary not taking crimes as seriously as it should. I welcome the minister's announcement of the new violence against women fund, although I share Frances Curran's concerns. I hope that as many groups as possible will benefit from the fund. My colleague Christine Grahame, Shiona Baird and others have spoken of disturbing statistics. Forty-five per cent of people believe that women who wear what are described as sexy clothes are in some way responsible if they are raped. We must educate not only men but women that such attitudes are not acceptable. Young and old people must be educated so that they know that, just because a woman was wearing clothes that, in their perception, were sexy, she did not deserve to be raped. Marilyn Livingstone and others said that it is not only women who suffer but children, families and, in the end, society as a whole. As Nora Radcliffe said, we must change attitudes and the culture before we can address this issue. As Kenny MacAskill said, it is just not good enough that there is this macho attitude that it is all right for a man to beat his wife or mentally abuse her. The  problem exists not only in this country but in others too. We have to make people realise that such an attitude is totally unacceptable. The Parliament must reinforce that message. I ask that both the amendments to the motion be agreed to. The way in which women are portrayed in the media has been mentioned. It results in violence against them. Margaret Mitchell mentioned the support of Barnardo's allowing women and children to remain in their own homes. I agree that they should be allowed to remain in their own homes, and their own communities, but only if they choose to do so.

I do not wish to labour this point—if you will pardon the pun—but I would like to ask the minister outright whether she has had any dealings, discussion or communications with Strathclyde police. Does she agree that, as she is the Minister for Justice, she must have at least some responsibility in this regard and should be aware of all prisoner movements, regardless of whose prisoners they are? You must come clean and say yes or no. Have you had discussions and what have they related to?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not ask whether the minister could direct the police; I asked whether there had been communications and meetings—yes or no?

I thank the Procedures Committee. I have been a member of the Public Petitions Committee in both sessions of  the Parliament, so I can see how it has developed and I understand the reason for the concerns that were expressed to the Procedures Committee. A lot more petitions are being lodged now, which shows what a success story the Public Petitions Committee is and how popular the petitions system has become. I will concentrate on three main areas, one of which is different from those on which Donald Gorrie focused. First, I agree with the recommendation that MSPs should not submit petitions. Most of the MSPs with whom I have had contact agree that there are other ways in which we can pursue issues that are raised in petitions. After all, the committee is called the Public Petitions Committee and, like Donald Gorrie, I think that it should be for the public. Members have the privilege of being able to speak to petitions when they are lodged—petitioners do not always have that privilege—and when the committee considers them later. Petitions are sometimes sent to other committees to consider or for their information. The Public Petitions Committee should be left open to the public. I have no problem with the recommendation on the lodging of petitions by MSPs. The second main area, which has caused concern to me and to some members of the public, is the resubmission of petitions. I welcome the Procedures Committee's recommendations, which are sensible. Some members of the public attempt to make unfair use of the system. However, although the system can be abused, we must ensure that we protect the rights of the majority of genuine petitioners. That is why the Procedures Committee's recommendation is absolutely correct. To refuse to admit a petition that is similar to one that has been lodged in the same session and closed in the past year, but only if it is lodged by or on behalf of the same individual or group, is a protective mechanism that goes some way towards ensuring that the process is open and transparent. The third main area of concern is the admissibility of petitions, which I have raised a number of times. Petitioners have contacted me about the fact that their petition has been ruled inadmissible. I acknowledge the amount of work that the clerks do in contacting and advising petitioners about their petitions, but I worry that members will not be made aware of petitions that are deemed inadmissible unless the petitioners contact them. I seek assurance from the convener of the Procedures Committee or the convener of the Public Petitions Committee that when a clerk explains to someone that their petition is not admissible, they will also tell them that if they disagree with that recommendation, the Public Petitions Committee will make a final decision on admissibility. For the rule change to work properly  and sensibly, the clerk must explain to the petitioner why the petition is inadmissible—I know that the clerks do that just now—and tell them that if they disagree with the decision, they are entitled to seek a final decision from the committee. I have been approached, as have other MSPs, by petitioners asking about the admissibility of petitions. Would we be able to offer them advice? I congratulate the Procedures Committee on its sensible recommendations, but I have concerns and I would welcome clarification on whether, under the rule change, the clerk will have to tell petitioners that if they deem the information or advice that they have received to be incorrect, they can take the petition to the Public Petitions Committee, which has the ultimate responsibility in determining whether it is admissible.

I congratulate Patrick Harvie. I did not realise that it had taken him two and a half years to secure a members' debate. Many people in Glasgow think that air pollution is caused by the many politicians who continually speak there. We can think about that for the future, but I assure members that I am not one of those politicians. Quite rightly, Patrick Harvie mentioned the damaging health aspects that are associated with pollution, particularly its effect on the young, the old and the sick, who are the most vulnerable. There is no doubt that air pollution has dire chronic health consequences—not only do people suffer ill health, but they die sooner because of the terrible pollution in Glasgow city centre. I will cite a couple of examples that we have all seen. How many times have we been in Glasgow—on Hope Street, Queen Street or around George Square—and seen 16 or more  buses parked next to each other in gridlock, belching out noxious fumes? What can be seen at the traffic lights? People with children in buggies that are level with the pollution that is coming out of the buses, which damages the children's health. Those kids have no choice, because they are waiting at the traffic lights and the buses are gridlocked. As politicians, we must give them a choice. It is up to us to ensure that walking about Glasgow and its outskirts is safer with regard to air pollution. That is why I am concerned that Glasgow City Council has not made use of every possible piece of legislation. Reducing the number of vehicles in the city centre would go some way towards creating less pollution. Glasgow City Council is progressing with some measures. I welcome the exhaust emissions tests, under which people can be fined £60 if they are pulled over by the police and their vehicle's exhaust emissions are too high. However, that does not stop the worst pollution, which is the problem. Patrick Harvie mentioned public transport—it is true that we need more of it, but the vast majority of the pollution comes from the buses in our city centre. The heilanman's umbrella has been mentioned many times, but pollution is a problem throughout the city centre. Charlie Gordon will be familiar with Scotstoun, which is outside the city centre; buses sit outside people's houses there and run their engines for 20 minutes or half an hour, yet there is no legislation to stop that. The council has brought in legislation regarding idling vehicles under which people can be fined £20, but it applies mostly to private cars.

I was not criticising the member, but there is a two-way situation. If we have good public transport, people will use it but we do not have good public transport, which results in 16 or 20 buses being crammed in together. Local authorities are responsible for local air pollution, but will the minister say whether legislation is planned to give the regional transport partnerships, for which the Executive will have responsibility, the power to require buses not to sit idling outside people's houses or to do something about the emissions when buses are gridlocked in the city centre, as that is where most of the pollution comes from? Patrick Harvie has suggested a long-term solution, which is fine, but  in the short term we must do something about the gridlock in Glasgow. The Executive could go some way to doing that through legislation in relation to the regional transport partnerships, for which it will have responsibility. I remind the Executive and Parliament that local authorities are not responsible for motorways and that air pollution from motorways is therefore the responsibility of the Scottish Executive. We have gridlock on the motorways round Glasgow, so pollution obviously comes into the city centre. The Executive has a role; it is not all about local authorities. The motion states that the Executive should get together with the local authority in Glasgow to resolve the situation. I echo that point; the Executive and Glasgow City Council are responsible. I thank Patrick Harvie for the opportunity to debate the issue.

To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Executive has had with the Commission for Racial Equality in Scotland regarding the fresh talent initiative. (S2F-1900)

The First Minister will be aware of the concerns that the CRE has expressed about the initiative and about the integration and retention of immigrants in Scotland. Is he aware of an integration strategy and, if so, where is it, who has been consulted on it and will it cover the fresh talent initiative? Will the CRE be consulted and, if not, why not?

I have absolutely no objection to any equalities duty being introduced for public authorities, particularly any equal pay duty or duties that assist ethnic minorities—no one would have any objection to such duties. However, my problems with the bill are that it creates duplication and that some of the powers that it will create will not be devolved but instead will go to Westminster. Some members might argue the point, but that is what a Sewel motion means. I heard what the minister said about the Equal Opportunities Committee's concerns. I was going to read them out clause by clause, but because I have only five minutes to speak, I do not have time to do so. The minister said that he raised those concerns with Westminster's Meg Munn, but he did not give us any answers as to whether Westminster will accept any of the points that the committee raised. For that reason, I do not know whether I can support the motion. A number of areas concern me, and there are two particular problems to which we should have had answers. One involves clause 17 of the bill, on grant-giving powers. Given the geographical spread of Scotland and the various community organisations that will interact with the CEHR, if the Scottish commissioner does not have grant-giving powers, the grant allocations system might not work properly. I am also concerned about clause 19, which involves the promotion of work with agencies. The CRE already works with various agencies and communities, so that power should be devolved. I hoped that the minister would tell me that the powers outlined in clauses 17 and 19 were to be devolved to the proposed new Scottish commissioner, but he has not so far. I hope that we will have an answer to that today. A point that the minister has not mentioned but which was mentioned to me and to the Equal Opportunities Committee is that there will be only  one Scottish commissioner among 15 in the UK. That is totally inadequate in a UK context—we need more than just one commissioner to represent Scotland's issues. The commissioners will have to be knowledgeable about devolved areas, and one is not enough. I hoped that the minister would mention that matter. Another question that concerns me is why a commissioner for Scotland should be appointed by UK ministers with the endorsement of Scottish ministers, rather than be appointed by this Parliament. The minister touched on the establishment of the commission for equality and human rights, which raises another area of concern. I am worried about duplication. The Justice 1 Committee is currently scrutinising the Scottish Commissioner for Human Rights Bill. Why are we using a Sewel motion to remove powers from a Scottish commissioner that we do not even have yet by giving them to Westminster? I am greatly troubled that the public might be confused by having two commissioners.

Cathy Peattie knows that I and everyone on the Equal Opportunities Committee have worked hard on the matter. I do not seek to make a party-political point, but none of our fears has been addressed today. I thought that we might have got some answers. The concern, which I share, about the proposed Scottish human rights commissioner has been raised before in committee and with me personally. There will be confusion and duplication. I mention another concern that Christine Grahame will pick up later. Although the children's commissioner, Kathleen Marshall, is doing a marvellous job, I worry that the bill might dilute her powers because it has been reported that there will be an overlap with her post. I hoped that the minister would say something about that in his opening remarks, but perhaps he will alleviate some of my fears in his closing speech. I felt that I had to express those genuine concerns.

The minister will be aware that the GHA's second-stage transfer to local housing organisations is now in doubt, following the UK Government's agreement to the European Commission's ruling, which classifies social landlords as public bodies and means that tendering will now become Europe-wide. Will the minister confirm that that is, indeed, the situation? What will she do about it? Does the position not—as we have always said—leave the stock transfer in chaos?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister hints at the possibility that people will put in loads of objections to developments because of the third-party right of appeal. However, she has not read the figures from Ireland, where very few developments have been held up in such a way. The system there has in fact worked more quickly. As I said in my speech, when people spoke to one another, the process was quicker.

I respond to Murdo Fraser by making it perfectly clear that a third-party right of appeal is Scottish National Party policy. I am proud that I was one of the people who put that forward at conference. The policy was adopted and it is in our manifesto.

No. Murdo Fraser should tell him that—I have already told Jim on many occasions. Perhaps I will tell him again, but I am sure that Murdo Fraser will remind him if he is on the  television or the radio with him. A third-party right of appeal is SNP policy. I can get Murdo Fraser a copy of the manifesto so that he can read it. Like other members, I think that the debate has been very good and that some good points have been made. There has perhaps been some point scoring on certain issues, but not from everyone. I put forward my party's policies and point out that the idea of a third-party right of appeal comes from speaking to communities. The approach is about speaking to communities, listening to them and ensuring that we act on their wishes. I take Karen Whitefield's point that we cannot please everyone, but I say to her and to other members that we can ensure that there is some form of fairness. A third-party right of appeal is all about fairness and equality and we should consider those issues today. We must be fair to businesses, but we must also be fair to communities, which, as has been mentioned, sometimes suffer from bad developments of various kinds. Wind farms can be one such development, but I am sure that Murdo Fraser will come back on that issue—a little birdie told me about that one. I will address other aspects of the proposed planning bill. The white paper contains some good provisions. I have made that clear to the minister and at various meetings with community groups and others throughout Scotland during the recess. The updating of local plans is essential. We have always needed that to happen, as the situation has been ridiculous. Business representatives have stated that sometimes, when they are developing something, the local development plans do not catch up with them. The welcome proposal on the updating of the plans has emerged from meaningful dialogue with businesses, communities, members and local councillors. Mary Scanlon picked up on COSLA's worries, which should be of concern to members and to the minister. What dialogue has taken place between the minister and COSLA? After all, local authorities will implement the plans. Local authorities need the resources, the manpower and the time to develop local development plans. If we do not ensure that they have those things, the plans will never be introduced. I am pleased with the positive attempt to get developers to meet communities and to involve them in developments early on. Indeed, many communities have cried out for such an essential measure. However, as Rosemary Byrne pointed out, despite such involvement, we have no legislation to stop any development that goes ahead, even though there might be objections to it. Although there might be a strategy for involving  communities, it has no teeth. Communities can be lulled into a false sense of security by their involvement with developers and councils because, whatever happens, developers and councils will always get their way. If there is to be no third-party right of appeal, we should tell communities that, ultimately, their involvement in the process will have no teeth. On consultation, Pauline McNeill mentioned that there were 800 objections to an application for a development in the west end of Glasgow. Although we all believed that those objectors had a good case, the development still went ahead. I say to her that it is all well and good to back communities in certain circumstances, but there is no easy road out of this problem. No one can sit on the fence and say that they back communities in certain circumstances. The only way in which those 800 objectors in Glasgow would have got anywhere was if they had had a third-party right of appeal. Pauline McNeill and other members have said that they would like the bill to include some form of third-party right of appeal. However, we must examine the matter properly. Regardless of what anyone in the Parliament says, without such an appeal mechanism—which I believe Sarah Boyack eloquently described as a communities appeal—communities will be left in their current situation. I have been to many public and community meetings at which the CBI and others have claimed that Scotland will disappear into a big black hole if it gets a third-party right of appeal. As Mike Rumbles and other members have pointed out, they should tell that to Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Australia. Those countries are not in a big black hole; indeed, their GDP is better than the UK's. Others claim that such a mechanism would be a meddlers charter and that it would give rise to serial objectors to developments. However, evidence from other countries that have third-party right of appeal suggests that that would not be the case. Indeed, evidence from Ireland shows that people tend to sit round a table and find a compromise before the matter reaches the appeals stage. Having recourse to third-party right of appeal gives communities the confidence to take such action. A third-party right of appeal should form an important part of the proposed planning bill; in fact, I believe that even some Tory members might be considering an appeal mechanism for communities. I urge the Liberal Democrats and Labour to think about introducing some form of third-party right of appeal. As a footnote, I notice that, at Westminster, a Liberal Democrat MP—I cannot remember her name—is introducing a private member's bill on third-party right of appeal. We should bear that in mind, because if we do not  incorporate the measure in the planning bill, we might have to debate a Sewel motion on the matter a year or two from now.

It must be a good idea if a minister says so.

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to meet Greater Glasgow NHS Board. (S2O-7335)

The minister is aware of concerns about the siting of the proposed new children's hospital in Glasgow. His predecessor as Minister for Health and Community Care said: "the Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill provide an important national service for the whole of Scotland and I am determined that such a service should and will continue."— [ Official Report , 30 September 2004; c 10753.]  Does the minister agree with that statement? Does he also agree that the two sites that Greater Glasgow NHS Board has identified could not provide such a service? Will he ensure that Professor Calder's advisory group is given access to all professionals in relation to integrated maternity and children's services in Glasgow?

The minister mentioned a series of consultations, said that he wants to reform and not tinker, and said that he wants to listen to what local people have to say through a fairer, more inclusive and more transparent planning system. However, he has ruled out the third-party right of appeal even though his consultation document shows that 86 per cent of respondents are in favour of it. Does he not agree that he does a great disservice to the majority of the public who support some form of third-party right of appeal? Does he not agree that confidence in the planning system will be eroded and that the third-party right of appeal should be included in the white paper?

I congratulate the committee on all the work that it has done. I was a committee member during consideration of the previous Housing (Scotland) Bill and I know how much work is put in, not only by members but by the clerks. It is very much appreciated. I will concentrate on two areas: disability, which Linda Fabiani mentioned, and houses in multiple occupation. I am concerned about the exemption from licensing of certain HMOs. The memorandum on delegated powers says: "Subsection (1) gives Scottish Ministers power by order to designate types of HMOs which may be exempted from licensing by a local authority." It goes on to say: "In particular, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 provides for all private landlords to be registered with the local authority, having been passed as fit and proper persons to let property. It is thought that registration, and other developments, may provide sufficient control over some categories of HMO, without the need for licensing. This power would enable the Scottish Ministers to indicate that in general such HMOs need no longer be licensed." I would like some clarification on that. Legislation on care homes was introduced in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, but I am concerned that if landlords are registering under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 they no longer need to be licensed. Perhaps the minister could address that when she sums up. I support ministers having the power to regulate the fees that are charged in relation to HMOs. For too long, fees in the Glasgow area have been extortionate compared with those in other areas. Regulation will provide uniformity and is a welcome addition to the bill. I welcome the minister's commitment to consider the introduction of amendments at stage 2 on disability adaptations and grants, particularly if that involves reviewing the means testing and ring fencing of moneys in the private sector. I look forward to considering those amendments. The  minister said that he believes that it is not discriminatory for disabled people in Scotland not to have the same rights as disabled people elsewhere, but I disagree; I echo Karen Whitefield's comment that people in Scotland should not be disadvantaged compared with people in the rest of the United Kingdom. The fact that the Disability Rights Commission is a reserved body is being used as an excuse for denying disabled people in Scotland the same rights as disabled people have in the rest of the UK. The minister said that he will speak to his Westminster colleagues, and I look forward to hearing any response that he receives. Perhaps we could come up with our own legislation to protect disabled people. From past evidence and from speaking to the disabled community, we know that the disabled are among the poorest in our society and that they pay more money for heating. It is essential that disabled people are treated more fairly, and more equally with everyone else in society. The moneys that disabled people receive are not nearly enough to cover their living expenses, let alone the adaptations that they need to live a normal life. The minister said that moneys were important. That is true—funding is crucial. The minister mentioned postcode prescribing, as we used to refer to it in the health service. However, in this case we are talking about postcode prescribing of adaptations and moneys for those adaptations. We must put a stop to that, and I welcome the minister's commitment to doing that. It is ridiculous that some local authorities provide more money for adaptations than others do. The minister mentioned the removal of capping, which would be a positive step forward. However, I seek clarification because, although the minister said that he does not want capping, he also said that he may have to introduce means testing. He said that moneys and funding are important. Will there be an upper limit of grant before means testing is introduced? The bill, and in particular the commitments to disabled people in Scotland, are overdue. I welcome the bill and look forward to stage 2 and any response from the minister to the questions that I have asked.

I thank Christine Grahame and others for securing the debate and I congratulate Lesley Riddoch on her hard work—not just today—to push women's  issues. The courage of the women whom we are discussing knows no bounds—they seek justice, equality and fairness, not only for themselves or other women, but for everyone in their countries. Rightly, a lot has been said about what happens to women in various countries, but we should also salute the courage of those women and others in seeking fairness and equality, not just for women or themselves, but for others in their countries. Many years ago, I studied what was happening in Ghana and Burkina Faso and was absolutely amazed by the small co-operatives that were springing up there. Ghana has come on in the world, but, unfortunately, Burkina Faso is in as bad a state as it was all those years ago. I was gobsmacked by the amount of work that women did in those areas to create co-operative farms so that they could educate their children—not just their sons, but their daughters, too—whom they had had to send away to get educated. The amazing thing was that when those children, particularly the girls, were educated, they did not want to leave their country; they wanted to stay there to educate others. That says something about women as a whole: they are not selfish, but wish to give something back through education or work. They want to see their communities take something from the hard work that they have put in. That is something from which not just the G8 leaders but leaders of all countries—particularly men—can learn. Trish Godman is absolutely right that we must ensure that money goes not to dictatorships but to co-operatives in which women are working at grass-roots level and so see what is going on. In my studies, I found that those women worked hard in the co-operatives, which is where the money should be spent—we cannot afford to let it go to dictatorships. Mary Scanlon said that, although the women work hard, they have no financial independence. That is why it is important that we in the Parliament, the G8 and countries throughout the world ensure that any money that is given in aid goes to people at grass-roots level. All that might sound negative; we have to consider the positives as well. The eight women who are here today and the others who are taking part in the W8 summit give us hope for the future. The debate is being televised not just in Scotland but throughout the world. We have to ensure that the work does not stop here or when the G8 summit finishes; we have to ensure that the media keep a close eye on what is happening in Africa. I salute the tenacity of the women here tonight and others throughout the world and pledge my support and that of everyone in the Parliament. I am extremely proud that the women are here tonight. I ask them to keep carrying on the good  work; we will ensure that the media here do not forget about it.

rose—

On financial eligibility, will reform take into account pension credit, which is a new, means-tested benefit for over-60s and is not disregarded for civil legal aid? The equivalent means-tested benefit for people who are under 60—income support—is disregarded. Many people who are over 60 will therefore be left at a disadvantage with legal costs.

I, too, congratulate Robert Brown on securing a very important debate that celebrates not only the centenary of Barnardo's but the people who offer their services to voluntary organisations. Many members have mentioned Barnardo's centenary; however, we should also celebrate the fact that the organisation has moved with the times and developed various projects without losing its original ethos of looking after, caring and nurturing impoverished children, who sometimes come from chaotic backgrounds. We—and Barnardo's—should be very proud of that fact. All too often, the kids who come from chaotic backgrounds go on to have chaotic lifestyles. In many cases, the kids themselves are blamed;  however, we should blame neither the children nor the parents. Instead, we should help them. In this modern world, it is too easy to lay the blame at the doorsteps of families and children when in fact all they need is some support and help, and I congratulate Barnardo's on providing such support. We should be very pleased that such organisations continue to carry out such work after 100 years; after all, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, even though our society is more affluent, there is still poverty among us. I am glad that people are willing enough to help with these matters. I want to concentrate on a number of initiatives that Barnardo's has introduced. Rosemary Byrne highlighted alcohol and substance abuse. To deal with that major problem, the organisation has established 361 projects throughout Great Britain, many of which work with parents who misuse alcohol. As a result of that work, Barnardo's has called for programmes that are designed specifically to help affected families and children. It is easy to say that we will spend money on that issue; however, if we do not know a particular family's circumstances, such money is not necessarily wasted but it does not always reach the proper areas. Perhaps we need a more inclusive approach in that respect. In any case, as Marlyn Glen, Robert Brown and Donald Gorrie have pointed out, money has to come into it somewhere—which, I am afraid to say, is where the minister herself comes into it. I realise that the Scottish Parliament supports the voluntary sector very well, but perhaps we should consider tailoring such projects to families' needs. Marlyn Glen touched on domestic violence, on which I know that she has done a lot of work in the Equal Opportunities Committee. I find it worrying that, despite campaigns by us and by Barnardo's, the incidence of such violence is increasing. We must examine the matter, because it badly affects young people and parents. I know that Barnardo's is certainly looking into it. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned that times have moved on—for example, we now have the internet—and Barnardo's runs 13 projects that work with young children under 14 and 15 who have suffered child abuse through prostitution. We should continue to support Barnardo's excellent work in any way that we can. I realise that funding is always a problem, but we must ensure that it is available for the fantastic projects that I have highlighted. I thank Robert Brown again for securing this debate.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate. As Jean Turner said, his tenacity in pursuing the matter is most admirable. I have never seen anyone fight so much for something in the chamber or in a cross-party group. He obviously believes in the cause that he espouses. Mike Watson mentioned something that I also want to pick up on, which is the fact that politics is being played by the medical profession in respect of ME. Doctors and professionals who do that should be ashamed of themselves and should think of patients rather than the medical profession. For the sake of the patients, they must stop playing politics with this issue.  I will read out just a few quotations from among the messages that I have received from people who suffer from ME: "It is good to know that the MRC is giving some priority into research into ME." "I would like money for research spent on looking into the physical causes of ME." "There is an urgent need in my opinion that research be carried out". "There needs to be research into the physical causes of this illness". "There is a great need for better funding of research into the physical causes of this illness." Alex Fergusson explained eloquently just how badly people are suffering. He and other members will have met constituents who suffer from ME and their carers, and will have tried to explain to them that although we in Parliament are doing our utmost, our calls are falling on deaf ears in the medical profession. Now, unfortunately, we must tell them that Scottish Enterprise, via the Scottish Executive, is also deaf to our calls. The situation is a sad one for me and people to whom I speak. Every one of the quotations that I read out mentioned research, yet today we are talking about a team that is perhaps only one year away from finding a cure for ME being pulled apart because of lack of funding. The group originally contained Dr Chaudhuri, who is a fantastic champion for ME and has bashed away at the medical profession to convince them that research into the condition is needed. Unfortunately, we have lost Dr Chaudhuri. I appeal to the minister to ensure that funds are made available to enable research to continue. We must not lose any more researchers, as we lost Dr Chaudhuri. We must be able to say to our constituents and to people in Scotland who suffer from ME that we are prepared to allocate a couple of thousand pounds in order to see the research through in an attempt to find a cure.

I note once again how quick off the mark the SSP speaker has been in leaving the chamber. I would like it to be noted for Carolyn Leckie's benefit that the SSP does not have a monopoly on socialist principles. Many of us here have been espousing such principles since long before the SSP was established and will be espousing them long after that party's demise. I hope that she reads the Official Report . It is typical of the SSP to say something and then not to stay for the rest of the debate. I hope that Carolyn Leckie will answer me if she comes back. I welcome the opportunity to debate certain aspects of the Kerr report. However, I cannot say that I thank the Conservative party for using its time to debate the report, because all that we have heard from the Tories is the usual diatribe about further privatisation of the health service. I am not the only one who is worried about that; even the BMA is concerned about the creeping privatisation of the health service. In its briefing, which we all received, the BMA said: "The BMA remains concerned that the Scottish Executive"— not just the Tories— "is increasingly considering expanding private sector involvement in the provision of NHS services". Perhaps the BMA knows what we know, which is that there is not a great deal of difference between the Tories, Labour and the Lib Dems. The minister and other members on the coalition benches should think about that.

I am sorry, but I am short of time as it is. I whole-heartedly agree with the great emphasis that the Kerr report puts on consultation of the public, but I am concerned about decisions that were taken before the report was produced. I cannot agree with Kate Maclean's view that we should have more time to discuss matters, because the big problem—especially in the West of Scotland—is that decisions have already been made and are, as has been said, not reversible. As we all know, the consultation process in the West of Scotland was less than perfect; indeed, it was deeply flawed. It led to countless protests, petitions and public meetings. I am concerned that, in his statement to the Parliament, the Minister for Health and Community Care said that the Kerr report "will not be used to reopen decisions that have already been made."— [ Official Report , 25 May 2005; c 17155.]  The minister has reiterated that. However, I think that those decisions should be re-examined, especially in the light of the situation involving Argyll and Clyde NHS Board that has materialised over the past few months.

I take on board what Jackie Baillie says, but the position of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board has a significant knock-on effect on the situation in Glasgow, where a decision has been taken to have only two full accident and emergency-equipped hospitals. As Jackie Baillie will know from consultation of her constituents and from meetings that she and I have attended, people want to come to Glasgow for services, but the decisions of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and the Executive will have a significant impact on Glasgow. The issue must be revisited because it is not enough to have only two A and E hospitals for Glasgow, West Dunbartonshire and other areas. I had hoped that this morning's debate would allow us to probe the issues in the Kerr report, but unfortunately the Conservatives have not given us the opportunity to do that. The position of maternity hospitals is not mentioned in the Kerr report. That issue, too, was the subject of flawed consultation. The people of West Dunbartonshire and the West of Scotland as a whole went to public meetings and signed petitions and there was a great deal of unrest. We still do not know what will happen to the Yorkhill hospitals, where maternity services in Glasgow will  be sited or when they will be moved elsewhere. Those questions must be answered. I had hoped that the Conservatives would seek to obtain such clarification during the debate, but it seems that written questions to the minister will be necessary. We cannot afford to wait until after the recess. I am disappointed that we will not debate the issue for another few months because we do not know what decisions will be taken. I asked the minister what advice and guidance had been given to health boards in the past and what advice and guidance they would be given now, but I have received no answer. We must wait another three or four months, but we do not know what decisions the health boards will take in the meantime and what impact that will have on users—patients and the public—and the professionals who work in the health service. We should have had an answer, but by the time we get one, it may be too late. Many members have spoken about staff retention and recruitment—an important issue about which there is a great deal of concern. A written answer from the minister shows that, in 2004, the number of medical graduates from Scottish universities fell by 61 to 727. At the same time, the proportion of those graduates who went to work outside Scotland rose from 9 per cent to 12 per cent. That is worrying. We must find out why we cannot solve that problem and keep staff here. If we intend to implement the Kerr report, we must get that right—we must ensure that we have sufficient staff to further the report's recommendations. I turn to an issue that I would like the minister to take up. Medical students at the University of St Andrews do a three-year course in St Andrews, but then go to the University of Manchester to finish their degrees.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. By the minister's own admission, medical students who study at St Andrews enter the health service down in England. They spend three years at university in Scotland, but cannot continue their course without going to England. I want to know why that is the case. Surely it must be possible to ensure that we retain those graduates.

I thank the clerks to the Equal Opportunities Committee, who have worked hard and are a dedicated team. I also thank the many witnesses who gave evidence and who in some cases—as the minister said—had suffered harrowing experiences. I also thank the many experts who gave evidence, whose knowledge of the terrible consequences of FGM was invaluable. FGM has short-term and long-term consequences for the women who are subjected to it, their families and future generations. Sometimes, older women realise that they do not want the procedure to be carried out on their daughters, but have to have it done because of cultural and community pressures. Some such women were brave enough to speak to the committee's reporter Elaine Smith, and to the committee itself, so it is incumbent on us to thank them. The minister says that they might be here today. I thank them very much and welcome them to Scotland. When the bill is passed, it will offer them the full protection of the Scottish courts. I use the term "female" deliberately because, as we all know, even babies can be the victims of FGM. It would not be right to describe young children, some of whom are as young as two years old, as women. We must ensure that everyone knows that FGM can be carried out on such young children. Unfortunately, that happens in certain areas of the world, but once the bill is passed it will not happen on Scottish soil or, if the person who tries to commit the offence is resident in Scotland, outwith Scotland. I thank the minister for his continued dialogue with the committee. We had some good arguments with him about amendments to the bill that we wanted to make. I am very pleased that we will pass a bill that is not merely an equivalent of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003, but is separate Scottish legislation. I accept what the minister said about reinfibulation—which I raised at stage 1 and stage 2—and the information that he has provided in his letter to the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and I welcome the amendments that deal with that. I am glad, too, that specific reference has been made to the Somali women's action group and health professionals, who I assume will write the guidance. It is important that we reiterate to professionals such as social workers that FGM is  against the law. When the minister sums up, I would like him to mention the intended timescale for production of the guidance. Dr Hepburn has significant experience of dealing with women who have suffered the terrible experience of being subjected to FGM and I hope that she will work with the Somali women's action group, Comfort Momoh and others to produce the guidance. I look forward to hearing when it will be published. I will touch on some of the amendments that have been outlined so far. Executive amendment 1, which amends section 1, alleviates many of my concerns and those of other committee members—no doubt they will raise them. Those concerns led to committee amendment 13 at stage 2, which was an important amendment, but one that led to difficulty for the minister and the committee. We got over those difficulties and I am pleased that the minister lodged amendment 8, which means that, if the bill needs to be changed in the future, an order will come before Parliament. It is fantastic that the minister took the issue on board. As I have said previously, the World Health Organisation may reconsider its definition of FGM, so it is important that we can come back to Parliament if that happens. I am also particularly pleased at the extension of section 1, which relates directly to FGM being arranged outwith Scotland. As the minister said in his speech, it is a big step forward—indeed, it is groundbreaking legislation. People who come into our country as asylum seekers will now be fully protected from FGM. If anything happens to them, they will know that they have the full weight and protection of the law behind them. If a person is fleeing persecution and knows that FGM might be planned for them, I am sure that it will give them some comfort to know that Scotland will protect them. I will conclude because many members want to speak in the debate. I am sure that every single person agrees that FGM in all its forms—not just in its most extreme form—is a vile, cruel and inhuman act. Through the bill, we must ensure that we reach out not only to the women who are affected by FGM but to the men in their communities. We have to make it clear to men and women in those communities that FGM will not be tolerated in our society. I said that the bill is groundbreaking legislation, which it is, but I have heard folk outwith the chamber say that other matters are more important than FGM. If, by passing the bill, we save even one female from going through the terrible trauma of female genital mutilation, we will have done something good. I am very proud to have been involved. I look forward to the day when we do not have to speak about female genital mutilation and when  the suffering of many thousands—maybe millions—of females throughout the world is ended. Scotland is leading the way. As I said, I am proud of the committee. I thank the minister and everyone else who was involved in the bill. This is legislation of which Parliament should be proud. It is an issue on which we can reach out to the world and on which we can say that we have done something that is slightly different from what Westminster has done. With the bill, we are saying to the rest of the world that female genital mutilation will not be tolerated, not just in Scotland but throughout the world. I welcome the bill and fully support the Executive amendments today.

I welcome the amendments, particularly amendment 8, which seeks to allow modifications to be made to section 1. That issue was much debated during the Equal Opportunities Committee's consideration of the bill. I welcome the fact that the minister has written to the Subordinate Legislation Committee on the matter and that he has taken on board the committee's suggestion that the affirmative procedure be used in respect of any changes that might be brought before Parliament. After all, the definition in the bill might well change if the WHO revises its own definition of FGM.

To ask the First Minister what impact the proposed staff reductions at BBC Scotland will have on Scottish democracy and cultural identity. (S2F-1672)

I, too, am glad that the unions and the BBC are meeting at ACAS, but I am afraid that the Deputy First Minister did not answer my question. Is he aware of the comments that have been made by the Scottish Trades Union Congress and others about the serious implications that the cuts will have in Scotland? In particular, is he aware of one official's comments that "London determines how much production Scotland gets", and that, "The cultural identity of Scotland will suffer, without a doubt"? Does the Deputy First Minister agree that now is the time for powers over broadcasting to be brought under the auspices of the Scottish Parliament?

As the minister said, we will not debate the issue until after the summer recess. What advice and guidance will he give to health boards and others in the meantime?

When I look at the Business Bulletin , I realise that the text of the motion is rather long. I have been told that it has set a record. However, the "Manifesto for Inclusion" covers so many meaningful and important areas that I felt I could not leave anything out. I congratulate Inclusion Scotland on producing such an excellent report and I welcome its representatives to the Scottish Parliament. They are behind me in the gallery. I thank them for all the work they have done. When I took them for a coffee earlier, they were at pains to tell me that the manifesto was written not only by them but by disabled people throughout Scotland. I thank them very much.  I am a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee and I want to thank the committee and its staff. At this very moment we are carrying out an inquiry into disability issues. Many people have spoken to me about the motion and they will agree that all the groups we have spoken to, and all the people who have contributed to our investigation in every area we have visited, have raised exactly the same concerns that the manifesto highlights. That says something about the work that Inclusion Scotland has done in producing its manifesto. It is estimated that one in five of the population of Scotland is disabled. That is 1 million people—an awful lot of people. More than one in three households have a person who is either disabled or suffering from a long-term illness. Those people face discrimination in everyday life—in housing, education and employment. That is appalling. In my speech, I want to cover a number of areas, highlighting particular concerns raised in the manifesto. The first is poverty. Approximately four in 10 of all households with a disabled person—42 per cent—have an income of £10,000 or less. The second is employment. Among the population of working age, 45 per cent of disabled people are in employment, compared with 82 per cent of non-disabled people. Next is housing. Households with a disabled person, or a person with a long-term illness, are more likely to rent accommodation than they are to own their own home. The last is education. A total of 58 per cent of disabled people, with or without a long-term illness, have no qualifications, compared with 24 per cent of non-disabled people. On top of all that, one in five disabled Scots has experienced harassment at some time or other because of their impairment. Poverty is a real issue for disabled people. The benefits system is a reserved matter but areas such as community care assessment and direct payments are within the powers of this Parliament. We can address them. We must have a comprehensive review of the assessment process, and greater emphasis must be placed on self-assessment in community care. Direct payments go some way towards increasing social inclusion, which is obviously welcome. However, the take-up rate is quite low, especially among those with learning difficulties and mental health issues. From constituency cases, I have experienced at first hand just how difficult it is for people from certain areas to get their local authority to fund community care packages that are tailored to their needs—I am sure that many other members will have  experienced that, too. We must look into that if we really want to give people the choice of living independently rather than being in residential care. The issue is raised with me continually in my constituency office and in letters. Transport has figured highly in the Equal Opportunities Committee's investigation and also features in the "Manifesto for Inclusion". Although we all appreciate the moves towards integrated transport services, disabled people still face various difficulties. Without access to services, people are excluded from participating in activities that most people would consider to be normal. We welcome the concessionary fares scheme that is being rolled out across the country but, when we read the legislation, we discover that the scheme will not be fully implemented until 2016 or 2017. People will have a concessionary card to travel, but the transport might not be available because it does not have to be in place until 2016 or 2017. The latest date for implementation—2020—seems quite far away, as is highlighted in the manifesto. It would be advantageous if the Scottish Parliament could set a date for implementation that is well ahead of the designated timescale. I leave that in the hands of the minister and suggest that she could address the issue when she responds. Of all the services, access to meaningful education is one of the most important. Education can open doors to employment, lift people out of poverty and lead to a fulfilling life. However, we hear over and over again—not only in the evidence that has been given to our inquiry but in the manifesto—that disabled people are being let down by our further education colleges. They are sent on courses that do not benefit them. Young adults and others are being given colouring books and are being told to clean windows and given other tasks that do not lead to fulfilment or qualifications. During our inquiry, we heard of one young woman who was told to clean the classroom. Rightly, she said, "No. I am here to get a qualification." That sort of thing is happening everywhere and we must examine it further. This morning, we had a debate on further education and I hope that the needs of disabled people will be considered closely by the Minister for Education and Young People. We must tackle inequalities in that area if the lives of disabled people are to be improved and social inclusion is to have any real meaning. I would like to cover many other areas but I expect that other members will deal with them. I admit that there have been improvements in the social inclusion of disabled people. The Disability Discrimination Bill should make a positive difference and we must ensure that it does. The "Manifesto for Inclusion", which is written by disabled people, gives a voice to  disabled people that we must listen to. As legislators, we must implement policies that will fully integrate all of the peoples of Scotland. I end by quoting article 1 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights: "All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood."

The minister will be aware that I have resubmitted my bill on third-party rights of appeal, but is he also aware of the widespread anger in communities about the Executive's complete refusal to consider third-party rights of appeal? He has mentioned clarification, but he must clarify to the people whether he is willing to have third-party rights of appeal. Does he agree with me and others that the consultation process was essentially a sham to get rid of third-party rights of appeal and that the real—

I am asking whether the minister agrees with me. Does he agree that the Executive's real purpose is to centralise the planning process?

Does the First Minister agree that it is absolutely shameful that Glasgow has the worst levels of deprivation and the worst life expectancy in the UK? After suffering decades of Labour domination in the council, at Westminster and in the Scottish Parliament, thousands of Glaswegians are still living in poverty. Will he give a commitment today to set up a task force and invite all interested parties to examine the very real issues of poverty in the city?

This is the first time that I have shared anything with Stewart Stevenson. I congratulate Des McNulty and commend him for what he has done today. In all the years that I have known him—mostly on hustings during election campaigns—he has always put the issue of poverty at the forefront. I want to concentrate on the millennium development goals. In 2000, almost all the countries in the world signed up to a programme for eradicating extreme poverty by 2015. Eight goals were set. I cannot go through them all, but Susan Deacon and Linda Fabiani spoke about empowering women. We also need to combat HIV/AIDS and to work towards providing education and getting rid of poverty and hunger. Sarah Boyack asked how we can achieve that in the future. One thing that we must do is provide more and better aid. Linda Fabiani mentioned the target for overseas aid of 0.7 per cent of GNP. The Parliament should pressurise the Westminster Government—whoever is elected to it—to ensure that that is achieved. There should also be better aid, targeted at the right areas. Debt cancellation is one of the biggest issues that we must tackle. Other members have spoken  about fair trade policies. Margaret Ewing mentioned Zambia, which offers an example of what is happening. Before 1975, Zambia was one of the wealthiest sub-Saharan African countries, but it is now one of the poorest. The life expectancy of Zambians is 33 years—they die earlier than people anywhere else in the world. Other members have mentioned the education system in Zambia and the suffering of women there. In 2004, Zambia used 7.35 per cent of its gross domestic product to repay its debt. What is the situation now? Despite all the efforts that have been made, debt reduction is only 5 per cent of what was promised under the HIPC initiative, which Mark Ballard mentioned. We must do something about cancelling the debt. After all, as Donald Gorrie pointed out, these countries have had to privatise their public sector industries so that outside firms will come in. Such a situation is ridiculous and cannot go on. We must support action to ensure that the Westminster Government reduces or cancels the debt of these poor countries.

To ask the First Minister what impact low immigration levels into Scotland would have on the fresh talent initiative. (S2F-1577)

I thank the Prime Minister for that answer—[ Laughter. ] Please excuse me for saying "Prime Minister". Sometimes I think that the First Minister is doing more Westminster electioneering than Scottish Parliament electioneering, and that is terribly wrong. My question was about immigration and the fresh talent initiative. In February this year, the Home Secretary said with regard to population decline in Scotland that his policy on immigration was industry led rather than region led. Does the First Minister agree that that policy will have a detrimental effect on the fresh talent initiative and will further compound Scotland's growing population crisis? Has he had any meetings with Mr Clarke regarding those concerns?

I declare an interest, as my husband is a partner in a pest control firm and as such is subject to legislation on the control of firearms. I extend my sympathies to the parents and relatives of Andrew Morton and to all who have suffered from the indiscriminate use of firearms. I agree that there must not be a knee-jerk reaction to this tragic case, but it is difficult not to be emotional when the life of a two-year-old child has been lost. I completely understand the anger and frustration of Andrew Morton's family. I welcome the amnesty that has been introduced by the Minister for Justice, which has already seen a number of air-guns handed in. However, 55 out of an estimated 0.5 million is only 0.1 per cent. We must do much more to prevent another tragedy from happening. That is why we need to consider introducing an all-encompassing registration system, which would deal with what some see as an unfortunate macho culture in Scotland. On the Tory and Labour amendments, I recognise that there has been a tightening of legislation at Westminster, but one-size-fits-all legislation cannot possibly work for the type of firearms that can be obtained in Scotland. Recent  legislation has raised the age at which people can acquire firearms, but let us not forget that the age of the alleged perpetrator of the crime against Andrew Morton was well above any limit that has been set. The minister and Jeremy Purvis mentioned the dangers of Scotland having different legislation from England but if Scotland needs separate and different legislation, surely it is our duty as a Parliament to realise that and introduce it. We must realise that as air-guns get older, they become much more dangerous. Their springs become worn and the guns become more dangerous and powerful. In fact, some are as powerful as 0.22 rifles. We must get it across to people that air-guns are not toys but lethal weapons. Perhaps an educational campaign would make people aware of that. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland believes that there are 500,000 air-guns in Scotland, but we need to know exactly how many are in circulation. We also need to know about the weapons that are involved in incidents. At the moment, we are working on 2003 figures, but that is not good enough. We need updated figures. Other issues have to be examined. We have to look at current legislation and stop the indiscriminate sale of air-guns, as Kenny MacAskill said. Members have only to walk through the streets of Glasgow and up to the Barras, as I do most Sundays, and they will see big, powerful air-guns—huge things that look like rifles—for sale in shop windows. Legislation must be introduced to ensure that such weapons cannot be bought over the counter. Firearms should be kept under lock and key and be open to inspection by officers at any time, so the legislation should also ensure that the main key holders are registered with the police, as Bruce McFee said. In conclusion, our motion calls for powers over firearms to be devolved to the Scottish Parliament in view of tragic happenings, not just recently, but in the past. The Parliament should agree on that. We have to get the police, community groups, the Parliament and other interested parties round the table to discuss the way forward on regulating the use of these lethal and dangerous weapons, which, in the wrong hands, can have grave consequences.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I will do my best. In a recent press release from the Scottish Executive, the Minister for Communities stated: "Housing isn't just about bricks and mortar, it's about places that people can call home. Decent homes, of the right type and in the right place, are vital to the health and well-being of our communities". I agree whole-heartedly with that, but unless we have a proper strategy and a commitment to social rented housing, people will not have a place to call home in the communities that they call home. The SNP amendment calls for "the right to buy to be reformed for new tenants". That is an essential part of a housing policy that seeks to address the diminishing supply of social rented accommodation. Like Christine Grahame, Shelter has rightly highlighted the continued use of the phrase "affordable housing". It has become a catchphrase, yet we do not know whether it means social rented housing or affordable private  housing. The minister must clarify what he means by "affordable housing". Is it social? Is it private? What is an affordable rent and what is an affordable house? It would be interesting to hear answers to those questions. In my remaining time, I will talk about the Glasgow Housing Association, which is the biggest landlord in Glasgow and which has just celebrated the third birthday of the housing stock transfer. I use the word "celebrated" loosely. Some people may celebrate, but many folk have not celebrated the transfer. I do not have time to go into all the issues, but suffice it to say that if the MPs, councils and councillors in England who are opposed to stock transfer write to me—perhaps I will write to them—I can tell them just how bad the GHA has been for many tenants in the Glasgow area. If members do not believe me that people in England are actively campaigning against wholesale stock transfer, perhaps they will believe Frank Dobson, who put forward an amendment at the Labour Party conference against stock transfer—the amendment was carried by a margin of eight to one. He said: "If you've got a ballot coming up, fight like hell to persuade people to vote no—the more people who reject it the better chance we have of turning over this stupid policy". I ask the minister to examine the finances of the Glasgow Housing Association. Why does it have £725 million languishing in the bank while people are sitting in homes without repairs? Why is it spending £96 million on staffing and running costs, yet only spending £44 million on repairs and maintenance? Those questions must be answered. I would like to have a conference with the GHA, with the minister's help, so that it can tell us and the people of Glasgow what it has done in the past three years.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate and welcome everyone who is in the gallery. I believe that 120 people altogether are in the gallery; they include 45 deafblind people and their helpers who have come to listen to the debate. I hope that the minister takes on board the fact that without communicators and guides, those deafblind people would not be at the debate. We appeal to the minister to ensure that communicator services are provided as quickly as possible. We must secure and expand communicator and guide services for deafblind people, as everyone has said. We must have proper training and recognition, such as the declaration of rights that Margaret Mitchell mentioned. We must have the same provision of services as in England and Wales, which, unfortunately, we do not have. I will concentrate on mental health services for deafblind people, which were brought to my attention by a petition that Drena O'Malley, Lilian Lawson and others supported and which the Public Petitions Committee has considered. England has three specialist centres for such services, but Scotland has only an out-patients clinic, which is held for one day a month in Edinburgh and in Glasgow and is under threat. I would like the Executive to look into that. Drena O'Malley gave an example of what happens when a deafblind person is taken into a mental hospital or into care. She mentioned that getting the communication wrong can make a person respond in a strange way. One example was when someone told a man that his guide dogs would have to be put to sleep. The man could not quite comprehend the fact that they had to be put to sleep. The truth was that the dogs were not to be put to sleep; they were just to be given an anaesthetic to put them to sleep while they had their teeth taken out. They were not to be put down, but the distress that the man suffered was  horrendous. That show why communication is vital. I would like the minister to take on board the importance of the interpreting service for mental health services for deafblind people, which is under threat. It exists in England and Wales but, unfortunately, it does not exist in Scotland any more. I also appeal to the Executive to implement in Scotland the guidance that exists in England and Wales. That would go a long way to satisfying not just MSPs but the people who are in the public gallery tonight and everyone else who suffers from deafblindness.

I thank the minister for picking up on and answering some of the questions that I had. I thank fellow members and the clerks of the Equal Opportunities Committee for their tireless work in scrutinising the bill and in producing the recommendations in our stage 1 report. The report notes that, as the minister said, the bill's intention is to ensure continuity throughout the UK in  respect of legislation on female genital mutilation. It also notes the determination of everyone involved to highlight and publicise that distressing practice. Despite the minister's comments, I believe that the committee's recommendations would strengthen the bill rather than weaken it. Perhaps Westminster and the rest of the UK could look to change the existing legislation to make it as strong as the bill would be under those recommendations. We should not simply step aside from the committee's recommendations. When we took evidence from the Minister for Communities at stage 1, we put it to him that the committee had worked hard on the issue in a non-party political fashion. I believe that our recommendations, which were agreed by all committee members, are in the best interests of women who have come to this country from other parts of the UK and from throughout the world. That is why I ask the minister to take the recommendations on board. The SNP will support the bill at stage 1, but we reserve the right to amend the bill at stage 2 if amendments are not forthcoming from the Executive. Female genital mutilation is just as it sounds. It is not, as it was previously widely known, female circumcision. FGM is the deliberate mutilation of the external female genitalia, comprising all procedures that involve the partial or total removal of the external female genitalia. The health consequences of FGM can be life threatening, both immediately and in the long term. For example, the immediate effects include severe pain, shock and bleeding, fatal haemorrhaging, prolonged bleeding that can lead to anaemia and septicaemia which can result from use—which the minister cited—of unsterilised cutting equipment. The long-term health consequences include cysts, abscesses, urinary tract infections, chronic pelvic infections that can lead to infertility, painful sexual intercourse and complications during pregnancy and childbirth. For a woman, all those effects can have psychological consequences, including anxiety, depression, negative feelings, low self-esteem, poor self-identity and suppressed feelings of anger and betrayal. All those conditions have been, and are, experienced by women who have undergone female genital mutilation. I ask that any press coverage of the issue refers to the practice as "female genital mutilation". At one committee meeting, we were told not by the committee clerks but by a television company that we could not talk about female genital mutilation because it did not like the term. I am sorry, but that is what it is and that is what we shall call it.  Although we should use the term female genital mutilation, we must be careful with the other language that we use on this matter and we must realise that, in certain cultures, the parents believe that they are acting in their daughters' best interests. However abhorrent the practice appears to be—it is absolutely abhorrent—we must use the proposed legislation not only to stamp it out but to educate the people of those communities and protect the girls who might be subjected to the practice in all its forms. We do not want to drive the practice underground. The matter must be out in the open, which is why many of the committee's recommendations on education and other issues are so necessary. I know that my fellow committee members will cover specific aspects of the bill, but I shall do my best to provide an overview. Because of FGM's immediate and long-term effects, it is extremely important to include in the bill the World Health Organisation's entire classification system, which divides FGM into four classes, as a reference point to specify procedures that will be unlawful under the proposed legislation. We must also ensure that communities are adequately informed about any guidance, education and training. In that respect, the minister mentioned the Somali women's action group in Glasgow. I know that Elaine Smith will speak of her experiences with that group. We must ensure that communities and individuals are aware of the various agencies and organisations that have the expertise to advise and help without stigmatising the people in question. Although I welcome the minister's assurance that the Executive will look at other publications and materials that are available in the UK and abroad, I ask that she take on board the point that was made by the Somali women's action group and other organisations that it is not always possible to put the spoken word into a leaflet; the information must be available in other forms. For example, visual material could be made available or someone in the community could speak to women on the matter. Moreover, suitable resources must be made available to the communities. The Executive has not yet said whether it will make those resources available, but it must do so if it plans to push the legislation out. We must also remember that men are sometimes the heads of the communities and that we must educate them as well as the women by reminding them that FGM is not an essential cultural element that must be preserved. Our society and Parliament must bring the matter to the fore. One issue that emerged from our evidence taking was that health professionals must be aware of FGM. Comfort Momoh, who is an FGM-specialist midwife, has based an excellent booklet  on research that she conducted into the subject in London. Some of her findings are very disturbing: for example, some health professionals said that FGM was not a big problem in their area and some midwives and doctors made comments such as "I've been working in this hospital for the past 20 years and I've only seen two cases of FGM". That evidence is backed up by personal experience of members of the Somali women's action group. For example, one of its members in Glasgow was fortunate to survive the birth of her baby in very difficult and dangerous conditions. She needed two operations. The first, which was meant to undo the FGM, failed and she had to undergo a caesarean section to give birth. Furthermore, two pregnant women were automatically given caesareans because the doctors were totally unfamiliar with FGM procedures and practices. We must ensure that health professionals are educated on the matter. As those women go through horrific and traumatic experiences, education, awareness raising and on-going support must be provided to all professionals who come into contact with women who have suffered FGM. The minister touched on asylum seekers, who were mentioned both by committee members and by groups that gave evidence. Although I accept the minister's comment that the proposed legislation will create extraterritorial offences that will prevent UK nationals in permanent UK residence from being taken abroad to have FGM performed on them, it will do nothing for the kids of asylum seekers. For example, Councillor Irene Graham of Glasgow City Council has done a lot of work on this matter. She says: "We cannot assume that children will never be taken out of the country by any other family or community member. We are concerned that the bill should contain additional protection." The minister has described the steps that she will take, but they do not go far enough. Something should be done to extend the provisions of the bill to provide further protection for the children of asylum seekers, should they be taken from Scotland. I hear what the minister is saying and the assurances that she has given, but we have to consider that particular aspect as well. I cannot see the clock but I think that I have time to wind up.

I am sorry. I fully support the bill, but with the recommendations that have been made by the Equal Opportunities Committee. I will be adding further recommendations. We must eradicate this terrible practice and protect vulnerable young  women, not only in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom but throughout the world. The bill will contribute to that, although, with the recommendations, it would be a much stronger bill. Thank you for your indulgence, Presiding Officer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage the end of segregation of men and women in the workplace. (S2O-5578)

I thank the minister for that detailed reply. I presume that he is aware of the findings of a recent study by the University of Glasgow, which highlighted that Scotland is blighted by discrimination in the workplace, where the outdated stereotypes in relation to men's and women's jobs are as prevalent as ever, regardless of what the Executive has done. Is he concerned by those findings? Does he agree that segregation at the level shown in the report has a deeply damaging impact on the Scottish economy, because it means that we do not make full use of men and women in different jobs?

To ask the First Minister what contingency plans the Scottish Executive has devised in the event of failure of the fresh talent initiative. (S2F-1491)

I cannot say that I thank the First Minister for his reply, although it was what I expected. Perhaps I can give him some ideas on how we can attract to, or keep fresh talent in,  Scotland; it would certainly happen with independence. Does the First Minister agree that many skilled Scots leave the country each year because of the lack of opportunities and the lack of financial incentives from a Government that is more used to rhetoric than to action? What does the First Minister propose to do to keep the young talent we already have in Scotland? How does he propose to support working Scots couples who wish to have more children but are prevented from doing so by a Government that has failed to implement the right set of economic incentives that would allow them to have a family and to stay in and belong to Scotland?

I say to the Parliament and to Mr Chisholm that we recognise the fact that, for the time being, sections of the bill pertain to reserved matters. We also recognise that it puts equality duties on public authorities and that certain modes of transport have been removed from part 3 of the bill. For those reasons, we will not oppose the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to reverse the trend in violent crime in Glasgow. (S2O-5545)

I thank the minister for his reply, particularly with regard to the front-line police. Will he explain why, despite all the initiatives that he has mentioned, violent crime, in particular knife crime, is on the increase in Glasgow? Does he not agree that it is about time that we stopped passing the buck between the Executive and the police and looked to have a proper strategy of front-line policing for every area, to ensure that there are more police on the beat to prevent crime, rather than them reacting to crime that has already been committed?

I welcome the minister's speech and will touch on some of the issues that he raised. We all agree that racism is abhorrent. As such, it cannot and should not be tolerated in any way, shape or form in this or any other country. We welcome the Executive's on-going commitment to anti-racism and particularly its continuing strategies, which the Scottish National Party whole-heartedly supports. We acknowledge the good work that is being done, especially in the one Scotland, many cultures campaign, which the minister mentioned. However, concerns still exist about the increase in racist crimes, which increased from 2,705 in 2001-02 to 3,787 in 2003-04. That increase might be due to more people reporting such crimes; if it is, we should welcome people recognising that racism is a crime that they should report. However, a University of Strathclyde report suggests that the figure could be five times higher than the figure of almost 4,000, which is worrying and must be examined. We must consider doing more research into aspects of the problem. The report clearly shows that, unfortunately, we have much more work to do in Scotland to eradicate racism. The minister mentioned the race equality annual report. Keeping that report fully updated and monitored is important in ensuring that we can see the statistics for racist crimes that are committed. It is also important to consider mainstreaming—which the minister also mentioned—in the health service and in posts elsewhere. We should consider mainstreaming of equality and ensure  that it is fully implemented at all levels. Parliament is committed to eradicating racism in Scotland, but I have grave concerns about some aspects of the media, which it is important to discuss. We have concerns about how some sections of the media and some politicians portray immigration and asylum. We must recognise that democracy and freedom of speech are paramount, but we must also tell the media that with freedoms come responsibilities and that they should be responsible in their reporting. The fresh talent initiative has been mentioned a lot. I note that the Conservative amendment would remove the reference to the initiative from the motion; it will be interesting to hear why when Mary Scanlon speaks to her amendment. I think that it is a bold initiative, although given the First Minister's remarks in answer to earlier questions, clarification is needed. I fully support the initiative and intend to continue doing so, but perhaps the minister will give us some clarification during his summing-up. Like everyone else, I have read the report. The gist of it is that we need the initiative because we have a falling population. In the First Minister's statement to Parliament on 25 February 2004, he said: "Our first target must be to avoid our population falling below 5 million. To do that, we need an additional 8,000 people living in Scotland each year between now and 2009." He said that the way to do that was "by retaining home-grown talent within Scotland; by encouraging Scots who have moved away to come back home; and by attracting some who are completely new to Scotland—from the rest of the United Kingdom, from the European Union and from further afield."— [ Official Report , 25 February 2004; c 5941.]  I take it that that is why the fresh talent initiative has been mentioned in the motion. We must remind ourselves that if we want to attract people from overseas who have never been to Scotland before, it is essential that when they come here, either as visitors or to settle, they do not experience racism and discrimination. Unfortunately, the figures show that they do experience those things. I welcome the fact that the initiative is mentioned in the motion because the matter is important. I have asked the minister various questions about facts and figures on the fresh talent initiative, but unfortunately I have not had any reply other than to say that the figures are not held centrally. My questions were mostly about expatriates because that was my starting point. I ask the minister to look into that: If we do not have accurate information, how can we possibly monitor what is going on?  I said earlier that we seek clarification, and Kenny MacAskill raised the matter during First Minister's question time. What exactly is happening with the fresh talent initiative? In a letter to The Herald today, Professor Anthony Cohen, the principal of Queen Margaret University College in Edinburgh, writes: "I am writing from India while on a trip which has taken me to Singapore, Kolkata, Mumbai and Delhi, to nurture Queen Margaret University College's relationships" with its collaborators in the university sectors in those places, who are "greatly enthusiastic about the Fresh Talent initiative." He continues: "Imagine my dismay on learning from the British Council representatives in these various centres that they have been instructed not to advertise Fresh Talent further, not least because they have been unable to elicit any further guidance about it from the Scottish Executive." We need clarification on that.

I cannot agree with Robert Brown on that. This is a debate; we have reservations about the Executive's motion and are entitled to suggest amendments to it. We will support the motion anyway, but we ask the Executive to examine the immigration policies of the Westminster Government. I will move on to address those, but it was important to mention the fresh talent initiative. We need fresh talent, but when people come from overseas we must ensure that they are not subjected to racism. I merely point out that that is why the initiative is mentioned in the motion. We will support the motion, but we also encourage members to support our amendment. The immigration policies of the Westminster Government are punitive, as are the policies of the Tories. The minister mentioned asylum seekers, Islamophobia and so on. His comments are welcome and I know that they come from the heart, but the policies of both the Tories and Labour at Westminster are totally different from what he says. We will support the Scottish Socialist Party's amendment, and I ask all members to support our amendment. However, we will support the motion.  I move amendment S2M-2402.3, to insert at end: ", and expresses concern that Labour and Conservative immigration proposals do not reflect Scotland's population requirements or multicultural ethos."

As a former representative of Renfrewshire Council and an old sparring partner of the minister, I am pleased to be taking part in the debate tonight. I congratulate Wendy Alexander on securing the debate. I repeat her tribute to Bill Butler for securing the previous debate on the subject and I congratulate him on the hard work that he has put into ending the scourge of racism. I could probably call myself an adopted buddie, because I lived in Paisley for more than 20 years and took my kids along to St Mirren football ground. Unlike Wendy Alexander, however, I did not get the chance to go to Braehead. I used to go on the supporters' bus and I would see such fabulous places as Dundee and Perth, when I could get away from the game to go shopping. When Gordon McQueen was signed up by St Mirren no one could tear me away from the terraces, so members will know for exactly how long I used to go along to matches. I was a very keen supporter. I congratulate St Mirren on its achievements. The club is the subject of a debate in Parliament and not only did it sign up to the UEFA 10-point plan but it implemented the plan, as Wendy Alexander said. The club should receive the highest accolade for doing that. Many football clubs, such as Dundee Football Club, have taken action. However, other clubs that said that they would sign up to the plan did not go ahead and do anything positive about it. I hope that such clubs will follow St Mirren's good lead and implement UEFA's fantastic 10-point plan, which is unique in the football world in that it operates throughout  Europe, not just in Scotland. If we can encourage every club in Europe to get rid of the scourge of racism, we will be closer to achieving a better society. I thank Donald Gorrie for his tenacity in highlighting the issues of racism and sectarianism. I thank the Executive for taking the issue so seriously that we have been able to debate it not just in this members' business debate but in committees and in other debates in Parliament. I think that one of the Parliament's justice committees is considering the matter and I hope that offences will lead to prison sentences. As Bill Butler said, judges are sometimes too lenient in sentencing. We must take the matter seriously and get rid of the scourge of racism, for kids now and in the future. We say that education about racism and sectarianism counts. The best education is achieved when people take part in something. It is much easier for people to learn the lessons when they take part in football as spectators or players. We need legislation that deals with people who go against what society wants, but others must learn to say that such behaviour is not acceptable. St Mirren can say, "Okay, we might not be at the top of the football league, but we are the top of the league when it comes to doing something to help society." I commend St Mirren for its approach and I hope that other clubs and the public will listen to St Mirren and learn from its example. Bill Butler mentioned schools. He and I—and others—attended a school meeting. Everyone there was from Glasgow and when we were asked what team we supported, we all said that we supported Partick Thistle. The kids' response was, "Oh, right—Partick Thistle." It is important to get the message across that we are not just here to be legislators; we are willing to listen to kids in school and tell them that we are doing something to tackle racism and sectarianism. Again, I thank Wendy Alexander for allowing me the opportunity to take part in this debate and I congratulate St Mirren Football Club. I hope that others will follow the club's example and that we will live in a better society in future.

In this debate on older people or senior citizens—whichever title we wish to give them—there should be no doubt that we will not improve older people's lives unless we eradicate poverty in Scotland and in Glasgow in particular. Elderly people are most at risk from premature death if they happen to live in the Glasgow area. The fact that premature deaths have more to do with poverty than anything else is a point that members should take on board. We will support Mary Scanlon's and John Swinburne's amendments, but we will abstain on the Executive motion. I will explain why. We have no problems with the Conservatives' amendment, as it acknowledges that progress still needs to be made in this area. It also deals with the reality of the closure of nursing homes in both the council and independent sectors and how that affects people at the coalface. John Swinburne's amendment recognises that there is more to be done and that positive action must be taken. I note that he uses the word "immediate" in his amendment, and I agree with him on that. The Executive motion fails to mention the real problems that many members of our older population face. As my colleagues have said, we should take very seriously the issues of fuel poverty and premature deaths. I am sure that the Executive takes them seriously, but they are not mentioned in the motion. For that reason, we cannot support it and will abstain on it.  Nanette Milne has mentioned Help the Aged's five resolutions, to which I, along with other members, have signed up. All members of the Parliament have been invited to do so. Help the Aged has identified five points that would improve the lives of our elderly people. I will not read out the whole document, but it calls on us to eradicate excess winter deaths, to support a vulnerable adults bill, to increase uptake in benefits for older people and to reform the council tax. I was astounded when I heard the minister's opening speech, as the only one of the five resolutions to which she referred was that relating to council tax. There was no mention of eradicating excess winter deaths or increasing benefit uptake.

I accept the minister's apology and am sure that the Parliament will do the same.

I understood that the minister was saying that she was sorry that she did not mention the issues that I have raised. I raised them because she failed to refer to them in her speech. She said that she was unable to mention them, but the Executive should take them on board. I congratulate the Parliament on the free central heating programme. As John Swinburne said, it has made a difference to a large number of Scottish pensioners. However, as members from all parties except the Executive parties have said, it cannot be right that 2,500 of 2,900 winter deaths each year involve people who are more than 65 years of age. We know from stats that people die because they cannot afford to turn on their central heating. One in three respondents to a recent NOP poll carried out in Scotland indicated that they could not turn on their heating because they could not afford it. Seventy-two per cent had not even heard of a Government programme that could provide them with heating improvements. The Parliament should take up that issue. I am sure that members will agree that it falls within the scope of the Parliament. Fuel poverty and winter deaths may increase dramatically, because gas and electricity prices have increased so substantially—in some cases, by 10 per cent or more. However, Communities Scotland, which is a Scottish Executive agency, says that even a 5 per cent increase would leave an additional 30,000 households in fuel poverty. When I put a question to the Executive or the Executive makes a speech on this issue, the  minister raises her hands and says, "What can we do? We can do nothing, because it is a reserved matter." For the people who suffer from fuel poverty, it is not reserved. Paul Martin and other members, particularly those from the unionist parties, talk about what we can do in the Parliament. Paul said about three times that he would take direct action. I ask him and other members why they do not take direct action by supporting our amendment, which calls for the Parliament to have more powers. I hope that they will look to their conscience, support our amendment and at least think about supporting independence for the Parliament and a better life for our pensioners. I recognise that some good things have been done. However, it is not enough to talk about what elderly people can do for the voluntary sector, what the voluntary sector can do for them and how good it is to have free transport and smart cards. Local councils up and down the country talk about those matters all the time—I talked about them when I was a councillor. However, we are a Parliament, not a local council, and we should have the powers of a normal Parliament to improve the lives of our people. We could talk about those subjects all the time, but we should let the councils speak about transport, for example. This is a Parliament and rather than talk about free transport, we should have the powers to look at tax issues and benefits and to improve the lives of our elderly people. Although free transport is a great thing, I ask members to remember that the Welsh Assembly introduced such a scheme and it does not have the powers of this so-called Parliament. I ask members to think about this: we need more powers for this Parliament. That would enable us to introduce a citizen's pension to give people dignity in their old age and would allow them a decent pension so that they could put on their heating. That is an SNP idea; other parties might have other ideas, but they are only tinkering around the edges of the problem. Unless we have the powers of an independent Parliament, elderly people will still live in abject poverty. Poverty is the main cause of premature deaths in Scotland and unless we have our own powers in our own Parliament, we can do nothing about it.

I thank Cathie Craigie for securing the debate and congratulate her on it. I apologise that I will not be able to stay after my speech—I have a meeting to attend, as I informed Cathie Craigie in an e-mail. I reiterate what John Swinney said. People think that eco-schools relate only to environmental issues, but that is not the case. I am glad that Cathie Craigie and John Swinney explained the other aspects; it is good to be able to say exactly what eco-schools are. Although in my area of  Glasgow we have inner-city schools, we can create a green lung through schools, with planting and so on. Through the eco-schools scheme, schools can speak to and become involved in the community. St Peter's Primary School in Partick, which is part of the constituency that I represent, produced a report about the benefits of the eco-schools scheme. The report says that the children have increased self-confidence and discuss in public, and with the public, issues that are important to them, something that we in Scotland have been sadly lacking over the years, according to the report. The children develop a greater awareness of the community and learn how to fit into their environment and how their actions impact on other people—that is important in relation to good citizenship as well. They also learn where Scotland stands in relation to other countries and how we all need to help other countries to develop, particularly after disasters and wars. The children are encouraged to co-operate with other schools in the community. In the Partick area, St Peter's Primary School and Kelvinhaugh Primary School have worked together on gardening projects, which encourages friendship between the schools. The children are excited about getting involved with the Clyde River Foundation. Along with the University of Glasgow, St Peter's is raising brown trout from eggs, to release the fish into the wild. That teaches the kids exactly how the animal kingdom works. The River Kelvin is now sufficiently cleaned up that brown trout can be released into it; the trout will be monitored until they reach maturity. The teachers have reported on the children's self-confidence, teamwork and ability to listen to others and care about what happens around them. For me, that is what eco-schools are about—caring for not just the environment but one another. The scheme promotes good citizenship. Members have talked about funding. The number of eco-schools has increased by 800 per cent and people are asking for additional funding or a promise of enough funding to enable the scheme to extend to more secondary schools and other areas. I congratulate all the schools that have been awarded the green flag.

I thank Mary Scanlon, whose comments have made us see that new Labour and the Tories are even  closer than any of us thought. Perhaps people will look at the Official Report to see exactly what I mean. Let us look at some of the facts on closing the opportunity gap. If I may, I will make so bold as to read out the key poverty facts. Some members have mentioned them, but they are worth repeating. One child in three, one working-age adult in five and 190,000 pensioners live in poverty. I am talking about relative poverty, which is the real figure, rather than the figure for absolute poverty, which the Executive bandies about when it suits it to do so. If the absolute figure is better for the Executive, it will use that figure rather than the relative one. We are using the proper figures—that should be borne in mind. The fact is that the opportunity gap is not closing for many people. My Scottish National Party colleagues have mentioned that this debate is the fourth we have had on closing the opportunity gap. The minister mentioned in his opening statement that, next week, we will be speaking about closing the opportunity gap for the elderly. That will be our fifth debate on the subject. I am not against closing the opportunity gap or speaking about it. In fact, I welcome any opportunity to close the poverty gap.

I am sorry. I will perhaps let Wendy Alexander intervene later, but not now. As far as I am concerned, the Executive's choice of debate represents a clear abuse of parliamentary time and power. It has chosen to have this debate again today—

No, I will not take an intervention. As I have often said in debates, it is time for some plain speaking and it is time for some truth. The people out there who really matter, who live in poverty and who find themselves in the benefits trap and in low-wage jobs, want to see action. They do not just want words; they want to see something happening. I will come to that again later. I am sure that Johann Lamont, the Deputy Minister for Communities, will probably answer some of those accusations or questions in her summing up. We need look only at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's report, which has been mentioned by many members, to see that the opportunity gap is not being closed. Parts of Glasgow that Johann Lamont and I represent are among the poorest and most deprived areas not just in Scotland, but in the whole UK. That is not something that we can sit here and say that we are proud of.  The Lib-Lab Executive has been the ruling Administration since 1999—as long as the Parliament has existed. The situation has become worse, which also involves the UK Government and Glasgow City Council. Something has to be done about the poverty and deprivation that exist in the Glasgow area, which is why I have lodged a motion suggesting that a poverty task force be formed to investigate why areas of Glasgow suffer such severe deprivation compared to the rest of the United Kingdom. In his speech, the minister mentioned plans to deliver on objectives and targets, which is absolutely right: we must deliver on objectives and targets in order to lessen poverty and to provide opportunities. However, the Executive needs to deliver those targets and to monitor the amount of money that is spent through social inclusion partnership projects. Those are changing, but we will get the same thing by a different name. We need to establish whether projects that are run through SIPs and other agencies are being targeted at the right areas.

No—I am sorry. I will not take an intervention. My colleague, Brian Adam, who wanted to speak but could not, wanted to discuss how SIPs work can be targeted and monitored. Something has to be done, as I think everyone would agree.

No, but I will take an intervention from Cathy Peattie, if it is on SIPs.

Perhaps that is the case in certain areas, but I assure the member that in certain areas of Glasgow, such projects do not work. There is no monitoring whatever of where the money goes. The minister can reply to that in her summing up, if she wishes. I have written plenty of letters on the matter. I ask the Executive to take that up under the new umbrella organisations—SIPs by another name, with councils still distributing the money. We cannot simply say that we are directing money at certain areas if we do not know how it is being spent. People have not always been meaningfully employed as a result of money that has gone to SIP areas—they have in certain areas, but not in all. I would like the money to be monitored and targeted.  Karen Whitefield and others mentioned low unemployment. It has been suggested that it is a marvellous thing that we have low inflation and low unemployment, but at what cost? What jobs do some people have? What wages do they earn? We are in a low-wage situation in Scotland. I have visited the Scottish Low Pay Unit and other organisations including credit unions, and I have found that the big problem is that people are living—rather, they are trying to live—on low wages. Donald Gorrie said that we should be giving people confidence. Surely the best way to give people confidence is to give them decent jobs and decent wages so that they do not rely on tax credits, top-ups and rebates. If people can go out there, get a decent job and earn a decent wage, that will give them confidence.

At the present time, we have a low-wage economy.

I am sorry—I was just going to mention Wendy Alexander, who spoke about financial autonomy. Basically, I prefer to call it independence, but I thank her very much for mentioning it. Colleagues on our benches and other benches are right: unless we take control of macroeconomics—

Unless we take control of macroeconomics, we will not eradicate the low-wage economy that we have at present. We have to take control of benefits and the taxation system of this country. I am glad that Patrick Harvie hit on a real anomaly that affects people. We have to consider the anomalies in the Scotland Act 1998. We should not shy away from them but face up to the fact that we have to take control of the macroeconomics, taxation and benefits and change our low-wage economy, in which people still live in abject poverty.

Does the member agree that people who are caught in the benefits trap cannot find a way out? Does he agree that, to give those people confidence, the benefits trap must be abolished?

I thank Frank McAveety for securing the debate. Dealing with knife crime is an issue that I have pressed vigorously, and I know that other MSPs, both in and outwith Glasgow, have done the same. On 20 October this year, I lodged a motion that highlighted the horrific murders to which Frank McAveety alluded, not just in his constituency but in other areas of the west of Scotland. As Frank McAveety mentioned in his speech, the problem is not limited to the east end of Glasgow, where his constituency is located, but affects the west of Scotland as a whole. We must tackle the serious issue of knife crime throughout that area. I recognise that the Executive is taking measures to stamp out knife crime, but I have concerns about the raising of the age for buying knives from 16 to 18. I do not have reservations about increasing the age limit as such, but I am concerned that people who are intent on carrying such weapons will simply use kitchen utensils instead. Indeed, Frank McAveety has alluded to the fact that the same thing happens in schools. Teachers have told me that pupils use compasses and even pencil sharpeners as implements of violence. We should not get too het up with the belief that simply raising the age limit will stop the problem. Instead, we must send out a message to the general public and the youngsters whom we are trying to educate that we need a cultural change in the west of Scotland to address the problem of people who carry all types of weapons. I am concerned by the suggestion that Frank McAveety made in his speech, and in a press release, that there should be a police presence in schools. Youth club members and groups of young people in the street have told us that even the presence of a policeman in a school was seen as a badge of pride by some young people who cannot be told that knife culture is wrong. I have my reservations about posting policemen in every school. Perhaps the pilot scheme in Aberdeen—

I take Mr McAveety's point. However, although I might welcome such a move as part of a pilot scheme in some schools, I am not sure that it would work in all schools. We need a culture change instead. We also need decent sentences that mirror the seriousness of this crime, because only that approach will send out a message to people who carry and use knives, whether or not they do so for their own protection. Members have mentioned in many debates that it is crucial to have policemen on the beat. As a great believer in prevention rather than reactive policing, I feel that the best way forward would be to have more police on the beat with stop-and-search powers to stop kids carrying and using knives. We must have a culture change, which is why I have already called for an investigation into the terrible knife culture in Glasgow. Unfortunately, the problem will not be eradicated overnight, but we must convince the public that this heinous crime can be dealt with by having more police on the beat, better education for young people and an investigation into the causes of knife crime. I look forward to the minister's response.

As my colleague Roseanna Cunningham said, there has been a lot of hot air, but we certainly have not moved on. I want to inject a wee bit of honesty into the debate, which will be healthy for Parliament. I suggest to the minister and to members on the Labour benches that the motion was lodged for a different reason from the one that the minister gave. The motion has nothing to do with the fancy document, "Fair to All, Personal to Each". I do not know how much it cost to produce that document, but perhaps we could have employed some more doctors and nurses if less money had been spent on it. I will investigate that and find the answer. We have only just received the document and have had no time to look at it. The minister mentioned waiting times in the Glasgow area. The figures for Glasgow are among the worst in Britain, so I suggest that we are having the debate because of those waiting times and because of the closure of hospitals in Glasgow, although we are told that we are debating the document that has just been published.

Presiding Officer, the minister was not supposed to make a statement—[ Interruption. ] I was coming on—

Thank you. I thought that the minister might have some manners. When he addresses someone he should do so to that person's face, not with his back to them. What more can we expect from the minister and the Labour benches?—[ Interruption. ] I will take no interruptions from Duncan McNeil. The debate has more to do with the fact that there have been closures in Glasgow. The Lib-Lab Executive supported Greater Glasgow NHS Board's proposals to close hospitals, but the board suddenly made a miraculous U-turn and decided to keep the accident and emergency units open at Stobhill hospital and the Victoria infirmary. The SNP welcomes that, as do the people of Glasgow, who fought hard, long and weary to make the board and the Executive see sense and acknowledge that we cannot do without those units. That is why we are having this debate. There is another reason for the debate. Lo and behold, a little thing called a general election is just around the corner. I wonder whether the fact that there will be a general election in May has something to do with that miraculous U-turn. I challenge the minister to guarantee in his summing up that the units that have just had a  reprieve at Stobhill hospital and the Victoria infirmary will stay open long after May 2005. Will the minister put his money where his mouth is and give us that guarantee? As I said, NHS Greater Glasgow said that the units must be closed, but then gave the hospitals a miraculous reprieve. The facility at the Victoria infirmary was supposed to be replaced by a day centre in 2007. Indeed, in the summer the board said that the process would have to be speeded up because of a chronic lack of staff. Also in the summer, Robert Calderwood, the chief executive of the south Glasgow division of the health board said that the closure of the unit at Stobhill hospital was imminent because of a chronic lack of staff. I am pleased that the units will now stay open, but as I said, Glasgow has some of the worst waiting times in the UK. Where will we find the staff to work in the units? Shona Robison was right to say that we should be trying to recruit people from abroad, instead of privatising the health service. The public were right all along; we need those hospitals to stay open, with enough staff to be able to reduce waiting times in the Glasgow area. Will the minister tell us in his summing up how he will ensure that there are staff to work in the units and how he will ensure that staff are not hived off to the private sector? One of the Labour members said that this is not privatisation and that we are not looking to any other country. I put it to the minister, however, that the proposals mirror what is happening in England, where some health professionals are worried that hospitals might have to close because they will be so unpopular that people will not work in them. That is exactly what is happening now—it is privatisation by the back door. Duncan McNeil, Des McNulty and all the other Labour members stand there and say, "People don't care how they get their treatment as long as they get it quickly." Fair enough; people want treatment within the recommend timescale, but perhaps those members should get out and speak to their constituents about the matter. They can believe it or not, but their constituents have consciences and do not want the NHS to be privatised. It is true that they want treatment quickly, but they want that treatment kept within the NHS because they care about people. They do not want the health service to be privatised and it is about time that the Labour members learned that. I will outline the reality of what is happening in the health service right now. A constituent of mine who has had a mastectomy was told that she had to have a check-up in September 2003. However, she was then told that she could not get that check-up until December 2003 because there were insufficient staff. That appointment was put  back again and she was told that she should have the check-up in September 2004. Now, however, she has been told that she will get her appointment in February 2005. That is the reality of the situation that faces the people in our constituencies. Labour members should listen to their consciences and believe what those people tell them. Privatisation of the health service will not help those people. I ask the minister, where will the staff come from? He should tell us that when he sums up.

As Christmas approaches, when we in Scotland and throughout the world send greetings in cards and messages of good will to all men throughout the world, it is somewhat hypocritical of Bush and Blair still to wage war against Iraq. The war is illegal. I do not care what Frank McAveety or others say; it is illegal. A country that has no weapons of mass destruction and has proven that it does not have them should not be invaded. I say to Duncan McNeil that I speak not only for myself, but for many constituents and many people in Scotland who have told me and other MSPs of their view. We are elected to advance those people's views and not just our own. Whether the subject is reserved or devolved does not matter. We are talking about humanitarian issues.

I am sorry; the time for my speech has been reduced to five minutes and others want to speak. We have a right to speak about Iraq. I say again to Duncan McNeil that whether the subject is devolved or reserved does not matter. George Bush and Tony Blair do not care whether the war is legal or illegal, so we have a right to speak about whatever we wish. When I think of people in Fallujah and other areas of Iraq, I think not only of civilians, but of soldiers, aid agency workers and other civilians who went there to help people in Iraq. My sympathies go to people who have suffered and to families who have seen those people paraded on the television, tortured and ultimately killed. I say to Karen Gillon that the SNP's amendment and the first part of the SSP's motion show that we take the part of the Red Cross, which condemns the actions of what may be called terrorist groups. I do not know whether they are groups of terrorists or just people who have come along to blackmail various countries' Governments to obtain money. We have sympathy with everyone who is killed in Iraq and throughout the world in an illegal war. Numbers have been bandied about. Tony Blair says that about 15,000 people have been killed in Iraq, whereas a report in The Lancet says that more than 100,000 people have been killed. I know which figure I believe. Some Tory, Lib Dem and Labour members probably take Tony Blair's word for it, but before they condemn anyone, they should look at the letter that was signed by dignitaries, Helena Kennedy QC and a Lib Dem peer, Lord Garden. That letter asks Tony Blair to instigate an investigation into the many civilian deaths in Iraq and I ask members to support that. Alex Salmond of the SNP has tabled an early-day  motion to call for an investigation and Tony Blair has said that we do not need an investigation. How can we trust someone who will not investigate what The Lancet says are 100,000 deaths? Members should think on that when they vote tonight. The deaths in Iraq have occurred. People have said that we should not go over the past, but we must do that so that we know where we will go in future. As I said, we know that no weapons of mass destruction existed. We were told lies and international law was flouted. We must do and say something before Tony Blair and George Bush embark on another war in what Bush calls "the axis of evil". Which other countries will be involved in that war? He has also named Cuba as being in the so-called axis of evil. Instead of creating a more peaceful world, a much more dangerous world will be created if Bush and Blair get away with what they want to get away with. There must be an international peacekeeping force in Iraq that is respected by the Iraqi people. Unfortunately, the actions of Bush and Blair have led to disrespect for the west and to Iraq being a dangerous place for our soldiers, as other members have said. Members should support Alex Neil's amendment. Something must be done. We must stop the killing in Iraq in the name of humanity and of God.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate and on the positive motion that she has lodged. We sometimes talk about older people in a denigrating tone, but tonight's debate has been a celebration of what older people can and do contribute to society. I am convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing. As Donald Gorrie said, it is easier to be the convener than to be the treasurer, and Donald, as vice-convener, gives us lots of help, as does Nanette Milne. Every time we have a cross-party group meeting, it is amazing to hear how much work people from all over Scotland have done. They come along to the cross-party group and tell us exactly what they have been doing throughout the country. As Rosie Kane said, they help not only by going for prescriptions but by being involved in the Scottish Trades Union Congress pensioners forum. Some of them are 80 years old and they still continue to go along to meetings and to bring their expertise to our cross-party group. This is perhaps a good time to make a little plug for the cross-party group's conference on Saturday, when people from all over Scotland will come along to the Parliament for the very first cross-party group conference. If it was not for the energy and support of those older people, the event would never have got off the ground, and I am proud and pleased to be involved in it. Mention has been made of the attributes that elderly people bring. John Swinburne has mentioned the skills that elderly people have, and one thing that comes with those skills is older people's reliability, which we tend to forget about. We often take for granted their ability to ensure that they are somewhere at an appointed time and carry out a task. Throughout the years on the cross-party group I have noticed that if it was not for the reliability of those people, we would be going nowhere. I am pleased that Sarah Boyack mentioned in her speech that this is not a touchy-feely debate. I have concerns and other members have expressed concerns, too. Karen Whitefield mentioned insurance cover, which is of great concern to many voluntary groups. Often, insurance companies will not give voluntary groups insurance cover for over-70s. I know that  the matter is reserved, but I would like to think that members of the Executive would consider what they can do about the fact that people cannot get insurance cover and would take up the issue with their Westminster colleagues. As Christine Grahame rightly said, there are many sprightly over-70s—they are probably sprightlier than I am—who would love to volunteer for certain groups but cannot get the insurance cover. I would like the minister to take that matter up. Another matter of concern is the volunteering strategy, which we discussed a few months ago. I spoke in that debate and I have the volunteering strategy in front of me. One of the matters that I raised with members of the cross-party group is the fact that the volunteering strategy does not include a strategy for elderly people who volunteer. Again, I ask the minister whether we will follow the Welsh example and have a strategy that is specifically for elderly people. It is right that we raise such concerns in this debate. Another concern of mine is that Gordon Brown, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, has announced that 2005 will be the year of the volunteer. I have submitted these questions as written questions. If the minister has further information, I ask him to let us know which voluntary sector organisations in Scotland will be involved in the year of the volunteer that the chancellor has announced and how much money they might get to take forward their work. I congratulate Sarah Boyack and all the other members who have spoken. I do not think that Scotland or even the world could go round without the work that is done by elderly volunteers. Members all meet such volunteers daily. Parts of the economy would collapse if they did not contribute in such numbers. I say good luck to them, on my behalf and, I assume, on behalf of other members. I am glad that we have them with us, and I do not know what we would do without them.

I welcome what the First Minister says about having a balanced response. However, does he agree that local communities currently feel alienated in the planning process and that introducing a third-party right of appeal in the coming legislation would go some way towards tackling that feeling of alienation? Will he say whether a third-party right of appeal will be included in the new planning legislation?

I know that my colleagues will elaborate on this point, but listening to what the minister had to say about the reduction in the number of control rooms, I should draw his attention to paragraph 31 of the Justice 2 Committee's report on the bill. The report quotes his comment that "fire boards representing 23 of the 32 local authorities in Scotland have suggested that we should consider having three control rooms". As Shona Robison has pointed out, that statement is misleading; the detail is all in the question, not in the answer. Only three fire authorities have indicated that, in the event of any reduction, they would prefer the number of control rooms to be reduced to three. COSLA—

I was just about to say that the three fire brigades or authorities that indicated that three control rooms would be their preferred option represent 23 local authorities. If the minister will let me finish this time, I will also point out that COSLA, which represents all local authorities, has stated that the majority of council leaders are opposed to any reduction, including the leaders of the authorities served by the three brigades that the minister mentioned. Paragraph 23 of the report states: "the Minister advised that the immediate driver behind the proposal to reduce the number of control rooms" was funding. So it is all about money. The Scottish National Party acknowledges that funding is important but believes that it should not compromise people's safety and ultimately their lives. I ask the minister to consider that point as well. Before I move on, I want to make it clear that my rural colleagues will consider the important issue of the geography of those areas, so I will not dwell on that in my speech. However, although I accept what the minister said on that matter, I should point out that people in those areas are very concerned about the reorganisation of the fire boards. If that reorganisation goes ahead, it might lead to an increase in injuries and deaths. In response to Bill Butler, the minister said that the matter will come before Parliament, and I look  forward to hearing what the minister has to say on that. On the issue of employment, Maureen Macmillan mentioned that one area of concern was section 45, which basically refers to the rights of trade unions. Maureen said that she accepted the minister's explanation, but I cannot take any comfort from his comments. For example, he said that, although the phrase "recognised trade unions" did not present any difficulties for him, he could not include it in the bill. I would have thought that, given his previous life, the minister, of all people, would recognise trade unions and I ask him to explain why he cannot use that term. Section 45 gives ministers the power to establish a "statutory negotiating body" that will be made up of representatives of employers and employees. Why can it not mention trade unions? I ask the minister to reconsider the matter; after all, we know that it is usually trade unions that represent employees—it is similar to Mike Pringle's point in his speech that a policeman is a policeman is a policeman. I cannot see where the difficulty lies. In any case, the rights of trade unions are enshrined in the European convention on human rights and I believe that they must be given legitimacy in the bill. If that does not happen, the unions and I will regard such an approach as an absolute farce. Maureen Macmillan also raised concerns about the bill's approach to fire safety duties and industrial action. Although the report makes it clear that the minister has given assurances on this matter, I seek clarification on section 67. A civil offence is already set out in section 240 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, which stipulates the requirements of those who take part in lawful industrial action. However, section 67(2) of the bill would make it a criminal offence for individuals to take part in lawful industrial action. I emphasise the word "individuals", because it does not matter whether we are talking about firefighters, fire control operators or any other individual who is deemed to have a responsibility for fire safety in their workplace. Again, I know that the report says that the minister has already given assurances on this issue, but I seek his assurances about the intention behind section 67(2) and ask him to clarify categorically either through an intervention or in his summing-up that he does not intend to make it a criminal offence for a person to strike. I thank the members of my party for giving me this opportunity to speak this morning. I am not a member of the Justice 2 Committee, but I have certainly read the report and the other evidence. Strathclyde fire brigade is one of the biggest brigades in the country—indeed, it is one of the three fire authorities that the minister said were in  favour of reducing the number of control rooms to three. However, that brigade and the members of the FBU are very concerned about all their colleagues throughout Scotland and would urge the minister and the Parliament to examine carefully the bill's contentious bits and pieces such as the reduction in the number of control rooms and aspects that relate to trade unions and industrial action. I cannot support the whole bill without examining those issues. I could highlight the many and varied incidents in which the men and women in the fire brigades have given their all—members have already mentioned Lockerbie and the Maryhill tragedy—but I will not dwell on individual actions. All I will say is that those people would not be telling us that there is something wrong with the bill and that we should look at it properly if there were no reason to do so. I am asking the Parliament not to simply take on board the minister's assurances. That said, if he can give us some assurances on the questions that I have raised, that might go some way towards allowing the SNP to support the bill.

Is the minister aware of the concerns about the level of service that have been expressed by clients—in particular, people with learning difficulties and learning disabilities—of agencies that access the supporting people fund? Will clients' satisfaction with the support services that they have received under the initiative be audited?

I welcome the announcement that the Minister for Communities made last week, and which he has mentioned again today, of the £6 million of extra funding specifically targeted at children and young people. When she winds up, I would like to hear from the Deputy Minister for Communities what period of time is covered by that £6 million. Does it cover a year, two years or three years? I would like the minister also to give us some specific examples of what the funding covers. The minister mentioned the 100,000 children and young people who currently live with domestic abuse. In our amendment, we specifically mention "the lack of suitably-located alternative accommodation for the victims of domestic abuse, particularly those with children". Children not only witness the abuse of their mothers in their own homes; they have a greater prevalence of mental health problems and difficulties—48 per cent of them have such difficulties, compared with 10 to 26 per cent of the general school population. The minister mentioned the meeting that he attended, where he spoke to and listened to children and their mothers. I will quote from two children who spoke in a film showing several children speaking about their experiences. One said:  "We just had to go. The house was pure wrecked and she couldn't afford to buy more furniture and everything. So she had to pack our stuff up and go." Another said: "It was quite sad actually, because all my friends were there. My mum just kept telling us it would be OK and there would be lots of new friends there." I mention those examples because moving young children away from the area where their family and friends live can only compound the matter and add to their distress and difficulties. I ask the minister to take particular cognisance of the lack of local refuge facilities for children.

I was talking about choice. If the mother and children are in greater danger staying where they are, they will of course ask to be moved, and I would hope that there would be a refuge place for them to move to. I was pointing out the fact that children will have family and friends in the area where they live, who give them support. It is always better to keep the children there. If the perpetrator of the domestic violence can be moved, that is much better than moving the children away from an area where they might have some help and support. Our amendment also mentions "elderly people who are victims of domestic abuse", for whom even more limited resources are available. Recently, I mentioned in a question to the minister—I think that it was around two weeks ago—that there is only one refuge for elderly people, and elderly women in particular, in Scotland. Surely that is unacceptable. I know that the minister replied and basically said that Scottish Women's Aid and other agencies would look into the matter, but we must take serious cognisance to the problem. Some women have suffered abuse for decades and have worked up the courage to recognise that fact and to seek help. When they do so, there is nowhere for them to go. We should pay particular attention to that matter and ensure that it has been dealt with. I know that the Tayside domestic abuse service has a good and effective strategy, which my colleague, Andrew Welsh, will talk about. I return to the Executive's motion and the extra funding for children and young people, which I mentioned. I ask the minister to announce as soon as possible where and when the money will be allocated. It is crucial that agencies such as Scottish Women's Aid and others know the level of  funding that they will receive. Even more important, they need to know that the funding is long term and secure—that is why our amendment specifically mentions that matter. Lack of long-term funding severely hampers the ability of agencies to provide services that are essential for the protection of the thousands of women and children who seek help. It is unacceptable that funding for Scottish Women's Aid is for only one year in some areas. I accept what the minister has said about examining that issue. Sometimes the level of help depends on the area in which someone lives, which is why the Scottish National Party has consistently called for a national funding strategy. We support Shiona Baird's amendment, as it specifically mentions a national strategy. Domestic violence is a crime and should be treated as such. Long-term, secure funding coupled with a national strategy is the only way to tackle the issue and to help to eradicate it. Domestic violence is a heinous scourge on our society. I support the Executive's motion, but ask it to support our amendment. I move amendment S2M-1943.1, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "expresses its concern, however, at the level of secure funding to agencies working in this area and the lack of suitably-located alternative accommodation for the victims of domestic abuse, particularly those with children; further expresses concern that services for elderly people who are victims of domestic abuse are even more limited, and commends the role of Tayside Domestic Abuse Service, the only service of its kind in Scotland where police and a voluntary organisation work together to support the victims of abuse, as a model of effective partnership working."

Let us be clear about what we are talking about. Michael McMahon says that we are wasting time, but talking about pensioner poverty is not wasting time and he should be ashamed of himself for starting his speech by saying that. We are talking about thousands of elderly people, some of whom are in very vulnerable positions, who should be able—like us and like the rest of society—to enjoy their lives without having to rely on state benefits and means testing. As has been mentioned, 145,000 pensioners in Scotland who are entitled to benefits do not take up the pension credit. They do not take it up because they feel that they are being penalised for being pensioners. We do not have to take up the credit, so why the heck should they? Twenty-two per cent of single pensioners have an income of less than £6,000 a year. That is a national scandal and a disgrace. They do not take up the credit because they feel so stigmatised and demeaned that they will not fill in the form. Sometimes, they do not even understand how to fill in the form. It is disgraceful that, in this day and age, we have to put up with that. Labour members should be ashamed of themselves for talking about the problem in such a flippant manner and saying that we should not be allowed to speak about it in the Parliament. The vast majority of people in Scotland are of pensionable age. They are the ones who vote us  in and we are here to discuss issues on their behalf, not on behalf of the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats or the Tories.

No, I am sorry. I will not take an intervention. Let us look at the findings of some of the research that has been carried out. The Department for Work and Pensions has discovered that half of those who are entitled to attendance allowance—disabled people, who are among the most vulnerable people in society—do not take up that benefit because they find the process confusing and tiring. We must ensure that people get the support to which they are entitled. They will not get it through means testing, but they will get it in full through our citizens pension.

No, I am coming to the Lib Dems. We had a lovely wee debate between Michael McMahon, Mike Rumbles and Des McNulty—it was a kind of half war. I tell them that I am not fooled by their smokescreens. Let us have a wee look at both the Labour and the Liberal Democrat amendments. Both mention free personal care, free bus travel and the central heating programme—the amendments are practically identical. Labour and the Liberal Democrats are Executive parties—[ Interruption. ] Let me finish. Why did the two parties not lodge a dual amendment and be done with it? The only difference between the amendments is that the Lib Dems reminded us once again that pension policy is reserved. How marvellous is that? How typical of the Lib Dems—they are all things to all people. Let us stop kidding people on: the Liberal Democrats prop up the Labour Executive in this Parliament. I am the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on older people, age and aging, and other MSPs here are members of that group. We are aware of all the issues, including pensions, that affect older people. Michael McMahon said that we need a long-term strategy. Where is that long-term strategy? In a place called Wales, which has the National Assembly for Wales, there is "The Strategy for Older People in Wales", which includes setting up a Cabinet sub-committee for older people's needs—that is a very good thing to do. There is also a national forum to advise the Assembly on what is happening with older people. Here is one for members to think about—the strategy covers the development and support of post offices in deprived and rural areas. We are told that we cannot talk about post offices in this Parliament, yet that Assembly can talk  about such matters and even set up a fund—that is a strategy for Executive parties to consider. The strategy also includes free bus travel not just for pensioners but for disabled people. If an Assembly can do that, this Parliament can. Where is our strategy on that? The National Assembly for Wales plans to take "Action to support the recruitment and retention of older people." The Welsh will talk to the Department for Work and Pensions about an age positive initiative. What do we do in this Parliament? We do not do that. Let us look at other matters and at housing for elderly people in particular. Where is our strategy on housing? We are supposed to have more powers than the National Assembly for Wales has and yet the Assembly has done more for its older people than we have done for ours in this Parliament. I say to the Executive parties, "Get off your knees, get to Westminster and tell them there that we want more powers in this Parliament to help our elderly people."

Will the member give way?

If Karen Whitefield was a single person, could she live on £79.60 a week?

I join others in congratulating Marilyn Livingstone on securing the debate. I know that she has worked hard on the matter over the past two or three years. Before I start, I apologise for the fact that I have to be at a meeting in Glasgow later and will have to get a taxi at 6 o'clock. I echo everything that other members have said about the advantages to be gained from working in the construction industry. Much has been said about the benefits to Scotland's economy, which is absolutely correct, but it is important to remember the benefit that people get from the feeling that they have real and lasting employment. The skills and training that people in the sector receive have been overlooked for far too long by Government and education authorities, who appear to have thought of the sector as being beneath them. I am glad that the skills involved in the construction industry are being recognised. I pay tribute to Alex Neil, Marilyn Livingstone and everyone in the industry who has pushed hard not to glamorise the industry but to ensure that it is an industry that young people—and even old people, as John Swinburne suggested—might want to become involved in. Marilyn Livingstone and Christine May have spoken about ethnic minorities and women. I  agree that it is crucial that we encourage more ethnic minorities and women into the industry. There must be a better gender balance in the industry. It is true that more women have been entering the industry but not enough have done so. We should be trying to ensure that schools assist in that. I know that some schools have day-visit schemes, apprenticeship schemes and that type of thing. The fact that we do not have a gender balance in the construction industry causes me great concern. Another area of concern that all the members who have spoken have raised are the rogue traders in the industry. I believe that, in 2002, the Construction Licensing Executive was created to restore confidence to the consumer and make regulation of the industry easier. Another on-going area of concern relates to accidents at work. From speaking to Sid Patten—I am sorry to hear that he is ill—and others, I gather that health and safety measures are being examined in collaboration with Glasgow Caledonian University. Perhaps the minister could give us an update on that. The study is examining how factors such as climate, daylight hours and so on affect accidents in the industry. The security industry as it relates to the construction industry is another area of concern. I have written to the Minister for Justice on many occasions to ask when we are going to regulate the security industry in Scotland. The answer that I have had back is basically that we will have to wait until the Queen's speech, which I think is on 3 November, to find out whether the matter will be covered in United Kingdom legislation on the security industry. I have written and have not found out whether the matter will be included in the Queen's speech. I ask the minister whether he can give us an update on that. If the matter will not be included in the Queen's speech, could we please have security industry legislation for Scotland? The problems in the security industry are bringing the construction industry into disrepute and bringing Scotland into disrepute. The firms are really fronts for drug runners and we need to examine the issue thoroughly. I ask Allan Wilson to take that point on board and perhaps pass it on to Cathy Jamieson if he cannot answer it. The construction industry employs more than 132,000 people directly and is worth £10 billion in sales and turnover. That is positive and the industry is on the up. It is up to the Parliament to ensure that we join the construction industry and give it the positive legislation that it deserves to enable it to move forward. I thank Marilyn Livingstone for enabling me to speak in a debate on the subject.

Is the minister aware that, in the past year, 7,500 people in Glasgow and the west of Scotland have been victims of knife crime? Will he give to members and the people of Glasgow and the west of Scotland a commitment that he will meet Strathclyde police, instigate an urgent investigation into the causes of knife crime and tell Strathclyde police to put more police officers on the beat?

Will the minister give way?

I will do my best to stick to the six minutes. Mr Purvis protests too much. Perhaps having a majority of only 500 in the Borders makes him a wee bit feart of Christine Grahame, who I am sure can stick up for herself, as he no doubt knows. I draw attention to the motion's title, which is "Improving the Quality and Availability of Scotland's Housing". That is a worthy aim and I congratulate the Executive on producing a worthy title. The motion is also worthy. It talks about increasing the availability of social housing, including rented accommodation for homeless people, and about community ownership and fuel poverty. Perhaps in his summing-up speech, the minister could say whether the central heating programme, which the Eaga Partnership is providing, will be extended to people of all ages who have partial central heating. When I looked closely at the motion, nowhere did I see a single mention of the flagship policy of the Tories and the Executive: housing stock transfer. I acknowledge that the minister said that stock transfer was marvellous, but the motion does not mention how wonderful it is. As we know, stock transfer has been undertaken in Glasgow and is being rolled out throughout the country.

I referred not to the Tories' amendment but to the Executive's motion. I said that the Tories and the Executive were as one on stock transfer. I made it clear that they agree on wholesale stock transfer. We have all mentioned the serious effects of bad housing on the Scottish people. Dampness affects seriously the health of our people and of our children in particular. We have pledged to protect and nurture children, but some of them live in the worst housing conditions. As we all know, children who live in damp conditions and in bad housing develop bronchitis and asthma and have long-term illnesses in later years. We have not managed to eradicate such conditions. The motion raises issues of temporary homelessness and temporary accommodation, which are created by the lack of secure rented tenure, which other members have mentioned. I acknowledge the commitment in the motion to increase the provision of rented accommodation by 2008, but that is four years away. In the past two years, the number of children who live in rented accommodation for homeless people has risen from 263 to 539. That is unacceptable in this  day and age. I think that Linda Fabiani mentioned in an intervention the effect on those kids of being shunted from place to place and of having no permanent home. That is worrying. I acknowledge the commitment in the motion, but four years is too long. The aim must be achieved more quickly. As for GHA and stock transfer, if the Executive had embarked on a plan of care and repair and of new build, instead of demolition in some areas, we would not lack affordable housing or have a shortage of public rented housing. Wholesale housing stock transfer has taken place in Glasgow. I do not apologise for raising that, although I have mentioned it time and again. I go out and meet tenants and I attend public meetings. My postbag is full of mail from people who are concerned about GHA and the way in which matters are developing. I admit that some tenants have benefited from investment because of the stock transfer, as has been said.

If the council had retained the stock and the debt had been written off, the level of investment would probably have been higher. We are leaving some people in limbo. GHA is conducting an option appraisal, which in layman's terms means a decision on whether somebody's house will be demolished. The people who are involved do not know what will happen. While they are under the threat of option appraisal, which could take six months to a year, they live with houses that will have no improvement, houses that are lying empty and houses that are boarded up. Communities are scattered throughout such areas. That is not good enough for the people of Glasgow. We need only go to places such as Sighthill and Scotstoun—I think that Pauline McNeill mentioned flats there—to see evidence of the wholesale deprivation as a result of stock transfer. I will ask the minister several questions about stock transfer. Will he confirm for me and the people of Sighthill and other areas that meetings have taken place between a firm called LPG Living and GHA with a view to selling the high-rise flats in Sighthill, Ibroxholm Oval and the Gorbals? That firm has bought council houses in Manchester and Leeds and sold each as private housing for between £60,000 and £100,000. I have been told in good faith that those meetings have happened and I would like the minister to say whether that is true and to tell tenants what is happening. Will the minister also tell me about the timescale for secondary stock transfer to local housing  organisations, which has been mentioned? That has not happened. A flagship policy of GHA was new build, which has not happened much either. What is the timescale for new-build proposals? I do not want gentrification of Glasgow, but that is happening through the housing stock transfer. We have had wholesale housing stock transfer and we are now experiencing the wholesale transfer of citizens out of the city. That is no way to improve lives or housing in the city. I would like the minister to answer my questions in his summing-up speech.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned kitchens and bathrooms in accommodation. Does she agree that because of the GHA stock transfer many more thousands of people are sitting in abject poverty in houses that have not been improved?

I welcome any measures to tackle racism and bigotry, but will the First Minister clarify the pilot scheme that is being rolled out in schools and nurseries? Is it a website? Is its use at the discretion of teachers and is there any in-service training on it for teachers in schools and nurseries? Also, in a week that has seen four public houses in Glasgow raided for putting up sectarian artefacts, why is Glasgow not one of the areas for the pilot scheme? To me, it makes more sense for the scheme to be run in Glasgow than in Dumfries, where teachers have said that they have no need for it.

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate, on the excellent speech that she gave, into which I know that she put her heart and soul, and on all the hard work that she has done on behalf of Remploy and other organisations. I also congratulate her on the final clause in her motion, which states that "the Scottish Executive and all publicly-funded organisations should examine their procurement policies with a view to reserving contracts for supported employment organisations such as those working with Remploy." That is one of the most important parts of the motion. If we could get the Executive to make progress on that, it would go some way towards rewarding all the hard work that Remploy and other organisations have been doing. I hope that the minister will be able to give us some encouragement on that in his summing up. Like Shiona Baird, I am a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. In the evidence that we have taken, we have heard about the difficulties that people with disabilities face, not just in securing a job or education but in securing a normal life within society. I thoroughly agree with what Shiona Baird said about employees and the general public. She also mentioned attitudes, which were one of the main issues that I raised with the people who gave evidence to our committee. It was a consistent theme in the evidence that we took that overturning attitudes towards disabled people would be one of the most difficult hurdles that we would encounter. We must work towards that goal, because people are people, regardless of whether they have disabilities. Someone who gave evidence to the committee said that even disabled people themselves sometimes have the attitude that they are disabled and are not deserving of a decent education or a decent job. We must put forward a positive message. That is why I congratulate Remploy on the highly positive message that it puts forward and the hard work that it does. Remploy helps people, regardless of their disability, by giving them a forward-thinking attitude towards their life, their education and their employment. It has worked hard at that.  Helen Eadie spoke about Remploy's work on developing skills. It is fantastic that it has training programmes in which it works with trade unions to get people through the learning process. It is not as if the trainers are put on board just to talk to the employees; they talk them through the skill training and learning and are always at the end of a phone or on the shop floor to answer any questions. That is excellent; there are not many employment agencies, even those that do not deal with disabilities, that provide such services. Employment gives disabled people the scope to go out into the world and say, "I am somebody. I am not disabled, because I am a person in my own right. I may have something different about me, but I am still a person and deserve the best chance and opportunities that I can possibly get." Remploy gives such people new skills and value through their training. We have heard about the washing machines and fridges that Remploy repairs, for example, but its work is much more than that, because it gives disabled people the opportunity to get up every morning, do a full day's work and feel good about themselves. We sometimes take that for granted, but the people whom Remploy supports think that it is fantastic. We must thank Remploy and similar organisations for doing that. Helen Eadie mentioned employee development time—I think that 5 per cent of the working time is devoted to employee development—and the learning centres that Remploy has in every centre. How many workplaces can say that they have learning centres? Perhaps even the Parliament does not have a learning centre for our employees to further their careers, so in some ways Remploy is much more advanced than some other employers. I congratulate Helen Eadie on her speech and I congratulate Remploy most of all. I ask the Executive to take on board the last clause of the motion, which calls for it to examine its procurement policy. That is important. If the minister says that the Executive will examine its procurement policy, the people from Remploy will go home happier. Helen Eadie will too, but I know that she will still fight on for the rights of the employers and employees in Remploy.

The minister will be aware that many victims of domestic abuse are elderly women, but is he aware that only one refuge exists in Scotland for elderly women who have suffered domestic abuse? Does he have any plans to create more refuges for those vulnerable women?

I was going to ask the minister about the audits, but she has just mentioned them. Will the Executive take on board the idea of giving awards to the companies that perform best in respect of equality in accordance with the 1970 act?

I can clarify that the figure is per hour of work. I can get Nanette Milne a copy of the paper if she wishes.

Perhaps we do not just need equality of pay, but equality of manners, although that is for another debate on another day. I am pleased to have secured a debate on my motion and I hope that the Deputy Minister for Communities will be able in her reply to assure to women in Scotland that the Government and Parliament will not tolerate inequalities of any kind, especially inequalities in earnings that are based solely on one's gender. For far too long in Scotland, in the United Kingdom as a whole and in other places throughout the world, women have been discriminated against just because of their gender. That situation cannot be tolerated and must be stopped as soon as possible. I am sure that all members who are present know that the Equal Pay Act was passed in 1970. Even so, 34 years later most women do not have equality. Although the legislation requires parity of payment, that is still not the case. Many firms have been informed of, and warned about, the discrimination legislation, but they do not comply with it. PayFinder.com contacted me about the gender pay gap. It produced a paper that tells us that the gender pay gap now stands at 29 per cent. That compares with the UK average of 24 per cent, which is still bad. Given everything that has happened, it is ridiculous that the pay gap is wider than it was when the Equal Pay Act 1970 was passed. We know that women make up the majority of workers in low-pay, low-value jobs and, because most women are the principal carers in the home, they take on part-time jobs, which are especially  badly paid. Sometimes working part time is the only option that such women have. That, coupled with inequality of pay, means that they get the sharp end of the stick. The situation will change for the better when the Government implements better education and child care. I hope that the Government will take over the provision of child care; that would be a good thing. What can we say to women who have been through further education, who have good degrees, who have child care and who have a good job but who, at the end of the week, get less money than their male counterparts simply because they are women? Their gender counts against them. I believe that it is incumbent on the Executive to set a good example at all levels. I say in my motion that we should do something about the situation. The Executive should ensure that equal treatment is the norm throughout the Scottish Government. I ask it to instigate an audit of all the employees in the Government, regardless of which job they carry out, to find out whether fairness and equality are prominent. I know that work has already been carried out on equal pay. Close the gap, a three-year campaign that was launched in 2001, received European funding. It began with the specific aims of enabling employees to carry out audits—as I have just suggested—of encouraging the development of action plans, of engaging unions in making equal pay a priority and, most important, of empowering women to challenge pay discrimination.

That is the gist of my motion. As I said, there have been initiatives such as close the gap, but only a small number of audits have been carried out. If the matter is progressed through legislation, there will be more audits, which I hope will mean that there will be shrinkage in inequality. The legislators must do that—we must go forward. As I said, the pay gap is even wider, even though surveys have been carried out. A 61,000 person survey was carried out by the University of Aberdeen and was prompted, believe it or not, by women in the media who are concerned about what is happening to them. Professor Rita Marcella of Aberdeen business school said of women in the media that  "evidence suggests that they are still failing to achieve equity with men in terms of entry, retention and progression." Perhaps the media in the Scottish Parliament, and the women in particular, should do their own audit so that we can see what they come up with. Alyson Thomson of the Equal Opportunities Commission in Scotland has said that the findings that have come out of the various surveys are not surprising and that still too many women are being treated as second-class citizens—that is straightforward discrimination. Basically, they are being paid less because they are women. A report to the Justice 1 Committee by the National Association of Official Prison Visitors states that women prisoners get lower wages than male prisoners. How is that for discrimination? Even Gordon Brown, in his speech to the Brighton Labour Party conference, criticised 50 years of the welfare state for failing in respect of equal pay for women. Patricia Hewitt, another Labour politician, set up a commission on women in work to deal with equality and pay, and she says that women are rightly demanding a better deal at work. At Westminster and here in this Parliament, we seem to have cross-party support for some form of audit and some form of legislation to stop the inequalities that women face at the moment. I mentioned pilot schemes such as the close the gap scheme. The Minister for Communities, Margaret Curran, set up a new equality group to report on putting ideas into practice. Unfortunately, that has not happened yet, and we must make it a requirement that it does happen. It is fine to commission reports, but we need action. Women need action and they need equality. We cannot, without taking any action, go on writing reports and asking women to fill in questionnaires about how unhappy they are or about what their work time is like. That is why I say that Parliament must make it a requirement to prioritise equal pay. As Jeremy Purvis said—I am sure that other members will agree—we must set up audits to ensure that each company conforms to legislation. We can no longer leave it voluntary; we must initiate a legislative process. Only by being bold and forward thinking in tackling inequality will we be able to put an end to the deliberate discrimination that faces many working women. I hope that the minister will take on board what I have said and perhaps come back with some answers. Thank you, Presiding Officer, for giving me this time to speak. I also thank the members who have stayed behind to speak in the debate.

I thank the Conservatives for using their time today to debate one of the greatest issues affecting the Scottish public. However, I take issue with the way in which they have turned it into a resignation matter. The people of Scotland deserve a lot better when it comes to such an important issue. I am sorry that the Conservatives chose to do that, and I will not support their motion. I turn to the minister's announcement about the  Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill hospital. Like Pauline McNeill and others who have worked closely with every party to retain that unique hospital service, I thank the minister for listening to the people. We have been telling people all along that the consultation process was flawed. I am glad that the minister has at last admitted that. I, too, congratulate the people who came out—rain, hail or shine—and stood in the streets with placards to lobby the health board. A special thank you must go to the Evening Times for the hard work that it has done and, I have no doubt, will continue to do. While I welcome the announcement, there are a couple of questions that I would like to ask the minister. He mentioned that it could be five years before the advisory group comes up with a proper site or before the site can be developed. Five years is a long time, so I ask the minister whether, during that time, the board—or whoever oversees the project—could keep the staff and the public fully informed about what is going on. The problem in the Glasgow area and throughout Scotland—from Inverness and Wick down to Glasgow and the Borders—is that the public have not been informed about what is going on. They have basically been told, "That's it." I ask the minister what exactly is going to happen. Are the Queen mum's and Yorkhill going to have new hospitals built on the present sites, or are the hospitals to be moved to a brand-new site or a site at the Southern general? What are the minister's thoughts on that? I and colleagues from all parties have been speaking to the groups who have been working with us. The first question that people ask is whether their local hospital is being retained on the same site or whether it will be moved. We need those answers, if not today then as quickly as possible. I ask the minister to respond to that when he sums up. I urge members to vote for our amendment, which outlines the proper way forward. Everybody has spoken about the reorganisation and the strategies that are being developed. We need a national strategy; we need to examine what is happening with the reorganisation throughout Scotland. In his amendment, the minister says that "boundaries are irrelevant to patients". Jamie Stone and others agree with me that boundaries are very relevant to patients.

If the member reads the minister's amendment, he will see that it says that "boundaries are irrelevant to patients". They are not irrelevant to patients. People do not want to travel many miles to have treatment. In  Caithness, Inverness and other areas, people do not want to travel long distances to have babies, which can be dangerous. I believe that we need a moratorium to ensure that people's voices are heard properly and that the health service is seen to work for them. People see the health service as working for the health board and for consultants; they do not see it working for them. We have to be transparent and ensure that the health service works for people. That is one of the big problems. I turn to the homeopathic hospital in Glasgow. For the sake of less than £400,000, in-patient beds are being lost. At a public meeting, the health board responded to questioning by saying that the hospital was owed £10 million because it does not have a tracking system for monitoring how much money comes in from different health boards. I have received a written reply from the minister that says that there is, in fact, a tracking system. Is that true? Do health boards have tracking systems? If they do not, why not? Only a moratorium will suffice. It would deal with the reorganisation of health services and it might clarify exactly what the health boards are doing. If different health boards are accessing activities in one hospital, we should know how much money is being paid in, yet in the case of the homeopathic hospital, Greater Glasgow NHS Board does not seem to know. I would like the minister to address that.

Does Pauline McNeill agree that we have to know about the site and the plans for the new hospitals, which must be kept close together?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. Instead of being area-parochial, I will be Glasgow-parochial. CABx do an absolutely magnificent job. Bill Butler talked about volunteering to work in a CAB, and I and other parliamentarians have done that. I did it last year in a number of CABx throughout Glasgow and have great respect for all the hard work that the volunteers and paid workers in CABx do. It is sometimes a stressful job, as I found out, and it can take half a day, which is a whole shift, to sort out the various problems that some clients have. I will not go into what CABx do in every detail, but they deal with benefits, debt, consumer debt and housing. Even on issues with which they do not deal, they can find a way of getting advice and  contacting those with expertise for people who come to them and ask for help. They do a magnificent job. There are a couple of issues that I want to raise with the minister, which I hope he will take on board. The first has been mentioned by everyone, and it is the funding situation. I was shocked to find that the moneys that CABx in the Glasgow area are getting in 2004 are the same as they got in 2003. There is no rise. Glasgow is the worst city in Scotland for poverty, so I would have thought that it was essential for more moneys to go into CABx. Parkhead CAB is to close for two days a week and Easterhouse CAB is to lose one worker. They contacted me to say that that will have a detrimental effect on their services. That is due to lack of funding. I hope that the minister will take that point on board. I know that people mention money all the time, and that CABx are a council responsibility, but councils get money from the Executive. I would like the Executive to address that. The other issue that I want to mention—Mike Watson touched on it—was raised with me by Parkhead CAB, Bridgeton CAB, Castlemilk CAB, Drumchapel CAB, Maryhill CAB, Greater Pollok CAB, greater Easterhouse money advice project and West Glasgow Against Poverty; it is the situation with Glasgow City Council, which is asking CABx to use the money advice casework system. If they do not do that—and CABx are saying that they cannot do that because it would breach confidentiality—the council has said that they will not get any new moneys or be able to access the money they get just now. A letter that I have states that MACS is the preferred system of the Scottish Executive. That is worrying. People have contacted me and other MSPs about it, because nothing can happen until the system is up and running. As CABx state in their newsletter, confidentiality is the main thing, but with that system they will be unable to provide it. I would like the minister to address that. I thank all the workers in CABx throughout Scotland for all the hard work that they do.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will not call you convener today, to save your embarrassment. Like everyone else, I welcome the minister's announcement about the setting up of the 21 st century social work group, although perhaps he could shorten the name, as it is a bit of a mouthful. Perhaps it will be shortened as time goes on. There is no doubt that the role of social workers has changed dramatically during the years and that their remit has changed beyond recognition. We should also be aware that the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill will land at the door of social work services. I hear what the minister says about the remit of the new working group, but I ask him to take seriously the comments that were made by Brian Adam and Kenny MacAskill on the need for a McCrone-style review alongside it. We desperately need to examine the pay, retention, conditions and training of social workers in order to ensure that we have proper social work departments. I ask the minister to include a McCrone-type settlement in the working group. I will concentrate on retention and pay and conditions in the short time that I have. I welcome the fast-track scheme; I have sent many questions on that scheme to the minister and I am pleased with his replies. Given the scheme's remit and timescale, it seems to be going well. However, given the current shortage of social workers, the fast-track scheme will not be sufficient to make up the loss of social workers. I would like a scheme to be put in place for workers in social work departments who do not have proper qualifications. Such a scheme could fast track those workers through the system to enable them to get qualifications without having to leave their jobs. We need to find work-based routes into learning for people who are already in the sphere, rather than sending them back to university. They have experience on the ground, so to fast track them into getting qualifications is an excellent idea. We should consider that part of the work force, because despite the fast-track scheme, which  enables graduates to train as social workers in two years, we are still short of social workers.

I was aware of that. Unison raised the point about experienced staff with me. I welcome Maureen Macmillan's comment that that work is starting in the Highlands, but throughout Scotland, particularly in the Glasgow area and in Edinburgh, we are desperately short of social workers and people think that they are not able to enter the profession unless they have the proper qualifications. A bit of encouragement would help immensely. Another point that Unison raised is on registration. Most people are not aware that registration in social work is entirely different from the registration of nurses, teachers and occupational therapists. People have to pay for registration and disclosure and sometimes that involves a lot of money coming out of people's pockets. We talk about social work being a big department, but we are also talking about voluntary workers. I ask the minister to consider whether we can help people to register and pay the disclosure fees so that they are not out of pocket. Unfortunately, social work is sometimes seen as the Cinderella service, which it should not be. It helps people through what are sometimes difficult situations. Social work intervention can sometimes be the difference between life and death—the situations can be as serious as that. We owe it to social work professionals and the people they serve to produce something for the 21 st century to ensure that we have social work departments of which we, social work professionals and the public can be proud.

I would have liked to start by thanking many individuals and organisations, but it would be unfair of me to single them out—there are far too many. Therefore, I broadly welcome the debate for giving me the opportunity to thank the many people who give of their time in volunteering on a daily basis. Volunteering is not just about people taking a couple of hours off to do something that interests them. As the minister pointed out, volunteering is good for the economy of Scotland and generates £2.2 billion per annum, which is 4 per cent of the GDP of this country. Not only does it generate income for the country; it also employs around 100,000 people. I mention those figures so that people will not think that volunteering is just something that people do as a pastime, but will recognise that it has an impact not only on the welfare of the people who do the volunteering and  those who are on the receiving end of it, but on the economy of Scotland as a whole. Volunteering is an economic asset. I am not going to go into the arguments that Ted Brocklebank made regarding predominantly white, middle-class people.

If Ted Brocklebank will let me finish, I will give way. His arguments have already been made and I do not want to give them any more mention than they deserve. In the areas where I and others work, it is not just white, middle-class people who volunteer. We have to accept that there are difficulties—especially in disadvantaged areas and among young and elderly people—and that only about a quarter of charities can pay people's child-care and travel costs. Transport costs are especially important in rural areas. We must acknowledge that when we discuss resources and funding for charities, as one of the main reasons why they cannot encourage as many people as they would like to give of their time is the fact that people cannot afford it. That has been recognised in what most members, including the minister, have said. The centrepiece of the volunteering strategy is project Scotland, which the minister and most other members have mentioned. I welcome that initiative. However, as the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and aging, I question why there is no specific strategy or project for elderly people. I have just come from a meeting of the cross-party group, which asked me to mention that. We are not talking about people who are in their 90s or who are 100; we are talking about people who are aged 50 and over—which includes myself and other members who will admit to their ages—who give a great deal of their time and have a lot of expertise to offer. When we consider the life experience of those people, and the fact that they want to continue getting life experience through education as well as volunteering, we do them a great disservice. Perhaps we should have a strategy specifically for them because, if we consider the facts, ours is an aging population, so why should we not produce a strategy and a project with those people in mind? I am sure that most of the charities and the cross-party group that I chair would be more than happy to give evidence on that or to work towards such a strategy for the minister. The group was very specific in asking me to raise the point in today's debate, so I ask the minister to consider the issue in conjunction with the other areas that I have mentioned. I go back to project Scotland and the concerns I have about it. To answer Lord Watson's criticisms of some of the SNP's comments, I am not  criticising the minister, but I am concerned about some of the aspects of project Scotland; perhaps the minister could clarify some things for me. The strategy mentions 16 to 25-year-olds and the gap between the transitional year and funding, which means that a volunteer gets three months-worth of moneys. How would that work if the young people were not in education? How would it work if they were receiving unemployment benefit or something like that? The minister also goes on to mention that the Executive is hoping to get 1,000 volunteers and that the cost of setting that up in 2005 might be met from sponsorship. How will that work? Is the Executive going to fund it for a year and look for private sponsorship afterwards? I ask that because I believe that sometimes organisations suffer from a lack of funding three or four years after setting up, which is a problem. Perhaps the Executive will give project Scotland false hope by giving it money for one year when it might not be able to get sponsorship after that. That is not an attack; it is a point on which I am looking for clarification.

Thank you, convener. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry; I know that Murray Tosh has not put himself forward for the convenership of the SNP, but I thought that I would give him the opportunity, seeing as most other people have jumped in. The minister mentioned percentages and age groups. Do we have figures for the number of 16 to 25-year-olds who take a gap year? How many of them do voluntary work? That information would be helpful because the minister is talking about getting 1,000 volunteers per year for her course, which would be something in the region of 0.2 per cent of the 600,000 16 to 25-year-olds in Scotland. Will the minister clarify those points? Do we have those facts and figures and do they tally up with the facts and figures that the minister is giving us?

I will be as brief as possible. I welcome—and the SNP supports—this group of amendments. I have said before that the bill must encourage, not punish. It is eminently sensible to allow someone to do voluntary work as part of the terms of a restorative order without making them take time off to appear in court as a result of a parenting order or some other order.

The first ASBO should go to Duncan McNeil.

Well, there are ASBOs for the over-16s—and I am not talking about his weight. [ Laughter. ] A bit of hilarity is at least welcome noise. Section 46B is very important not just for the reasons that Pauline McNeill mentioned. I want to make sure that, if someone is sitting in their garden and someone else is playing loud music, or even if they are in their flat or house and a car is parked outside with music blaring out of it, the guidance can be enforced. However, I would like clarification of amendment 99, which Pauline said is a probing amendment. I am concerned that if the amendment were passed, every local authority could have a different way of looking at noise coming from accommodation that was "under construction". As someone who sometimes feels as though she lives in the middle of a building site, I have been woken up at 7 o'clock in the morning by the noise of scaffolding construction and so on. I am sure that many other people have had that experience, too. It is not just the scaffolding and the construction noise; there are also workmen who like a bit of hilarity—as does Duncan McNeil—and who talk loudly and play loud music in the building. It is very difficult to find out exactly where the noise is coming from in the middle of the town. I would welcome the minister's clarification of whether it is possible to make such amendments to the bill that would enable local authorities to tell construction companies and builders that they cannot start work at 7 o'clock in the morning and at weekends. The noise is a nuisance not just between Monday and Friday, but on Sunday mornings as well sometimes. I would like the minister to tell us whether there is some way in which we could give the local authorities that power—if not in this bill, in some other form of legislation.

I take great comfort from what the minister has just said. He will be aware of the success of the Glasgow Gaelic School, whose new building is to open in 2005. My question is similar to Ken Macintosh's. Gaelic-medium education is so popular in the area that people who want to send their children to the Glasgow Gaelic School are being told that there is no funding for remedial teachers to enable those children who have got to level 1 in Gaelic to continue their education at the school. Will the minister put additional resources into encouraging not only more Gaelic-medium teachers but remedial teachers, so that children who have a smattering of Gaelic can attend the Glasgow Gaelic School and such schools elsewhere in the country?

Two main issues arise in the debate on amendment 49. First, as the Executive admitted, an ASBO would not be granted in relation to a child as a result of a one-off incident. I assume—I think that anyone with a piece of common sense would assume—that a child in respect of whom an ASBO was made would be known to social services, the police and other authorities. As Rosemary Byrne and others rightly said, that is the point at which the help should kick in. Secondly, Sylvia Jackson asked the minister what packages would be put in place if the link between ASBOs for children and short Scottish secure tenancies is restored, but the minister has not yet given an answer. I hope that she will do so. Surely any package should be in place before a tenancy is converted. After all, if an ASBO were made, families would live under the threat of an SSST before any help was offered. That is an important point. Cathie Craigie said that it is all about helping people. Surely there are packages that would help kids without threatening the whole family. If someone commits a crime, we do not lock up their whole family.

I will let the member in in a minute. Cathie Craigie talked about the rented sector and the private sector. Amendment 49 would create a law that would treat people who live in rented housing entirely differently from people who live in private housing. That cannot be right. Cathie Craigie said that we must accept that there is a difference and she gave an example of how the situation would affect different children. In a block of four flats, a 10-year-old who lives in a rented flat would be treated differently from the kid who stayed across the landing in a bought house. Amendment 49 is ludicrous. The Communities Committee got it right from the start and it is ridiculous that the Executive is trying to change the bill in this way. I wait to hear what the minister  says about the packages that would be put in place, but we cannot create a two-tier society in Scotland. Help is available for kids. I urge members not to support amendments 49, 80 and 81, which are all wrong.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am not sure that I support Charles Kennedy of the Lib Dems, but I certainly support Donald Gorrie's amendment 40. As he says, local authorities throughout the country have special strategies in place and funding is a key issue for them. The bill's remit is to address antisocial behaviour. Part 1 will ensure that strategies are put in place to enable councils to do that. It will allow the police and local authorities to get together to make provision for strategies. It is eminently sensible to involve the communities and people who are affected by antisocial behaviour. I have always taken the view that the bill should be more about prevention than about punitive measures. Amendment 40, which would come near the start of the bill, would go a long way towards preventing antisocial behaviour because it would allow us to address issues with local people and communities. The Scottish National Party supports amendment 40, because it is sensible to engage with local communities and young people to ask exactly how they are affected by antisocial behaviour and what they would like to be included in the strategy. Amendment 40 would be a good way to start. I urge the Executive to accept Donald Gorrie's amendment and to show communities and local people that in dealing with antisocial behaviour we are serious about preventive measures and about engaging with communities.

I understand Johann Lamont's point, but I am saying—and I think Donald Gorrie is, too—that the consultation would be an addition to the strategies, not a separate measure. It would let people know that we are engaging with them.

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on securing the debate, and I associate myself with everyone's remarks. All the speeches, by members of all parties, have been excellent, and they were all spoken straight from the heart. I thank the Scottish Refugee Council, the Glasgow Campaign to Welcome Refugees, Positive Action in Housing and the churches. Graham Blount in particular has done a lot of work in the cross-party group on refugees and asylum seekers. He has travelled all over Scotland, trying to help refugees and asylum seekers with their plight. I see asylum seekers on a daily basis in the Glasgow area, as I am sure does Johann Lamont. They are situated in Sighthill, Townhead and all over the city. I cannot get over the welcome that I receive whenever I go up to these people's houses, whether just to knock on their door to see whether they are okay or to follow up a query that they have phoned into the constituency office. I remember one occasion when two boys were offered trials with Partick Thistle, our great football club in Glasgow, but unfortunately they could not take up the offer, because they did not have the permits needed to stay here permanently. I was invited into the home of that family, and was given an absolute feast. I could not quite believe how these people could put such a feast in front of me and others on the pittance that they receive from the Home Office. I have been given such a marvellous welcome in every house that I have gone to. I wish that the media—certain tabloid newspapers, anyway—could see how such asylum seekers welcome us into their homes. Perhaps then there would not be such negative coverage of asylum seekers and refugees in the media. If there are any representatives of the media in the chamber, I hope that they will take that lesson on board. The scaremongering has to stop. These people are welcome in our country, and we look forward to welcoming them here. The media should heed that message. I have been speaking about asylum seekers who have accommodation, for which I must thank Glasgow City Council. Lots of councils come in for a bit of flak on that issue, but Glasgow City Council has gone overboard to try to help. In  particular, Mr O'Hara of the council's asylum seekers unit bends over backwards to help with any problems that asylum seekers have. Those asylum seekers who have a home are the lucky ones—if we can call them that. As might be the case in other areas—I know only about the Glasgow situation, because I have been so closely involved in it—asylum seekers are put out on the streets of Glasgow. They are destitute and have nowhere to go. All that they can be offered by the Simon Community and the various voluntary organisations that exist around Glasgow is, basically, a sleeping bag. I have already spoken to Margaret Curran about the matter, and I appeal to the Deputy Minister for Communities to write to the Home Office or to speak to the relevant minister there—it is not Beverley Hughes now, but I cannot remember who it is; I am sure that the minister will remind me. We are not looking to the future at the moment. There are people here who have escaped persecution and who came to this country, expecting to be safe. They might not expect a marvellous welcome from people in this country, but they certainly get it, and despite that, they are thrown out on the streets. We have an army—near enough—of mainly young, single men, sleeping rough on our streets. Young women, aged perhaps 24 to 30, have now started coming to my surgeries, and some of them have been put out on the streets. We cannot condone that action, and the Home Office has to be made aware that we in the Scottish Parliament will not put up with it. I appeal to anyone who will be in Glasgow on Saturday 19 June to get themselves along to the Glasgow Film Theatre to see "Welcome", a film by Camcorder Guerillas, narrated by Elaine C Smith, on the plight of asylum seekers who sleep rough on the streets. There will also be a question and answer session with asylum seekers and refugees, many of whom have degrees and are mathematicians, midwives or doctors but who cannot work and are put out on the streets. I appeal to members to take the opportunity to go along to the GFT on Saturday to see the film. Some people in my area—particularly midwives—have been offered jobs and have letters from the school of nursing, midwifery and community health at Glasgow Caledonian University, but they cannot get work permits. In response to phone calls, the Home Office says that they are at the bottom of the pile, but some of them have been here for four years. We must do something about that. Rosie Kane is quite right—we should not just say that people should come here because that is economically viable for our country; humanitarian concern states that we should bring people in. However, they want to work and the work is there.  I ask the minister to speak to the Home Office to say, "Enough is enough—get these people their work permits, give them their passports back and let them be the vibrant members of the community that they want to be."

Is the minister aware of the proposals that the GHA has made and approved not only to vet tenants who wish to become members of the board, but to have its chief executive sit on the board? The GHA is the only housing association in Scotland to do that. Does she agree that those proposals undermine the democratic process of stock transfer and tenants associations, that they lead to an obvious conflict of interests and, as has been said before, that they go against the ethos of tenant participation, which was one of the original objectives of the transfer?

I welcome this opportunity to debate health issues. As David McLetchie has said, it is a subject that touches everyone. Although I agree with that sentiment, I cannot agree with or support the Conservative motion, which promotes privatisation of the health service. It is a bit rich that a party that gave us the bureaucracy of the NHS trust is trying to tell us how to run our health service. That is one of the reasons why I cannot support the motion. Still, the Conservatives may have allies in new Labour. Janis Hughes mentioned what the Tories have done; however, the Tory motion may find favour with new Labour members, who also want to establish foundation hospitals—a Tory idea. It is a bit rich of new Labour members who support that idea to attack others for promoting their policies. I want to concentrate on issues in Glasgow that have a direct effect on services throughout Scotland. Many members have mentioned the increase in funding for the NHS. Although I appreciate and acknowledge that, we must ask why Greater Glasgow NHS Board is closing hospitals, reducing the number of in-patient beds and shedding staff to save £58.8 million in order to prevent it from plunging into the red. It has been told to make those savings and we must ask questions about that. Although this is not his debate, I hope that the minister will address that point, whether in writing or otherwise. An Executive spokesperson has reported that Glasgow received a lower than average increase in its health budget. The Executive has also stated that it is for the health board to deploy its resources as it sees fit. Well, the buck stops with the minister. It is his duty to investigate Greater  Glasgow NHS Board and its handling of any moneys that it receives. I fully support the amendment in Shona Robison's name, as we need an investigation by Audit Scotland and the Executive.

Yes, I agree entirely. I was going to mention that later in my speech. I spoke to Jean Turner earlier, who will raise that issue if she is called to speak. We now know that Stobhill hospital is to close two years before it was due to close, according to the minister's announcement. Tommy Sheridan makes a valid point in that respect. I would like to mention some of the other issues in Glasgow. There has been lots of publicity about the closure of the Queen Mother's hospital and lots of angry voices—MSPs' voices and the public's voices—have been heard. It is the jewel in the crown of maternity services, not just for Glasgow but for Scotland, and it should be emulated throughout the world. I find it hard to believe that, even after the letters that I have sent him and the petitions that have been submitted, the minister has still not given us an answer as to whether the Queen Mum's will be saved. Staff morale there is very low indeed. It is imperative that the minister gives us an answer as soon as possible, to stop the drip-drip effect on morale. Let us consider what the cost savings might be if the Queen Mum's were to close. The estimated cost saving is £1.3 million. We are talking about Greater Glasgow NHS Board trying to save £58.8 million. Closure of in-patient beds at the homeopathic hospital—which is also a world leader and one of only two such hospitals in Britain—will lead to estimated cost savings of £300,000. That still does not make a big dent in the £58.8 million. The health board has said that 1,000 jobs will be shed through natural wastage. I am certain that nobody would lose any sleep if the health board people lost their jobs—I put it to the minister that that would be genuine natural wastage. However, we do not know whether any of the health board people are going to lose their jobs. Why should it be front-line workers who lose their jobs? We have now heard the grand announcement from Greater Glasgow NHS Board that it is going to charge patients and staff car-parking charges at all hospitals. It has said that there will be a consultation, but every one of us has seen how Greater Glasgow NHS Board conducts its  consultation processes. The board's press release states: "It is planned to introduce the charges on a phased basis from April 1 2005." So now we know how the consultation process works in Glasgow. New Labour members are the current guardians of the health service in Scotland. They are supposed to be the Government of this country, yet we see closures, staff losses and the drip-drip effect on staff morale. We are going to lose a lot of good staff who have come to do medical research but who feel as if they cannot move on because there is not enough money or a vision for the future of health services, not just in Glasgow but throughout Scotland. What we are really seeing is the centralisation of the health service. I ask the minister, or whoever is responsible, to look at the closures and stop any closures whatsoever until the expert group on NHS service change reports back to the Parliament. If that approach is not taken, it will be too late for the Queen Mum's and for other hospitals. Centralisation may be a fine word, but it is not good for the health service.

I thank Bill Butler for instigating this debate on an important issue. The debate is about stamping out racism in football but, as we all know, the tentacles of racism do not start and stop at football grounds. I take this opportunity to congratulate St Johnstone  Football Club, which has been mentioned already, on signing up to the UEFA 10-point plan. The Show Racism the Red Card campaign and the clubs that are taking part in it are to be applauded, but its aims would be enhanced if all Scottish clubs signed up to the UEFA plan. The abuse of a person just because they happen to be of a particular race should not and cannot be tolerated in modern Scotland. As Bill Butler said, a number of players from all over the continent come to Scotland to play for Scottish football clubs, and in a world that seems to be shrinking it is beyond belief that racism is still practised. We see racism every day not only in football grounds but in the streets. Like other members, I have been involved in work with asylum seekers; I have seen racism affect them and their communities, which is a sad state of affairs. Unfortunately, in Glasgow in particular we hear racist chants and see racist drawings, paintings and graffiti, which sprout in certain areas in which asylum seekers congregate. Such incidents perhaps happen after people come out of football matches. We should hang our heads in shame about that. I hope that those who are involved in such racist abuse are caught and told that their deeds do nothing for Scotland as a whole. Their racist message is not the one that we in Scotland want to send out to the rest of the world. I agree whole-heartedly with Bill Butler and I take on board what he said about MSPs writing to their local football clubs, whether amateur or professional, and telling them to sign up to the excellent UEFA 10-point plan. I know that various initiatives are going on within football clubs throughout Scotland and that they have done a marvellous job, but signing up for the 10-point plan would enhance that and it would show people out there that we in Scotland mean business. If I may, I would like to touch on another form of racism by quoting a definition: "Racism is the belief of the superiority of a particular race, religion or ethnic group." That definition of racism implies a much wider remit. Bill Butler referred to people's race, but we in Scotland must be honest and admit that racism involves religion as well as ethnic origin; we should look seriously at that. We have a particular problem in Scotland that we call sectarianism, but it is racism. We should perhaps tackle that in a holistic approach that tackles all forms of racism. It does not matter whether someone is abused because of their colour or religion. Nobody should be subjected to such abuse and we in Scotland should not just sit back and accept that it happens. The recent incident involving graffiti about Neil Lennon, which was scrawled all over a road, is particularly upsetting, not just for the chap but for  everyone in Scotland who looks upon footballers as decent people who are just doing a job by playing a game of football. They should not be subjected to that type of racism. Again, I congratulate Bill Butler and I hope that something will come out of the debate. I will certainly be writing to all the clubs that I know of, both amateur and professional, to encourage them to sign up to the 10-point plan. However, we must tackle the other form of racism in Scotland, which is obviously sectarianism.

I did not want to start my speech on a negative note but, like other members, I question why we are having  this debate in the chamber, given that no vote will be taken. In her speech, Fiona Hyslop referred to the fact that the Parliament is a legislative body and said that we should be legislating; we should not be debating a subject that, I believe, should be discussed by committees. As other members have said, the subject has been debated by the Education Committee and is being considered by the Justice 2 Committee. I believe that the committees are the right and proper place for such debates. The only debates that we should have in the chamber are those on which we have a vote. I am concerned about the time that we have spent on the debate today. We recognise that the children's hearings system was introduced in 1971—although Scott Barrie mentioned 1968—which is a long time ago, but the subject should be debated by the parliamentary committees rather than in a full-day debate in the chamber. I agree with Donald Gorrie that a committee would be the proper vehicle for scrutiny of the overall situation of children's hearings and children's panels. However, the debate has started and I want to raise some issues. Perhaps the minister will give me some feedback when he sums up. We should remember that the treatment of children in the home, the education system, the community and the justice system has a direct bearing on their behaviour. That is why I believe that children's panels and the children's hearings system, with its holistic approach, are the best way forward. I do not think that youth courts would be particularly helpful. We have heard from other members that England and Wales are considering reviewing their system of youth courts. As I have said before, it is 30 years or more since we considered the issue, so it may be time for us to look at it again. However, we should not do so in the chamber. I will give members a couple of examples that illustrate why the holistic approach of children's panels and the children's hearings system is the right way forward. I refer to case studies in the papers that have been given to us. One such case relates to a girl called Kelly—obviously, that is not her real name—who is 14 and does not attend school regularly, as she falls asleep. If we look into the situation, we find that Kelly's mum is a drug addict and that Kelly has to look after her younger sister. Clearly, that is not Kelly's fault, as a children's panel would reveal. Another case involves two young kids whose mother is regularly beaten by an abusive partner. Obviously, that has an effect on the children, who are not doing very well at school. I could give many more such examples. I am trying to explain that children's panels and the children's hearings system are the best way of dealing with those cases, as they examine all the facts holistically  and can put together a proper package for the children. We must be very careful before tinkering with the system. Many members have mentioned members of children's panels, from whom I have received a number of letters. They state that MSPs are right to express concerns, because panel members are frustrated by the way in which they and the children who appear before panels are treated. However, they make it clear that their complaints are not directed against the children's hearings system. The problem is the lack of resources for panel members, as well as the lack of social workers and of funding more generally. That issue is very dear to the hearts of panel members. As has been said, they serve on a voluntary basis because they want to do something for society and for kids in the community. They are frustrated by the fact that their recommendations are sometimes not heard or adhered to—basically, agencies are ignoring them. Some panel members say that agencies would dearly love to do something, but do not have the necessary funding. That point is central to any examination of the children's hearings system. We cannot ask people to develop the system when they do not have the necessary funding. We must take what they say seriously. Johann Lamont and others referred to social work departments and other agencies and emphasised the need for a joined-up approach. That is an important point. I am not targeting social work departments—other local authority departments and schools have a role to play. Children's panels and the children's hearings system cannot act in isolation. We should do something to right the wrong that currently exists. As has been mentioned, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill will put even more pressure on children's panels and on social workers. Earlier, I spoke about the need for an holistic approach. I did so because I am a member of the Communities Committee, which is considering the bill. Marrying the bill with the review would have been advantageous and might have produced a better approach to children's panels and the children's hearings system. That is the reason why I began my speech on a negative note. We must also consider seriously the recruitment and retention of social workers, to which Stewart Maxwell referred. We cannot continue recruiting social workers and failing to keep them. I ask the minister in his summing up to provide me with an update on the fast-track scheme that was announced on 12 February to bring more people into social work, so that we can see how many people have taken up the option and where it is  being advertised. I note that the minister is nodding. In his opening remarks, Peter Peacock said that the Executive is taking stock of the issue and that the review is not about scrapping the system. I took comfort from that, but I was concerned when he said later that our system has not been fully replicated elsewhere in the world. I hope that the minister will explain what he meant by that remark, which seemed directly to contradict what Elaine Murray said about the various places, such as New Zealand and Guernsey, that are adapting their systems and adopting a similar system to ours. It is a good thing that other countries are adopting our system. Like other members, I believe that the system that is in operation is excellent. It needs a certain amount of attention and improvement, but it also needs more resources and it does not need to be pulled apart. When the minister sums up, will he assure us that there will be no two-track system for children's hearings and panels?

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity to debate this important issue. The timing of the debate is appropriate, as it comes one year after the passing of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and one year  before that act is fully implemented. The debate gives us an opportunity to assess what has happened and what we can do to make improvements before 2005. I used to volunteer for mental health services, and I seem to remember doing a lot of outreach work, particularly in housing schemes. Unfortunately, a lot of that work has been discontinued but, having read Sandra Grant's report, I see that things have moved more towards community work, which should be commended. I look forward to the day when we go back to having more community health services, which were useful. I will return to the subject of community work, which was raised by Carolyn Leckie, Jackie Baillie and others. One of the issues in Sandra Grant's report that was raised most frequently by service users and carers was the services that they wanted to be either improved or continued. In particular, they wanted the see me campaign to be continued, and I thank the minister for his announcement on that. That campaign has been very successful and I know that users and carers will welcome the announcement. Service users and carers mentioned responsible and positive reporting by the media, and I will return to that subject, too. They also wanted openness on the part of mental health services about what services are available and what information they can access; in particular, they wanted such information to be made available for carers, and not just for users. Stewart Stevenson raised the paramount issue of the work force. Sandra Grant's report mentions that the position is likely to deteriorate further in Scotland. We need to take that into consideration, bearing in mind the level of training that is required. As we all know, there will not be any early change for the better; it was worrying to read that in Dr Grant's report. The report is honest, as members have said, and we should take cognisance of what it says. David Davidson and Mike Rumbles mentioned the important issue of stigma, which has been raised again and again. I, too, would like to quote some figures from the survey that Mike Rumbles cited earlier. According to the survey, 64 per cent of young people said that they would be too embarrassed to disclose a mental illness or health problem to a prospective employer. I find that quite worrying. Only 37 per cent of employers said that they would be prepared to take on somebody who had said that they had a mental illness. I find that very worrying, too. According to the same survey, 50 per cent of people said that media portrayal of mental health problems was much more negative than positive. That is why I ask the minister whether he could monitor the see me campaign. Once the campaign  has run its course, perhaps another survey could be done to find out the extent to which it has improved society's perception and, I hope, that of the media. If 50 per cent of people say that the media's portrayal of mental health problems is negative, that is a terrible indictment of the society in which we live today. I worry about that very much. Carolyn Leckie highlighted the plight of people who live in deprived areas and the accessibility of services; the accessibility of services was also highlighted by Jackie Baillie and Mary Scanlon. Services must be accessible in the community, and I agree that we must ensure that people are not denied services simply because they cannot afford them or because they are not provided locally. That is a major issue, which Carolyn Leckie described very well. We need to consider advocacy. I welcome the minister's recognition of the fact that demand for advocacy services will rise and I hope that he will ensure that advocacy is available to all, and not just to people who can access it and who can afford to do so. That is where the community aspect of the matter has to come in. Many members, including Nanette Milne in her summing-up speech, mentioned children. It is very worrying to think that there are 125,000 children with mental health problems. Nanette Milne was right to say that early intervention is important if we are to help those vulnerable kids. If we could prevent something in society from getting worse, we would all be proud of that. We must pay special attention to the fact that such vast numbers of children are suffering. I am sure that all of us will be thinking about that carefully. The minister mentioned the fact that the Executive is looking to more outreach work being undertaken. As I said, I used to do outreach work in the voluntary sector. Whole families used to come along, even if only one person in that family was suffering from some form of mental health problem, and I found that to be a good thing. Services were provided in centres—or clinics, as they were called in those days—that were located in the middle of communities, so families could bring their children, and mothers and fathers could come with the rest of the family. Perhaps because people were able to come along to meetings, there was less stigma. Neighbours and others got to know about the service, and I was amazed at the number of people who came along. I hope that we can get back to having more localised services like that. We must try to reach out and help the people concerned. The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 was a good piece of work but, as Sandra Grant's report said, we must consider improving certain of its provisions.  Once again, I welcome this opportunity to debate the issue. We have heard about a number of issues around the lack of surgeons, psychiatric consultants, community services, advocacy and, obviously, funding, which I would like the minister to address when he sums up. Although there is funding for local health boards and local authorities, Sandra Grant's report found, as have people on the ground, that the money that is allocated for mental health services is not always used for that purpose; basically, the money is soaked into the general grant. Adam Ingram picked up on that point. Is there any way that the minister could ensure that that money is spent on mental health issues? There is an issue of ring fencing, which the minister might wish to address when he sums up. We have to know where the money is being spent. It is all right to say that money is being given to local authorities and health boards to spend on mental health services, but if—as Sandra Grant's report, users and carers are indicating—the money is not being spent on those services and is being soaked up for something else, we require answers. We must move forward. I appreciate the fact that we are doing something that Westminster might never have got round to doing. The Scottish Parliament should be proud of that. Let us get things moving. We recognise the problems. Let us solve them and give people with mental health issues a better deal and a higher quality of service.

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing this evening's debate, which is the first members' business debate in the new term. I want to pick up on a couple of things that he mentioned, especially with regard to the consultation process and the third party right of appeal. If we go forward with the third party right of appeal, I believe that that will go some way towards addressing the concerns of the public at large, who will welcome the fact that the Executive is listening to them on that matter. I look forward to the end of the consultation process on the current planning document, but I remind the minister and members that my bill for such a right of appeal can be resurrected if there is not an overwhelming response in favour of a third party right of appeal. Like Robert Brown, I am worried by press reports that the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and others are very much against the third party right of appeal, as if the only democratic right is for developers, but not for the public. I regret that such organisations use the newspapers and cross-party groups in Parliament to put forward those views. I hope that the Official Report of the debate can be sent to the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament for construction. I received an e-mail from one of the members of that group—he is not an MSP—who said that the third party right of appeal had been discussed at a cross-party group meeting and that it was called a "meddlers charter". If the report of this debate would not automatically be passed to it, I would like it to be passed to the cross-party group on construction. I had always thought that cross-party groups did not have political back-up; I hope to tell the convener of the group that in person. I will get on to the matter in hand. Robert Brown and Johann Lamont mentioned greenfield sites. Johann Lamont made a point about council tax; I agree with what she said about the small pocket of council tax payers. However, we should look towards affordable housing, which is where brownfield sites—as Robert Brown mentioned—come into play. We should promote brownfield sites more vigorously than we do greenfield sites. I know that there is special dispensation to bring forward brownfield sites so that people can build on them, particularly if there are chemicals and so on there, but I would like to see more emphasis being placed on councils promoting brownfield sites rather than greenfield sites. I do not want to name all the areas that Robert Brown named—I am sure that other members will also name some of them. An area that has not been mentioned is St Augustine playing fields in the Milton area, where lots of people train to play in football teams and so on. Those playing fields  still languish after the community fought hard to save them after a public inquiry, but nothing has been done to the land and it is earmarked for housing. I think that Robert Brown mentioned Thornwood park. A vigorous campaign was run by residents there—Robert Brown, Pauline McNeill, myself and others were at the public meetings on Thornwood park—but once again developers won and housing has been built there. Yorkhill park is another area where there was a right of way, but developers took no notice of that and housing will be built there. We must be concerned about the issue not only in the city centre but in other areas. Greenfield sites are a bonus for people who live near them because their kids can go out to play there and they can walk their dogs there. Some folk do not particularly want to belong to a club, but they want to play football or whatever in a field. We should consider particularly the situation in the west end of Glasgow where land is at a premium—any tiny site there gets built upon. That is sad not only for people who live in the area but for people who pass through it. The buildings are so crammed in that it is unbelievable and the traffic and so on causes concern for everyone. I was amazed to read about Kit Campbell's recent report in the newspaper. We should bear it in mind that Kit Campbell is an adviser to the Westminster Government and to the Executive improving public green spaces. His idea for improving public green spaces is to sell off poorly maintained and under-used football pitches, as he puts it, for housing development and land for homes. That is what an adviser to the Executive and to the Westminster Government has to say, so we should ask some questions about that. If we are to sell off land—as Kit Campbell suggests—what is there to prevent people from saying that amenities are surplus to requirement without having a public inquiry? This is a very good debate; I welcome it and thank Robert Brown for securing it.

I, too, congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing the debate and on all the hard work that she has done with deaf people in the Parliament and through the cross-party group, which has done tremendous work. I was very concerned when I learned about the loss of funding for the project. After looking at the papers, I can only concur with what every member who has spoken before me has said about the good work that is done by the project. The statistics that were quoted by Cathie Craigie are proof that the project should continue, especially because of its emphasis on information gathering and sharing. That type of information is invaluable for the future, not just for the present. The project has turned around the statistics on underachievement and has been able to take evidence from various areas and from research that has been done and put it into practice. That is what we are looking towards: putting ideas into practice for the benefit of all deaf people. Cathie Craigie talked about the response to the questionnaires. There was a 99.4 per cent return from schools, which is fantastic—that level of response would put a Scottish election to shame. That shows that the public, the schools and the deaf community take such work very seriously. Those people are willing to take part in that type of research; we do not always get that willingness, so we should not lose it once we have it. They are very keen that the project should continue, and so are those who are in the chamber. I ask the minister to take the statistics on board.  I will tell members about a deaf person who I have known for a long time. He was, and still is, a fantastic artist, and was probably the loudest, most outgoing and sociable person in our group. When it came to saying what we wanted to do when we left school, he chose architecture. This was more than 40 years ago and many deaf people will identify with what I am about to say. He did not have the recommended qualifications to pursue that career. That was not because he was not talented, but because, at that time, not enough was done to encourage deaf people to get those qualifications. I still go out for a drink with him and, although he has had various jobs, he is not bitter; he is a very happy person. However, when I speak to him, I think what a loss he has been to our society and what a shame it is that such a talented person did not get the opportunities that hearing people got just because he was deaf. That is why it is so important to continue the ADPS project. There are probably many who have passed through schools who, like Dennis and others—now that I have said his name, he will never forgive me—have much to give to society but cannot contribute in the way that they would like to because the help that projects of this type provide is lacking. On behalf of all the pupils who attend those schools and who desperately want to fulfil their potential, I ask the minister to continue the funding. Even if the funding were continued for just another year, we could see how things go from there. Too many people's lives are at stake. I appeal to the minister to continue the project's funding.

Des McNulty was doing so well, but as always, he spoiled what was a good contribution at the end. I point out to him that if Scotland was independent, the health service would not be in the situation that it is in today. I give a sincere welcome to the bill. Like Shona Robison and other members said, the bill is long overdue. I will not rehearse all of the problems that we have had with the health boards, consultations and so on. Instead, I want to concentrate on two specific areas. The first is the duty on health boards to co-operate in the planning and provision  of services. My colleague Stewart Maxwell will elaborate on that issue in his contribution. The other area that I want to cover is the duty to encourage public involvement, which has caused such a lot of consternation not only in Glasgow but in other areas of the country. The reason why I cite those two areas for attention is that it was the lack of proper co-operation and public involvement that caused such a furore and such concern in the review of maternity services in Glasgow and in the health board's recommendation to close the Queen Mother's hospital. This morning, a petition was submitted to the Public Petitions Committee on behalf of six eminent medical practitioners. They called for some of the things that I think are included in the bill, but I ask the minister to clarify that when he sums up. The petitioners called for a legal framework for consultation, for guidelines and for an independent process for the selection of expert witnesses when a national review of services is to take place, whether or not that is a maternity services review. If those are included in the bill, that is most welcome. If they are not, perhaps the minister will lodge amendments at stage 2. The minister said in his opening speech that the bill is very much needed. One of the key aims of the bill is to enhance the powers of ministers, in particular to intervene in areas where there are service failures. That point was raised by Kate Maclean. The powers that ministers will have are of concern. I will elaborate on that a little bit. I have considered the issue from a different angle, through consultation, legal advice and the Scottish Parliament information centre. If it is found that health boards have not complied with the legislation, for example with section 5, on public involvement, will they be guilty under section 44(2) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 of not following through an act of Parliament? I would like the minister to think about that. If he cannot give me an answer in summing up, he can give me an answer later. I seek clarification because we all know that health boards have a duty to consult, but the bill will make the duty to encourage public involvement legally binding. If they do not do that, they will be guilty of committing a criminal act under the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995, because the duty is in the legislation. I would like verification of that important point. I sought advice on that point when the health board's maternity review was on-going in Glasgow and was given lots of good legal advice by officials and SPICe. Because the duty to consult is only a duty, boards are not guilty of committing a criminal act for not carrying it out. However, if the duty is in legislation of the Scottish Parliament, they could  be guilty of committing a criminal act. Would they be guilty of committing such a criminal act? Is the point that ministers have enhanced powers and can intervene? Like other members, I am worried about the lack of detail in the financial memorandum. Perhaps we will see savings in the long term, but in the beginning, during the transition period, there will be costs. I ask the minister to look favourably on Shona Robison's amendment, and particularly the part about the financial memorandum, because it is not only me and my party who have raised concerns, but members from all parties.

I put on record the fact that myself and my colleagues in the SNP fully appreciate everyone who works in the NHS: kitchen porters; administrators; consultants; nurses; and all the others. The list is so long that I cannot possibly go through all of them, but we certainly appreciate the very good work that they carry out, sometimes in difficult conditions. I am speaking in particular of nurses and others who happen to work in accident and emergency departments at the weekend who, unfortunately, are not given proper protection. We debated the issue several weeks ago and I am sure that the Parliament could have passed something that would have given all public service workers the protection that I believe they deserve. I give a big thanks to Irene Yardley and the others at Glasgow royal infirmary who have worked tirelessly to get proper protection for nurses, who are, after all, going about their duty and should not be subjected to attacks by drunken and violent patients. I hope that the minister will consider the matter again and perhaps monitor the situation and give us a report on what is happening in accident and emergency departments at the weekends when, unfortunately, people are drunk and violent. I look forward to getting such a report. I listened to the minister's speech and I appreciate the sentiments that he expressed about the challenges that are being faced in achieving and sustaining a viable and professional work  force within the NHS. However, as Shona Robison and other members have mentioned, vacancies within the NHS have risen considerably since 1999 under the Lib-Lab coalition Government, regardless of what Mike Rumbles says. For example, consultant vacancies in Glasgow have risen by a massive 156 per cent and the number of nursing vacancies has risen from 282 to 784. I acknowledge the minister's comments about recruitment, but it is five years since the Lib-Lab coalition Government took over, so the question is why, after all that time, we are having this debate all of a sudden. Is the Lib-Lab coalition Government only now recognising that we are so short of consultants and nurses? The Government seems to be paying lip service to the problem, but it is a bit late and it is acting once the horse has bolted. The situation is of serious concern, particularly when it is coupled with the report published by Audit Scotland the other day. The report states that a quarter of all machines, including X-ray machines, in the health service in Scotland are obsolete—some of them are 15 years over their lifespan. That must give us all cause for concern. As I said, the Government has been in power for five years yet we are reading that kind of report. I congratulate Audit Scotland on its honesty, because I assure members that if it was up to the trust—particularly the one in Glasgow—we would never have found out any of the information. Clinicians and staff must have access to proper equipment. In some hospitals, they have the equipment but they do not have the manual on how to work it and the person who used to work it has retired. That is a ridiculous situation. I want to pick up on what the minister said about maternity services and the falling birth rate, which he suggested was the reason for having fewer midwives. I have spoken to midwives and they tell me that lots of midwives go into training but head down south once they have finished, because the conditions there are much better. If the minister speaks to midwives, he will hear the same thing. The minister says that we can centralise maternity services, but there is a direct contradiction with the First Minister's statement the other day. The First Minister is calling for people to come to Scotland; I think that he wanted 8,000 immigrants to come each year. It is dangerous to assume that we can close hospitals—particularly maternity hospitals—and centralise services when we are actively encouraging population growth. We must consider a moratorium on such closures. Janis Hughes is right about nursing. People do not have to go into academia to do nursing. Des McNulty and I were at a meeting on Saturday and this was one of the topics that came up. Among  the people there were ex-nurses and they asked why people's life experience could not be considered. They asked why people could not become nurses without going to university. I hope that the minister takes up Janis's suggestion. Mary Scanlon put the fear of death into me when she talked about people pulling out their own teeth. My grandfather used to pull out his own teeth, but it surely should not be a self-inflicted cure. Mary represents the Highlands and Islands and if people there have to listen to Mike Rumbles, perhaps they do feel like pulling out their own teeth. I will leave that to Mary's discretion. Duncan McNeil mentioned the European working time directive and doctors' hours. He is right to say that services are being impinged upon. However, we have known about the directive for nine years. It was never going to go away; it was always going to happen. Instead of blaming consultants and others, Duncan should perhaps blame his own Labour Government.

Sorry, but I am into my last minute. We knew about the problem nine years ago but the Labour Government has done nothing about it. Jean Turner said that we have to create high morale in hospitals and the NHS. The only way to do that is to have better working conditions and wages and more inclusiveness within hospital services. I agree with Jean. In Wick and Inverness, in the Queen Mother's hospital in Yorkhill and the Southern general hospital in Glasgow and elsewhere, insecurity does no good to staff morale and does not attract new staff. We should consider that seriously before we allow health boards and trusts to tell people that they are going to shut down hospitals. Such talk causes people to move away and to try to find secure employment elsewhere. In conclusion, Presiding Officer—

Mike Rumbles is saying "Hooray." We said that when he stopped speaking. I do not need to pull out any teeth at all regarding that. I appeal to the minister and deputy minister to consider the centralisation issue and to consider our amendment very closely. We should have a review of all hospital services, not only maternity services. We will be making a big mistake if we do not consider things holistically and just consider them regionally.

I welcome most of the minister's statement, in particular the relaxation on capital receipts, which is long overdue. My question is on the £175 million regeneration fund. The minister said that priority would be given to local authorities that wish to engage in stock transfer and she then said that access would be extended to other local authorities that do not wish to transfer their stock. Who will have first priority? Will local authorities that wish to transfer their stock have first access to the £175 million regeneration fund, followed by local authorities that do not wish to transfer their stock?

Is the minister aware of the statement that Catriona Renfrew of Greater Glasgow NHS Board made the other day? She said that the Queen Mum's hospital would be closed in five years' time and would have to be demolished, but that the Southern general hospital would last for another 25 years. The minister said that he would meet clinicians from the Queen Mum's hospital. Does he agree with those clinicians—and with me—that it is disgraceful that Catriona Renfrew made such a statement three weeks before the consultation process is due to be completed? Will he now say that the whole consultation process is a sham? Will he intervene to end the process and ensure that Catriona Renfrew withdraws her statement? We have said all along that the consultation process is a sham. Will he admit that?

I thank the minister and the expert reference group, not only for the report, but for the opportunity to contribute to the debate and—if the minister is taking on board everything that is said—to influence the final strategy. As other members have said, a strategy to address the serious issues that we have in relation to sexual health in Scotland and the serious pressures that are put on our young people—not only peer pressure, but media pressure, which David Davidson discussed eloquently—is long overdue. I have always been an advocate of the promotion of good citizenship in schools; indeed, I have spoken to the Scottish Youth Parliament about that. We all know that good citizenship takes the form of young people respecting not only themselves, but those around them, regardless of their creed or anything else. From one of the papers that I have been given, I noticed that the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust shares that view.  The trust includes it in a programme called respect, which I believe the minister mentioned in his opening speech. The minister also mentioned the appointment of a tsar—I do not know whether that person will be called a sex tsar—but I do not see the need for a tsar if good citizenship is put together with the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust's respect programme and sex education is introduced within that programme. If we had a tsar, we would end up with lots of bureaucracy; I really feel that that would hinder the strategy rather than help it. I therefore ask the minister to take on board the suggestion that we amalgamate good citizenship education, the respect programme and sex education. We all know and, I think, agree that the only way forward for Scotland and its young people in the long term is for young people to be taught from a very early age in schools and other places of education to have respect for others. That is something that members have mentioned, but we must also remember that with respect comes responsibility. It is Parliament's responsibility to ensure not only that young people know that information on sex education is available, but that they are able to access that information. It is a big problem that such information is not easily accessible. I will pick up on points that several members made about the morning-after pill. I also have concerns about the morning-after pill in relation not only to its supply in schools, but in relation to over-the-counter prescribing of it. My main concern is about the long-term damage that the pill might do to young women's health. Our strategy should not just be about unwanted pregnancies; we should also monitor the long-term effects of certain contraceptives, particularly the morning-after pill. We owe that to our young people—we should not just introduce such things without monitoring their long-term effects. For a long time women have been used as guinea pigs in attempts to prevent unwanted pregnancies. I often wonder whether the morning-after pill is another example of that and whether in 10 or 20 years' time we will see more effects of it on young women. The minister should consider that as part of the strategy. Des McNulty mentioned the Black Street clinic. He is right that nobody talked about it; it was hidden away and there seemed to be a stigma attached to it. That says a lot about the way we approach sex in general. For years in Scotland, sex has been spoken about behind closed doors and sniggered about on the playing fields or behind the sheds at school. We have to get away from that attitude; we have to make young people feel confident, responsible and respectful.  The report calls for a mass communications strategy, with which I could not agree more. I urge the Executive to say that there are excellent strategies out there; a lot of people do not know that the clinics involved exist. The Sandyford initiative, which is based at Sauchiehall Street, is excellent. Although a lot of people know about it, some do not. It runs outreach clinics, is city-centre based and has an open-door policy. It does not only provide for treatment of sexually transmitted diseases; it offers advice about such diseases, and every type of service to do with sexual health is available there. I ask the minister to consider the Sandyford initiative with a view to emulating it throughout Scotland. It is one of the best and we should do something with it. As Susan Deacon said, the strategy will not work unless money is available. I ask the minister to take on board the issues that I have raised.

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing this very important debate on an issue that affects not just all of us in the chamber, but our constituents and their children. At this point, I should mention Rosie Kane, who also put her name to this motion on 20mph speed zones. The Parliament sends its best wishes to Rosie, who I am sure would have been here to speak in the debate had she felt well enough to do so. Bill Butler referred to Glasgow City Council. As someone who has at times sparred with its representatives, I should take this opportunity to congratulate the council—and in particular my long-time political sparring partner, Alistair Watson—on all the hard work that has been carried out not just in Cardonald but throughout the local authority area. Glasgow City Council has been successful in the vigorous way that it has pursued this matter and I hope that the introduction of 20mph speed zones around schools will be rolled out throughout the country. However, I am worried that money will be concentrated only on zones surrounding schools and will not be allocated to areas in and around hospitals and to housing schemes that are located slightly away from schools. I know that members are always asking for more money, but I must ask the minister whether, in addition to the £4 million that has been allocated, there will be any more money to extend the 20mph speed limit to other residential areas and housing schemes. I realise that members will talk about their own areas. Bill Butler mentioned Anniesland, but there are many other areas within Glasgow city. For example, people assume that, because Townhead and Garnethill are in the city centre, there are no children there. I assure members that many kids live in those areas. Indeed, people seem to forget that Townhead, which is sometimes used as a rat-run, is actually a housing scheme. As a result, I am glad to see that a 20mph speed zone has been introduced for a school in that area. However, people simply zoom through other parts of Townhead to get on to the motorway. In that respect, I must pay tribute to Glasgow City Council  for its decision to introduce speed bumps in that area. People do not realise that the Garnethill area at the top of Sauchiehall Street contains nursery, primary and secondary schools. Because so much is going on in the city centre, they tend to take their cars up into the area around the Glasgow School of Art. Anyone who has walked up Rose Street and the aptly named Hill Street will know that those streets are very steep and unfortunately cars sometimes come speeding down them. I hope the minister will also comment on that particular issue. As I said earlier, I congratulate Bill Butler on lodging his motion, and I also congratulate Glasgow City Council on being at the forefront of pushing the 20mph zones. However, I would like the initiative to be extended, and I hope that the minister can give us some assurances that there will be more money to extend the zones, not just to roads outside schools but to roads outside hospitals and to roads in residential areas, which sometimes become a bit of a rat-run. The kids in residential areas need protection as well.

I am glad to hear the minister mention specialist services. He will be aware of the inaccurate brochure that  Greater Glasgow NHS Board has sent out regarding the maternity services review in Glasgow, which claims that a 1999 report by the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons says that it is safe to transport seriously ill new-born babies, when, in fact that report opposes the transport of neo-natals. Will the minister act now and instruct Greater Glasgow NHS Board to withdraw that damaging and inaccurate leaflet and will he instigate an immediate inquiry into the process of the consultation?

rose—

I was glad to find that this morning's debate was a Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party debate on the reform of public services. The reason why I was so glad was that, when I read the motion—particularly when I reached the part that mentions foundation hospitals—I could easily have thought that it had been lodged by the Executive. It is a bit rich—I use that word advisedly—for the Tories to lecture anyone on public services and even on public spending, given their appalling record not only on health, as Malcolm Chisholm has pointed out, but on education and, most important, local government, which was nearly destroyed by the last Tory Government. There are many people with long memories—and some with short memories—who are glad that the Tories are out of power. When we remember what the Tories did when they were in government, we realise that they are once again showing their true colours in what they are proposing today. Mention has been made of foundation hospitals, although more by Tory members than by Labour members. Foundation hospitals are supposed to be the NHS and the independent sector working in partnership, but they are actually nothing more and nothing less than privatisation by the back door. Let us also have a wee look at what would happen if the so-called patient's passport came to fruition. Pauline McNeill touched on that issue, but she would do well to think about the matter. Given that foundation hospitals, as pushed through by the Labour Government in Westminster, could come to fruition here in Scotland, perhaps Labour members could learn some lessons during today's debate. For example, let us look at the current prices for private operations. It costs £9,000 for a heart bypass, £5,000 for a hip replacement and £3,000 for a hysterectomy. Those are much more expensive than NHS prices.  "Choice, choice, choice" was the constant mantra during David McLetchie's speech, but let me tell him what choice would mean under his foundation hospitals or patient's passport scheme, or whatever label he wants to use. Basically, it would mean extending choice for only 5 per cent of Scotland's population—those would be the only people who could afford it. The other 95 per cent of Scotland's population could not afford it. That is what David McLetchie's foundation hospitals would mean.

There would be 95 per cent who could not afford such care. What about the doctors who would perform the operations? Would they move over to the private sector? The Tories would do well to learn that lesson. As Shona Robison highlighted in great detail, PFI/PPP and the privatisation and sell-off of our railways were imposed on the Scottish people and on the British people via Westminster when the Tories were in power. The Tories also seem to have forgotten about the fuel tax escalator, which caused all sorts of problems, particularly in the Highlands. All those policies were introduced by the Tories with absolutely disastrous consequences for Scotland. That is the legacy that the Tories have left behind for the people of Scotland. Talking of legacies, I want to turn to the other unionist party. The Labour Party has taken on the Tory legacy and developed it with even more vigour. We have had more PFI/PPP and tuition fees. Thousands of council houses have been sold off and have been privatised by being transferred to the private sector.

I am sorry, but I have only a couple of minutes. Labour members may crow about the extra money that was announced yesterday by their so-called masters in Westminster, but the public will ask what the Executive is doing with that money. Christine Grahame and others have highlighted the fact that the education system is failing our children, that our health service is crumbling and that homelessness is increasing. One in three children in Scotland lives in poverty. That is the legacy that Labour has delivered. Labour is supposed to be socialist, for goodness' sake.

That is right. Wendy Alexander mentioned it once and I told her that it was her mantra. Bill Butler said that the Labour Party is not socialist, but I think that he needs to be taken back to the drawing board to learn. As the Minister for Health and Community Care will sum up today's debate, I want to touch on the health service. Both Shona Robison and Carolyn Leckie mentioned the crisis in the health service, especially with the maternity services review. I ask the minister to think seriously about having a national debate on that subject. Not only in my area but the throughout the country, people are complaining about the flaws in the consultation process and the lack of consultation. I ask the minister to consider that seriously when he sums up. A lot of people might say that the health service costs a lot of money, but let me just give the minister a wee fact. Gordon Brown announced yesterday an extra £800 million for the on-going war in Iraq and Afghanistan—in total, £6.3 billion has been spent on an illegal war. That should help to put in context the situation that we have in the health service today.

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing this important debate on a subject that is dear to the hearts of all of us—not just the hearts of people who are present, but the hearts of people who could not stay behind for the debate. I do not say that just because Renfrewshire Council's area and the Glasgow airport area are my old stomping grounds. As Trish Godman said, Unity Enterprise's work is not confined to Renfrewshire and Glasgow airport—it reaches out all over Glasgow, to Inverclyde and other areas. I compliment Unity Enterprise on its work. Perhaps Johann Lamont will comment on that, because today she brought together 40 or 50 carers from throughout Glasgow. It was interesting to see carers' reactions to questions. Tonight, we are debating people who have learning disabilities and who may be cared for, but who are doing a marvellous job of caring for other people. The people to whom I have spoken in the confines of the airport about the work that is done there say that the project is excellent. Like Trish Godman, I ask whether the Minister for Transport is the right minister to respond to the  debate. Perhaps the Minister for Communities or the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning could respond, as Trish Godman said. The Executive has a strategy for carers, which was discussed at today's meeting with carers. Could we have a strategy to monitor what happens to people with disabilities? Perhaps a bit more help could be provided in Unity Enterprise's area, where such good work is being done. One reason for having this debate relates to people with learning disabilities. Sometimes the phrase "learning disabilities" is not liked; language and labelling can be big problems. Such people are starting to get their lives together with the help of agencies; they then push forward and help other people. As Trish Godman said, it is important that they can live in their own homes in Maryhill and other areas. People are being given the benefits of independence and are, as a result, reaching out and helping other people. We could consider expanding such work. In airports, people in wheelchairs and elderly people are not always helped as they should be. Perhaps that is why the Minister for Transport is here. Unity Enterprise does an excellent job within the airport. Work should not stop where it does; rather it should be progressed. As Trish Godman said, people are not only helping themselves and others, but are gaining a wee bit of confidence. I hope that they get on to the employment ladder, which is where Unity Enterprise and similar projects will come to the fore. Such organisations have the expertise, experience and contacts that can help people to get onto the employment ladder and to lead lives that are like the lives other people lead. Nothing should hold them back—if they are prepared to put themselves forward and to help other people, Parliament should be prepared to help them. I hope that Unity Enterprise—along with other such projects—will be monitored and that its good work will be considered in order to find out whether it can be stretched out further than Glasgow, Inverclyde and Renfrewshire, and in order to establish a strategy for such projects. We should recognise that people want to contribute and that they are contributing. As always, finance is an issue, but we should acknowledge that people are already contributing emotionally and financially, so Parliament should contribute, too. If that takes finance, strategies and projects, we should consider those and view the issue in the wider sphere. Again, I congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate. I hope that the minister can come up with good answers, a strategy and finance.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the Scottish Ambulance Service prioritises emergency calls in the local community during sporting events. (S2O-890)

The minister talked about categorising and prioritising. Does he agree that something is very wrong with the system when, in one instance, two ambulances that were sitting outside a football ground could not respond to an emergency call a few yards away? Will he look into the way in which the service is categorised and prioritised?

I genuinely welcome this debate and the importance that the Executive and the Parliament have attached to physical activity. Like other members—I will mention Duncan McNeil, but I will not name all the others—I grew up in an era when we could play out on the streets, although I do not know whether I played the same games as Duncan McNeil and Janis Hughes did. We belonged to an era in which we did not have computer games, video games or television and I believe that we were healthier and fitter, too. As has been said, however, those days are gone and we must look at the realities of the moment. I will to concentrate on the SNP amendment. Although I agree with the Executive's motion to some extent, I feel that its emphasis on walking and walking alone as a means of increasing levels of physical activity is a bit simplistic. Shona Robison was absolutely correct in what she said about PPPs. Our amendment encompasses everything that the Executive motion does not. I feel that there is far too much emphasis on walking—laudable though that might be—in that simplistic motion. Shona Robison was absolutely correct to say that we must make more of the school facilities that exist in our communities. I know areas where there are school facilities such as swimming pools, sports areas and football grounds that kids and members of the public are locked out of at the weekends and after hours. I cannot for the life of me see why we cannot do something to change that. Community facilities such as swimming pools are an excellent means of involving children and the wider public in sporting activities, but currently people are locked out.

That is what I am trying to say. There must be a far broader agenda than the one in the motion, which focuses on walking. I am not saying that we cannot encourage young girls to dance, but there are also young men who like dance and young girls who like football—those activities are not gender specific. We can encourage the uptake of such activities in the local schools and community centres that provide them. In certain areas, those activities are available at affordable prices, but in other areas, although the community centres and schools are there, the young people cannot get into those facilities or, if they can get in, they have to pay astronomical prices. I ask the Executive to consider that issue in developing further strategies. The Executive must be applauded for the investment that it has made, particularly in the active schools programme. However, once we have encouraged young people to take part in dancing, swimming, football, rugby or any other activity, we have to give them access to the necessary facilities outwith school hours. I ask the Executive to consider that. If we are serious about physical activity and the well-being of children and adults, we must also look at diet, which David Davidson, Dennis Canavan and others have mentioned. We must look at the fast-food zones in schools and encourage a healthy lifestyle for our kids. Healthy lifestyles and physical activity go hand in hand and will go a long way towards improving the general health of our nation. Perhaps Peter Peacock is the minister who should take on that responsibility. Donald Gorrie and Richard Lochhead mentioned parklands and facilities that are slowly but surely being taken away from communities. As the Green party has said, developers are coming in and taking over parkland. That is happening all over Glasgow and other areas. Parkland, community facilities and football facilities are being sold off to developers who are building private housing with no thought of any form of facility—not even ordinary green parkland for young kids and others to walk, play football or exercise in. We must look at encouraging physical activity in the round, holistically and in a joined-up way. I welcome what the Executive is trying to do, but we could do more.

The minister will be aware that I have proposed a member's bill on third-party rights of appeal. As the proposal has already been out to consultation, I would be happy to provide the minister with what I received back from that. Does the minister agree that there is concern in communities that the people there do not get a fair share when planning decisions are made? Will she give a commitment that a third-party right of appeal will be considered seriously in the forthcoming planning bill?

I apologise to Maureen Macmillan for missing the beginning of her speech. I listened to the rest of it and it was excellent. I say to Mike Rumbles and Murdo Fraser that everyone has sympathy with what they say. I recognise that there are perpetrators of violence against men, but we cannot get away from the facts: 90 per cent of recorded abuse is against women and 92 per cent of violence against women is perpetrated in the home, which is a place in which one is supposed to feel safe and secure. If Mike Rumbles and Murdo Fraser want to highlight the issue that they raise, I advise them to lodge a motion for a members' debate on the matter. I am sure that most of the members who are present would come along to such a debate, to listen and to contribute.

I take Mike Rumbles's point, but he could still instigate a members' business debate on the issue if he wants to. I commend the work that is carried out by Women's Aid and the other agencies that are involved. I say to the minister and the Executive that the special emphasis that they have put on violence against women is most welcome. Unfortunately, the issue will not go away. When we look at the figures, we can see that something is going terribly wrong. We must get to the nub of the issue: why does violence continually increase, year after year? It might be that, with the continuing advertising campaigns that highlight domestic abuse, women are becoming more confident in reporting incidents to the police, as Frances Curran mentioned. However, I believe that the upsurge in domestic violence—and violence against women as a whole—is also related to some men's disregard of  women as equals. We should reconsider the national strategy that was produced to address domestic abuse. The strategy centres on prevention, protection and provision—that is fine, but the strategy must also put more emphasis on education, particularly given that one in five young men think that it is all right to be violent towards women and that one in ten young women think that violence towards women is acceptable. Education must play a bigger part in the strategy; I mean not only education in schools, but education through the media. When we look at the ways in which women are portrayed in films, magazines, videos and in some places of so-called entertainment, there is scope for a strategy to educate the media on women's role in the world. There is a direct link between violence and what happens in some places of entertainment. Some people say that we cannot control the media; that might be so, but we have legislative powers over places of entertainment and the licensing of such places. For example, we are considering the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. I have suggested that we amend the 1982 act, as has Glasgow City Council, and I believe that Edinburgh City Council is also considering the 1982 act in relation to the licensing of places of entertainment such as lap-dancing and table-dancing clubs, which could be licensed in the same way as sex shops. I hope that the minister will take that on board and consider amending the 1982 act, as that would be welcome. Women are portrayed as objects, not people, in those clubs. When we talk about lap-dancing clubs, sex shops and other such places of so-called entertainment, we have an obligation to women in society to make the case that such entertainment is not acceptable. I am not being prudish about what goes on in those clubs; I am considering their wider impact on society and how women are perceived as objects, whose bodies can be used and abused. Until we educate not just men but society as a whole to relate to women on equal terms, and until we make inroads into changing what I call the laddish culture that is so prevalent—particularly in the media—we will, unfortunately, continue to have debates such as this one. It would be a dreadful indictment of the 21 st century if we had to turn up next year to have the same debate. There should be a little more education of the media and we should take a firmer hand in educating young people and society as a whole to treat women as equals, because I believe that the way in which women are portrayed contributes to their being regarded and used as objects and to the perpetration of violence against them. I support the Executive's motion.

I thank all the MSPs who signed my motion. I pay special tribute to the Glasgow  Evening Times , which has been at the forefront of the campaign for maternity services in Glasgow. Not only was it responsible for a petition that has been running for many weeks, but it has kept the general public well informed of all aspects of the maternity services review—something that Greater Glasgow NHS Board failed miserably to do. I make it clear that this is neither a party-political issue nor solely a Glasgow issue. The closure of the Queen Mother's hospital, with its unique position in the Yorkhill complex, will have an adverse effect on all maternity services in Scotland. I am pleased that MSPs from all over Scotland have stayed behind to take part in the debate. It is beyond belief that this world-renowned set-up is in any way under threat. It is a state-of-the-art provision that many countries want to emulate, but Greater Glasgow NHS Board is trying to destroy it. On a recent visit to the Queen Mum's, I met young doctors and other professionals who told me that they had chosen to train and work at the Queen Mum's because it was a world leader in innovation and practical medical advances that exist nowhere else in Scotland.

I agree entirely and have supported Elaine Smith's motion to that effect.

I thank Johann Lamont for her intervention and am sorry that she cannot stay for the rest of the debate. However, I am pleased that she has at least arrived for it. Johann Lamont is right to say that this debate is not about buildings. On a recent visit to the Queen Mum's, the professors told us that the issue was not buildings, but the unique set-up that keeps mothers and babies together. Greater Glasgow NHS Board has forgotten that. I mentioned the Yorkhill complex, which houses both the Queen Mum's and the sick kids hospital and has been at the forefront of pioneering techniques. I know that other members want to comment on that point. I refer to techniques such as foetal diagnosis and therapy; Professor Ian Donald also pioneered ultrasound for maternity services at Yorkhill. Professionals are seriously concerned that if the Queen Mum's closes the experience and expertise that both hospitals have built up will be lost. The support that other medical professionals throughout Scotland and beyond have given to their colleagues at the Queen Mum's is a sign that the campaign to avoid closure is not just a knee-jerk reaction to a local inconvenience—it is a Scotland-wide campaign. Today I received a phone call from a campaigner who told me that he has written to the Queen on this issue. She has written back to him to say that she has contacted Dr John Reid. If the minister is not already au fait with that, perhaps he should contact Dr John Reid MP, who might intervene on the campaign's behalf if the Executive does not wish to do so. I turn my attention to the consultation process, which is the nub of the issue. From the beginning the consultation process was flawed to the point of being a sham. If, as some people are saying, that is not the case, why was the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health not invited to  contribute? What about the concerns of paediatric cardiologists at Yorkhill, who have had to write to the newspapers to get over their information about the 60 newborn babies with serious heart disease who have been treated in the sick children's hospital in the past year? Why were the views of child psychiatrists not noted? Experts such as Alice McGrath and Michael Morton have stated: "We do not believe the way forward involves the closure of a specialist centre that allows sick babies and their mothers to be together as much as possible". Recently I attended a public meeting where emotions were running very high. The two most telling contributions came from health professionals who were pleading the case for the Queen Mother's hospital. One of those professionals, Anthea Dixon, spoke of the special relationship that helps to make the Yorkhill site world renowned for the care of babies and children. She expressed her concerns that she had not received a copy of the consultation evidence from the health board. I have not received a copy, either, even after repeated requests. Professor Cockburn, who is highly thought of, spoke with real emotion about the work that is carried out at the Queen Mother's hospital, much of which would be disrupted if closure went ahead. He was truly angered that his evidence and that of many other eminent health professionals was not included in the consultation document. As well as all those experts who were ignored in the so-called consultation, there have been approximately 100,000 signatures on a petition from concerned citizens all over Scotland and beyond. Although Catriona Renfrew of the Greater Glasgow NHS Board has arrogantly announced that public opinion will not influence the closure decision at all, we politicians cannot afford to behave in such a high-handed manner. There is real anger among the public, and the minister must look into the issue immediately.

I am pleased that Carolyn Leckie has stayed until now.  Some of my colleagues are going to pick up on some of the questions that Carolyn Leckie asked, particularly about ECMO and the situation with the Southern general hospital. The professionals are concerned that the professionalism and expertise at Yorkhill could be lost to Scotland. There is real anger about the proposals and the minister would do well to speak to the publicly appointed board and tell it that it is there to serve the public, not to dictate to us. People are very angry and unhappy about the whole situation. We all know that the health board is a publicly appointed body, and secrecy is not necessary in this case; secrecy is very much against the public interest. Misinformation is also unacceptable and the health board's suggestion that there are no high-dependency beds in Yorkhill is an untruth. There are high-dependency beds on the Queen Mother's hospital site and people should remember that. Sometimes, people have to be moved from the Southern general hospital because there are no beds, so it is a fallacy to say that there are no high-dependency beds at Yorkhill. The specialist and dedicated staff of the two units are pleading with the minister and others to look into the situation now and to start an investigation. I ask the minister to remember his find words about "a culture of care" and "a new partnership between patients, staff and Government." Those fine words should now be put into action. Nothing further should happen until the minister puts together an investigation of the consultation. We want to know how the evidence was gathered, and if the evidence gatherers and the pre-emptive decision that was taken by the working group to close the Queen Mother's hospital were acceptable. I demand that that investigation takes place immediately.

The motion may be long, but I thank Carolyn Leckie for lodging it, as it has allowed us to debate this important subject again. Christine Grahame mentioned that we spoke about poverty in 1999; we also had a debate on the subject on 14 December last year. It seems as if poverty is continually being debated, but what has actually happened out there? I agree with Carolyn Leckie that only with independence can we truly eradicate poverty. I am sure that all members, regardless of their party, would agree that it is a national disgrace that children are still living in poverty. It has been mentioned that one in three children live in poverty, but one in five working adults and one in five pensioners also live in poverty. The minister said that she was happy to take part in the debate, but she also said that things were changing for the better. If members listen to the figures that are presented by myself and others, they will recognise that it does not matter how much spin is put on the issue or how many targets—or whatever the buzzword is—are proposed, things are not changing. People are still living in poverty  and people are still struggling. Things are simply not changing. Robert Brown mentioned the Lib-Lab Executive—perhaps it is the Executive that is suffering from poverty: poverty of ambition. The Executive has poverty of ambition for our country and our people. We should tackle that. If the Executive had more ambition and spoke more to its Westminster colleagues about tax credits and so on, we may not eradicate poverty but life would be a lot better for people out there. The minister spoke about the minimum wage and family tax credits. I do not need to tell the minister that we do not have control over those issues.

Somebody has already mentioned the policies. We must take control over the tax and benefits system. I believe that Westminster is using the system to keep people unemployed. There is no point in sitting in this Parliament and tinkering around the edges.

No, I am sorry but I will not. We will not eradicate poverty by tinkering around the edges. I quite enjoyed our little tour around the world with Murdo Fraser. We were in North Korea and South Korea and we went to Cuba and America, but I do not remember him mentioning Scotland. Perhaps if he took more interest in his own countrymen, people in this country might start to listen to him. Des McNulty can always be relied upon to stick up for Labour policies. He is a loyalist. I was going to call him a red, white and blue man, but perhaps I will change it to just a unionist man, considering that he called us a mixture of yellow, green and red nationalists. Des McNulty constantly talks up the policies as if everything is marvellous in the Labour Party, but everything is not marvellous or all roses. He said that the Labour Party is socialist and Wendy Alexander gave us a lovely wee history lesson on socialism. Perhaps she should speak to her colleague Bill Butler, who told school kids and me last week that the Labour Party has never been a socialist party. I was surprised when he said that. Wendy Alexander mentioned socialism and socialists so often that that must be her mantra. Perhaps one way of keeping her roots would be for her to remind herself that, one day, the Labour Party might be a socialist party.

No. I am sorry; I am in my last minute.

I commend Campbell Martin for saying it all about the reality of living in poverty in Scotland today. We know what it is like to live out there in the sticks. It is about time that the Labour Party and the Lib-Lab Executive went out there and spoke to and listened to the people, instead of repeating to us the mantra that everything in the garden is fine and rosy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what extra resources will be made available to national health service boards following implementation of the new primary medical services contracts for out-of-hours general practitioner cover in those circumstances where not enough GPs register to work beyond contracted hours. (S2O-722)

I thank the minister for his reply, but my question was in human rather than financial terms. Given that a substantial number of GPs say that they will opt out of the service, what services will be provided for people who reside in areas with acute shortages of GPs who take part in out-of-hours cover?

During yesterday's debate on transport, the minister mentioned the new transport agency. He has not committed himself to a date, a time scale and funding for the crossrail scheme, but can he indicate whether the establishment of the new agency will interfere with its progress?

I want to concentrate on one particular area—Strathclyde Passenger Transport. The minister has praised SPT and I am sure that Malcolm Reid and Alistair Watson will be very pleased to hear that praise. It will be news to them. I want to emphasise a point made in our amendment to the Executive's motion—that the new agency "should not undermine the role and function of Strathclyde Passenger Transport". I mention that because I want to pick up on a point in the minister's speech. He said that SPT in its current form cannot deliver. In his summing up, I would like the minister to explain that statement and to answer this question: does the Government intend to abolish SPT? I have not always praised SPT—in fact, if any criticism was being made, I was probably the first to make it. However, when praise is deserved, I will praise. The great strength of SPT is that it is locally driven and not centralised; I think that the minister mentioned that in his speech. If SPT is centralised, I and others believe that less focus will be put on local issues. SPT and the new agency will not be able to concentrate on areas, or put in the time and expertise, in the way that SPT can at the moment. As other members have mentioned, a lack of sufficient powers is also a weakness, not just for SPT but for other transport authority areas. I would like SPT and other regional transport authorities to be given more powers and to be driven more locally, because that would allow them to do a much better job.  The deregulation of the bus network must be reviewed urgently, through consultation or whatever, because it has caused heartache and has been a disaster for the general public and SPT, which is the first port of call for people who make complaints. It is a travesty of justice that bus companies can withdraw bus services without any explanation. We must examine that. In Glasgow, for example, 56 per cent of households do not have access to cars, so public transport is vital in providing people with access to different areas, which they need for going to the doctor and so on. I agree with what the minister said about the need for joined-up thinking, but I wonder whether the new agency will be able to deliver on that. SPT has a good track record in that regard and I do not see why it should not have more powers to carry on that work. SPT and I have concerns about what will happen to rail powers if the new agency comes on board and SPT is diluted or abolished. The creation of the new agency would certainly remove the west of Scotland's input into rail strategy. Most of the powers of procurement would be given to the Strategic Rail Authority, which is based in London. I know how much bother I and others have had for asking for funding for the crossrail system, for example, which has been debated since the day I came into the Parliament. There have been about 10 motions on that subject, but we still do not see any funds being provided. I worry that that is what will happen if the new agency goes ahead. The minister said that central funding was a very controversial system; it certainly is, especially since local government reorganisation in 1996. SPT and others have said that not only is central funding a controversial and convoluted system, it is highly unfair. I will quote a couple of figures that I have cited before in written questions. In 2002-03, West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority, which has 2.5 million passengers, was given consent to borrow £50 million, whereas SPT, which has 2.2 million passengers, was given consent to borrow only £28 million. I could go on providing figures, but I do not want to use up my speech in that way; I can send the minister the relevant papers. If the proposed new agency comes about and SPT still exists, will that give the Parliament and SPT more powers, both in relation to crossrail and to borrowing more money, which would help to give us a better system? I ask the minister to answer that in his summing up.

The minister has heard the concerns of constituents and professionals. I want to go one step further. The minister mentioned the three-month consultation process, but he is aware that Glasgow has already undergone a consultation process. We are not happy about the present situation. Indeed, professionals and public alike believe the process to be flawed. I ask the minister not to wait until the end of the so-called consultation process. I ask him to instigate an investigation into Greater Glasgow NHS Board's handling of the whole affair of the maternity services review. I plead with him on behalf of the public and professionals to wait for the three-month process to be undertaken.

I congratulate Scott Barrie on securing this debate and thank him for enabling us to debate an issue as important as children's panel membership. I also extend my heartfelt thanks to all members of children's panels. I know many of them, especially in the Glasgow area. They do stalwart work, spending many weekends and evenings trying to put something back into society. They tell me that they see that as their duty. Scott Barrie and other members have highlighted a number of issues. It is important that we examine the way in which agism affects membership of children's panels. I know many people who are 70 or 80 years of age and who could put me to shame, never mind younger people. We also need to consider the under-representation of ethnic minorities on panels and the fact that, for some reason, men are not taking up places on panels. Scott Barrie suggested that  that may be the result of work commitments, but during the past 30 years, as children's panels have evolved, men have had more time to get involved in the voluntary sector. More women now work, and if they can find the time to serve on children's panels I am sure that men can do the same. The Executive has run an advertising programme to encourage men to become more involved, and further advertising would be more than welcome. I urge more men to consider serving on children's panels. As Duncan McNeil said, the members of children's panels come from all airts and pairts and should include people who have worked in shipyards with apprentices. We need to involve everyone in panels—their membership should be much more wide ranging than it is at the moment. I congratulate the Executive on investing more funds in children's panels, especially in the Glasgow area, and I thank it for doing so. Some people may disagree with the fast-tracking of social workers, but not everyone opposes it when the aim is to enable more social workers to assist children's panels. We could say that children's panels are absolutely marvellous. The volunteers who offer their services to panels are marvellous and panels do a good job. However, we cannot ignore the fact that there is a lack of social workers, which is a big problem. We all recognise that. I will not repeat everything that children's panel members have said to me. However, children's panels were set up as a means of intervention before children become involved in criminal activities. Unfortunately, at the moment we are failing those vulnerable children, because some of them do not have social work reports. Scott Barrie made the point to Fiona Hyslop and Mary Scanlon that people leave children's panels because of work and family commitments. Like the children's panel members that Mary Scanlon mentioned, the members of the Glasgow children's panel to whom I have spoken are leaving out of frustration. They do not feel that their work is being undermined, but that they are not able to fulfil the duty for which they volunteered. They believe that they are failing the children whom they set out to serve. I know that we are actively involved in trying to recruit more social workers, but we must monitor what happens in the long term. We can throw money at any problem, but if there is no monitoring to determine whether that is working it is hardly worth while. I sincerely congratulate everyone who offers their time and energies to children's panels. It is up to the Scottish Parliament to ensure that adequate resources—whether money or social  workers—are provided to enable them to help kids who are desperately in need. I thank Scott Barrie for lodging his motion.

Will the member give way?

It is clear that every member in the chamber is concerned not only about the public perception of antisocial behaviour, but about the antisocial behaviour in their particular constituencies and communities. However, wherever such behaviour occurs and whoever perpetrates it, the Executive is wrong to put the blame on the young in our society. I take issue with the Executive's emphasis on youth crime.

Hugh Henry protests too much, and he proves my point by using the word "plaguing" and other such words in reference to young people. He can protest as much as he likes, but he is labelling young people. Only a small minority of young people are to blame. To impose electronic tagging and ASBOs on young people under 16 will only exacerbate the problem. [ Interruption. ] Does the minister want to come in?

I gave a personal view, to which I am entitled—as everyone is.

It seems that the Executive wants to target young people and once they are tagged and out of sight and out of mind the Executive will do nothing for them. Tagging is not the answer for everything and neither is locking people up. Antisocial behaviour does not begin in the cradle. As Johann Lamont said, young people of 25 or 26 are not born to be antisocial. We have to target the reasons that kids become antisocial. We should not put a tag on kids of 12 to 15 and label them for the rest of their lives as someone who was antisocial. We must look at the causes of antisocial behaviour. I believe that the Executive has got it wrong and that tagging is a knee-jerk reaction—and I am not the only one who believes that. Many organisations believe that tagging is wrong. For example, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations believes that tagging and other Executive proposals are wrong. Hugh Henry may laugh, but I think that such organisations are more expert than he is. He should remember that they have a right to speak on the issue. Hugh Henry's attitude shows the contempt that the Executive has for anyone who says that it might be wrong.

No, I am sorry. I do not have much time. It is a rather sad indictment of the Executive  when its attitude is, "Do what I say, not what I do." It is little wonder that the youth of this country has no respect for politicians in the Parliament when the politicians of what is supposedly the Government of Scotland speak of young people in the way that they do. It is an absolute disgrace that, in a debate such as this, a minister can laugh at proposals from the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and other agencies. I will skip a part of my speech and go on to something that Hugh Henry quite likes.

Margaret Curran cannot have her cake and eat it; she should not try to do that. I am giving examples, not just of how I feel, but of how others feel. Margaret Curran should not turn things back on me; she should examine her proposals.

I know of a consultation that took place in Maryhill—I see that Patricia Ferguson is not here—where people did not agree with every single Executive proposal. I know that, because I know people who were there. The Executive should not think that everybody in Scotland agrees with it simply because it can produce a group of tenants who do agree with it—there are other people out there as well. We are talking about preventive medicine—ways to cure or stop antisocial behaviour. Why does the Executive not open up schools to kids at night and let them use facilities such as swimming pools and fitness suites? That is a measure that could be taken easily. What about good citizenship classes? Why do we not have those in schools, as an hour in the curriculum, so that kids can learn about good citizenship when they are five years old? We do not have that at present. I suggested it at the previous Local Government Committee and I spoke to young people from the Scottish Youth  Parliament who agreed absolutely that good citizenship should be part of the curriculum. So, there are two ideas that the Executive could start with: good citizenship classes from the age of five and the opening of schools and community centres to allow the kids to use them instead of someone saying to them, "If you're standing on the street corner, you're doing something wrong; we're right and you are always wrong."

I apologise to Cathy Peattie for not being present when she began her opening speech. Unfortunately, I was at another meeting and had to wait before I was let into the chamber. I am involved in drafting a member's bill that has gone out for consultation, and am very grateful to  the non-Executive bills unit for drawing my attention to the difficulties of mainstreaming equality. As a result, I have been looking at what it means to mainstream equality—in particular the groups that I have to contact and the language that I have to use in covering letters about my bill. I will not tout the bill, because I think that everyone knows what it is. NEBU drew my attention to particular areas that, as an MSP, I was not aware of. Indeed, I do not think that many people are aware of just how deep mainstreaming equality goes and I am eternally grateful to Cathy Peattie and the committee for producing this report. Cathy Peattie and others have mentioned mainstreaming equality in the committees and I wholeheartedly agree that mainstreaming must take place, not only in committees but throughout the parliamentary process. I also agree with Elaine Smith that we must monitor the situation to find out how mainstreaming has been carried out and to gather any results that pertain to it. I suppose that we are embarking on a programme of reform, because such mainstreaming has never taken place before. We must realise that, as far as equality proofing is concerned, there must be greater transparency and accountability. Indeed, transparency and accountability should become the norm when, as we hope, mainstreaming equality becomes the norm for the parliamentary process. That is why I think that monitoring is very important—we must ensure that mainstreaming is carried through. Equally important is our commitment to engage the many groups that feel disengaged from the Parliament. As many members have pointed out, lack of access is one of the main barriers not just to mainstreaming equality but to people's involvement in the parliamentary process and we need to reach out to the groups that have been very much neglected. I want us to consider not only access but other areas where equality mainstreaming will help and where people will be consulted and enabled to take part in the parliamentary process. It is important to consider physical access. Most members think that we have gone some way towards making the Parliament more accessible, as well as making it easier to reach polling stations, but I assure them that there are plenty of places in the area that I represent where access is not easy. If that access is not forthcoming, we will have to consider how people can get to such venues, which means looking at transport. People who have children will need some form of child minding, and carers' responsibilities will also have to be considered. If people vote in a different way—electronically, for example—we will have to consider that too. We must ensure that information is accessible  because it is central to any good consultation process. Where there are language barriers, for example, we must provide interpreters. Presentation barriers are also covered by equality mainstreaming. We have to think about small groups that might not have the finances to contribute their ideas to a consultation process. Perhaps we should consider providing financial support as well as other types of support. Appropriate training for staff has been mentioned. In my opening remarks I said that I did not realise how wide ranging equality mainstreaming was, so perhaps MSPs should also receive training. Feedback is important. If we want people to engage in and be serious about equality mainstreaming, we need to give them feedback on all the consultation documents that they have looked at or with which they have been involved. The Deputy Presiding Officer Trish Godman and I were involved in the previous Local Government Committee, and when we took the consultation process out to the people, they were most concerned about the lack of feedback that they received. The Local Government Committee rectified that situation by giving out feedback. That is an important point: people participate in consultation, but they do not get any feedback. We must give people feedback and make accessible any information that pertains to them. I congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on the report and I look forward to seeing its recommendations mainstreamed throughout the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to meet the Scottish Tenants Organisation to discuss the effect of the new Glasgow Housing Association tenancy agreement on its clients, including elderly people and people with mental incapacities. (S2O-465)

That was short and sweet. Does the minister agree that the concerns of the STO are merited, given tenants' inability to access decent housing, the fact that owner-occupiers have been sent exorbitant bills and the GHA's admission that it has failed to collect £10 million in rents? Does she also agree that she should comply with the Scottish Executive's guidance on tenant participation and meet the Scottish Tenants Organisation as soon as possible?

I welcome any debate about the health of the people of Scotland. However, like my colleagues, I have concerns about how the debate has been conducted. There is no motion and no amendments and there will be no vote at the end of the day. I want to record in the Official Report that I hope that such debates do not become talking shops that result in all talk and no action—I fear that there is a real danger that that will happen. I will be interested to hear what the minister says about that in summing up. I want to concentrate on Glasgow and the health of its citizens and to say something about the situation in which Glasgow finds itself. Glasgow is the powerhouse of Scotland. It is the commercial and financial centre for half the nation's population and has national and international status as a city of cultural significance. However, Glasgow's people consistently find themselves left at the bottom end of successive Governments' health league tables, whether those Governments are Labour and Lib Dem, or Tory—in other words, I am talking about unionist Governments. For a city with such wealth and the capacity to generate more wealth, Glasgow is, perversely, home to some of the worst areas of multiple deprivation not just in Scotland but in the United Kingdom. The dependence on benefits in areas such as Shettleston, Drumchapel and Ruchill is an affront to human dignity in the 21 st century. The minister mentioned healthy eating initiatives. There is a healthy eating initiative at the Annexe in Stewartville Street in Partick, and outreach staff at local health centres such as that in Drumchapel do excellent work. Such work contributes greatly to turning the tide in favour of health improvements, but we believe that such efforts are greatly constrained by funding limitations. I ask the minister to consider that matter with regard to the scale of deprivation rather than population. Members have mentioned hospital reorganisation in Glasgow, which the Executive should also consider. We in Glasgow refer to such reorganisation as hospital closures. A city with special health needs that result from widespread deprivation, heart disease, diabetes, oral and lung cancer, childhood ailments such as leukaemia and even malnutrition should receive better rather than fewer facilities in the 21 st century. Glasgow faces the closure of two of its five main hospitals and a reduction to only two fully operational accident and emergency departments from five such departments. Where does that leave the people of Glasgow when they face a significant accident or terrorist incident? Where does it leave them in the face of a flu epidemic or some other epidemic?  Such closures in a city that has as poor a health record as any city in western Europe are driven by the balance sheet and not by patient need—the minister and the Executive must consider that matter. I agree entirely with Duncan McNeil, Mary Scanlon and Jamie Stone that health boards are not listening to the very people whom they are supposed to represent. Furthermore, although the Golden Jubilee national hospital in Clydebank is innovative and worth while, it is poaching scarce medical staff from already stretched NHS hospitals in the Glasgow area. I ask the minister to reply to the various written questions that I have put to him about that matter. Pauline McNeill mentioned Yorkhill. I have a query regarding the protection of the special status of the Royal hospital for sick children at Yorkhill. Two years ago, when Susan Deacon was Minister for Health and Community Care, she mentioned the protection of that special status in her review. I have spoken to many doctors, constituents and consultants who see the threatened closure of the Queen Mother's hospital maternity unit at Yorkhill as the beginning of the reduction in status of the sick kids hospital. Pauline McNeill and other members have mentioned that the two hospitals at Yorkhill are unique. They provide a one-stop shop of excellence for mothers and children—not just for Glasgow, but for 50 per cent of the rest of Scotland. If the maternity unit at the Queen Mother's hospital closes, there will be no maternity hospital in the west end of Glasgow and Yorkhill's uniqueness will be under threat. The minister should look closely at that matter. Glasgow must be seen as a special case in respect of health—I make no apology for pleading that case here and at every available opportunity. Members should excuse me while I drink some water.

Yes. Duncan McNeil mentioned pubs—I am not in the pub yet. The skill and dedication of NHS staff in Glasgow—Macmillan nurses, social workers, volunteers and so on—deserve the highest praise, but those members of staff do not need or want praise. They want investment in the health service, in wages and in better services for the people. Political will to ensure that they have a decent NHS is needed. We ask the so-called Executive for that political will and to deliver a good health service that is free at the point of need. Mike Rumbles said that he is happy that the partnership, which he and the Lib Dems revere, is delivering. If he asks the people of Glasgow about that, they will say that it is not delivering. We in the  SNP will argue for immediate change in respect of the hospital closures for the benefit of the people of Glasgow and we are determined to gain power over the tax and benefits system through an independent Parliament. That is the only way in which we will tackle the ills of the people of Scotland and the ills of the people of Glasgow in particular.

In the past couple of months, which have been nice and warm—perhaps because of global warming, although I do not know—I have enjoyed sitting outside in Glasgow city centre to have a drink. I admit that I enjoy a drink. I found the atmosphere to be civilised and, until about 8 o'clock or 9 o'clock, there were no problems in the city centre. I welcome the debate and the examination of the alcohol licensing system in Scotland. It is well known that the culture around alcohol in Scotland is to use and abuse it, which creates associated problems. I welcome anything that will help to alleviate or stop those problems. I hope that the  debate will get down to the nitty-gritty and that we will get some answers in the summing-up speeches or in a later consultation. As I said, in the past couple of months I have enjoyed sitting outside in Glasgow city centre, where I live. Although it is great to be at the hub and among the buzz, I assure members that during the weekend, the situation can be horrendous when I look out of my window or come home at night. That applies to people walking on Queen Street or Sauchiehall Street, or even George Square or Argyle Street. I have seen out of my window—and stepped over—comatose young boys and girls lying on the pavement, in the gutter or on the road. They can barely lift their heads, never mind themselves, off the ground. Questions must be asked why kids are served alcohol in pubs and clubs and allowed to get into such a state before leaving. Unfortunately, I have also seen adults—mostly men—urinating on people's doorsteps. People come out and remonstrate and that is when alcohol-related violence can occur. Where are the police at such times? I have seen police vans in the city centre at night, but I never see police walking around at that time. I am sure that giving the police more financial resources would help to alleviate the problem of alcohol-related violence, because the police would be better able to monitor the streets. The Nicholson report refers to training for licensees and people who work in pubs. Such training is important, because we must get across the message that it is not acceptable to serve more alcohol to someone who is over the limit and can hardly stand up. I welcome the report's reference to national forums and to local people being involved. However, I have questions about the forums. In particular, will there be legislation for the national forums that will also cover licensing boards? The Scottish Licensed Trade Association is concerned about that issue, as I am. The report states that licensing boards should listen to advice from regional or national forums, but it does not comment on what the boards should do with such advice. I, and I am sure most people, would like clarification on that point. Kenny MacAskill is correct to say that we cannot consider the issue only in relation to Scotland's drinking culture and peer pressure. We must have a more holistic approach. We must consider not only Scottish drinking culture, but aspects such as appropriate training, education and the number of police on the beat. We must ensure that additional resources are provided to allow more police to be on the beat. As members will know, the police who are on the beat in Glasgow city centre are taken from other areas. The number of clubbers who are  in the city centre on a Saturday night is comparable to the population of Perth. It is worrying that we do not have sufficient police to deal with such large numbers. Pauline McNeill referred to the transport system. We must have an adequate transport system for the thousands of people who might come out of clubs at staggered times; I use the word "staggered" advisedly. I look forward to enjoying more liberal and more civilised licensing hours, as I was able to do in the past couple of months. However, liberal hours must be accompanied by sensible and responsible behaviour. I hope that members keep that point in mind.

The minister mentioned dealing with reality. I will deal with a few realities at Dungavel: large building, razor wire and guards. If someone's children are hungry outside permitted eating times they are not allowed to feed them; if they try to do so, they are fined. If someone wants milk for their children they cannot just get it—they have to ask a guard, who has to open up the cupboards to give them milk. Kids cannot play outside whenever they want. They have to ask a guard, and are still surrounded by walls, razor wire and guards. If an individual needs sanitary products, they have to ask a guard. I would not call that a detention centre; I would call it a prison. Members of the Parliament should be forthright in our opinion that children should not be held at Dungavel. I congratulate Elaine Smith and Cathy Peattie on their stance. I say to the other Labour members who have spoken that if there was a  shiver going round their side of the chamber, it would be hard-pressed to find a spine to run up. Let us consider the amendments one by one. It is not worth mentioning the Tory amendment. Elaine Smith's and Robert Brown's amendments both have merits. However, I am sorry to say—particularly in relation to Elaine's amendment—that those amendments are just smokescreens, as Rosie Kane said, that try to protect the Lib-Lab Government. Margaret Curran and the other ministers cannot hide forever. Robert Brown has created a smokescreen that tries to let them off the hook, but people outside the chamber will not let them off the hook any more. Once again, what we see today is the might and weight of Westminster against the fright of the Lib-Lab Government. According to the Government in Scotland, the master has spoken and the servants will obey. However, this is a Parliament and Lib-Lab members have been elected to it. They should get off their knees and do something. They should vote for the SNP motion.

Will the member give way?

I have a brief question for Paul Martin on Dungavel, which is what we are talking about. Does he believe that children should be incarcerated at Dungavel—yes or no?

Will the minister take an intervention?

rose—

This has been a good debate, in which most speakers have contributed positively. I have some information in which Helen Eadie will be interested. During the election campaign, the SNP published many documents on health that specifically outlined initiatives on smoking and dietary issues. I will send her copies if she wishes. I am sure that I will not need her address—I will put it in her doocot and she can look forward to reading it. Most members have raised important issues. Shona Robison talked about salaries. I know that Pauline McNeill, who is no longer in the chamber, spoke about staffing problems and the need to attract specialists. We must consider that issue carefully. The minister admitted that, although we have attracted specialists, a big gap remains in oncology, about which there is much concern. We must consider ways of encouraging specialists in that area to locate to our hospitals, rather than elsewhere. It is nice to think that, because we are providing services, specialists will come here, but deep down money matters to them, regardless of the research that is being undertaken. Shona Robison's idea of offering variable conditions and enhanced terms is a good one, which the minister should consider.  David Davidson and Ken Macintosh talked about providing information, which is an important issue. I refer not just to information about health—diet, exercise and smoking—but to access to information, if members will forgive me for saying information two or three times. That issue is raised time and again, especially by people who do not live near outreach clinics and are unable to access information easily. Bill Aitken said that if people can access information easily, they can find out whether they have a form of cancer. With early diagnosis, people's chances of survival are much higher. Macmillan Cancer Relief nurses and patients from areas such as Drumchapel, which I visited recently, have raised the issue of outreach information with me. Will the minister and the Executive—perhaps through the Health Education Board for Scotland—consider establishing a rolling programme of outreach information, not just on diet and prevention of cancer, but on recognition of some cancers, leading to early diagnosis? I would like to know the minister's views on how that information might be distributed, whether it be by leaflets, a television campaign or whatever. The issue is important. We do not want to scare people, but we want to ensure that cancers that can be easily treated do not spread until they reach a point at which they cannot be treated. I am pleased that the minister has announced a continuation of ring fencing, which many members have mentioned. The Macmillan nurses whom I met in Glasgow and Edinburgh were worried about the possibility that ring fencing would not continue. I am sure that they will be pleased to hear that it will continue. I agree with Janis Hughes that some cancer treatments are becoming swifter, but I think that we should not shy away from recognising that others are not. In the Hairmyres hospital in her constituency, people are being treated more quickly, but other people suffering from lung cancer, for example, are not. Colin Fox—who is no longer in the chamber, unfortunately—talked about the link between deprivation and cancer. We know that people in deprived areas are more likely to get lung cancer and are three times more likely to die of it than people in other areas. As I have said before, we must consider that issue. As the minister said, we will have a debate on health on 18 September. I look forward to that debate, when I am sure the issues that have been raised today will be raised again.

I am sure that Des McNulty saw his speech as a labour of love, but I do not know what it was for the rest of us. The Minister for Communities mentioned yesterday's debate on the economy. I agree with what the minister and others said about how a strong economy and partnership working should help eradicate poverty—I emphasise the word "should". I reiterate what my colleagues and John Swinburne and Tommy Sheridan said—poverty cannot be tackled properly with the few powers that this Parliament has. We need full powers and full independence. Poverty can be dealt with properly only by our taking on board all the powers of an independent country. Only by doing that can we close the opportunity gap. The opportunity gap has been mentioned time and time again. However, we are talking not only  about opportunities, but about getting rid of the dependency culture that exists for many of our people. I blame the members of the Unionist parties for that. Those members seem to think that if people are kept in a dependency culture they will be pliable and will not realise their aspirations. We in the SNP, and people who believe in independence, want the Scottish people to realise their aspirations. We want to give them the opportunity to believe in themselves and to take control of their lives. That will come only through independence.

I was about to say that we are always being accused of not saying what is happening with the powers of the Parliament and what we would do within those powers. I will pick out what the Executive Lib-Lab coalition has attempted to do in two areas under the powers of the Parliament and what the SNP would do differently. It might be novel to give such an explanation, but I will attempt to do so. The first area I will deal with is inequality in the education system. Des McNulty went on about the education system and people going back to college and university. It is great that that area falls within the powers of the Parliament, but let us consider some of the figures. The number of young people who are between 16 and 19 years of age and who are not in education, training or employment has risen between 1999 and 2002. It is even higher than it was when the Tories held office in 1997. It must amaze members that the Executive can do a worse job than the Conservatives did, although it does not seem to amaze the minister and it certainly does not amaze me. I said that I would inform David Davidson what the SNP would attempt to do. We would introduce a scheme to introduce closer working between schools and colleges to allow young people aged 14 and over to study in a more adult environment. Such a scheme would encourage more people to stay within the education system to develop their skills. That is one answer.

No, I am sorry. Please sit down. Let us consider some other statistics that make equally grim reading. Research has been produced that suggests that about 20 per cent of people in Scotland are at the lowest literary level and that a further 30 per cent find that their skills are inadequate in today's society. That is a terrible  indictment of the Lib-Lab coalition, as that area falls within the Parliament's powers.

If the member would stop interrupting, I will show her how to sort out the problem, even using the Parliament's limited powers. We are committed to cutting class sizes. Although the Executive has spoken about cutting class sizes, we believe that that is a priority. It is widely accepted that cutting class sizes would represent the single biggest step towards closing the attainment gap. Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh has said that reductions in class size of one or two pupils do not make any great difference and that it is class sizes of fewer than 20 pupils that make a difference. It is time that the Parliament started to treat the causes rather than the symptoms. That is the answer on education.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I want to move on to social inclusion partnerships, which Shona Robison mentioned. The minister and I have had a great deal of correspondence about SIPs. I will read out the Executive's vision. SIPs are supposed to be in "Areas suffering from multiple deprivation ... bad housing, high unemployment, low educational attainment, poor health and other problems". SIPs embody a partnership approach and are "the core element of Scottish Executive policy on regeneration in Scotland ... a range of 47 Social Inclusion Partnerships began their work on 1 April 1999." I had to cut short the quote. Those fancy words are fine, but according to a report that the Executive commissioned, the reality is that the boards of SIPs are filled with Labour placemen, there has been a failure to lift people out of the poverty trap, money has been wasted and there has been a lack of monitoring of SIPs. Six SIPs have been investigated and some have been reported to have cost £300 million. SIPs have been dismissed as "sounding boards ... hijacked by Labour placemen and old-style talking shops". That report was not mine; it was commissioned by the Executive. That is my answer to Patrick Harvie, Des McNulty and the others who asked, "What about the powers?" I have mentioned what the Lib-Lab Executive is doing with the powers that we already have; it is not doing a very good job with them.  Independence and full fiscal powers represent the only way of getting rid of poverty.

I congratulate Irene Oldfather on securing the debate and on highlighting the fact that around 116,000 people in Scotland are unpaid carers—a fact of which many people, including me, were unaware. I salute the many people who take up the role. Having spoken to folk, I know that they do not want congratulations. Sometimes, they do not even want thanks. What they want is recognition, and information that will make the role of carer less of a chore and more enjoyable. We all know that most carers regard themselves not as carers, but as wives, husbands, partners or children. As such, they are not always in receipt of benefits, which is something that we must remember and take on board. Carers who do not receive benefits are not acknowledged by agencies that help carers. Such carers can be described as hidden carers and there are many of them throughout Scotland. I congratulate the Executive on its carers strategy and particularly welcome the assessment of carers by local authorities. However, that assessment might not always reach the hidden carers. Various agencies have done work around the issue of carers. Irene Oldfather referred in  particular to the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, which has done a great deal of such work, including a survey that covered pharmacies, hospitals and doctors' surgeries, and speaking to people in the street. The survey threw up interesting and, occasionally, sad facts. The survey showed that many carers do not get relevant information and are not reached by local authorities or hospitals. The help that they should receive is not always present. The survey also found that two in 10 carers had not been directed to any sources of information whatsoever. They did not know what was available to them. We should all take that fact on board. I ask the minister to consider an information strategy for carers, particularly for the hidden carers. Some carers receive benefit. For example, the elderly woman Irene Oldfather mentioned used to be a hidden carer but then received help. If she had had information about where to go for help, she might not have had to suffer as she did for so long. I ask the Executive to take on board the issues that were raised in the Princess Royal Trust for Carers strategy document. I hope that we will help hidden carers more and give them the information that they so desperately need and deserve.

I congratulate the minister on using his muscle to order Greater Glasgow NHS Board to drop its ban on beta interferon for MS sufferers. When will action be taken by the board to reinstate such drug treatment and will it involve all 240 MS sufferers in Glasgow? At the moment, only 71 patients are involved. Can the minister give an assurance that that will happen as soon as possible?

I thank Pauline McNeill for tendering apologies to me—she has another meeting to attend, but I thank her for her support in today's debate. We all know that since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament there have been a number of debates in which the transport infrastructure of Glasgow, the west of Scotland and Glasgow airport in particular have featured heavily. My first members' business debate, in the early months of the Parliament, was on that very subject. In that debate, I called for the creation of a Glasgow airport direct rail link in conjunction with a Glasgow north-south crossrail scheme. It is correct that we are debating those issues again, as the contribution that our airports make to the economy is well established. Studies by the Fraser of Allander Institute revealed that Glasgow airport contributed £709 million to the economy and supported 15,000 jobs—a much larger contribution than that made by Edinburgh airport. I do not believe that it would be productive to become involved in a sterile Glasgow versus Edinburgh debate—such a debate would not be productive in the long run for either of those great cities. That is why my motion calls for investment in both airports, to enable them to reach their full potential. However, as a Glasgow MSP and a native Glaswegian, I believe that it is my duty to argue Glasgow's case.  There has long been a perception that there is a bias in Government and official circles in favour of Edinburgh, at Glasgow's expense. BAA Scotland's response to the Government's consultation document " The Future Development of Air Transport in the United Kingdom" only added fuel to the fire of that perception.  The BAA response revealed that officials of the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Transport, Alistair Darling—who is the new Secretary of State for Scotland—got their sums badly wrong when they calculated that the development of Glasgow airport to hub status would cost £1.3 billion. In fact, according to BAA figures, the cost would be £1.1 billion. In his new position as Secretary of State for Scotland, Mr Darling has already warned officials at the Scotland Office to sharpen up their act. I say to Mr Darling that he still has a job to do with his officials at the Department for Transport. Apart from overestimating the figures for Glasgow, they underestimated the cost of developing Edinburgh airport. They said that the cost of upgrading Edinburgh airport would be a mere £900 million—a figure that BAA has shown to be underestimated by £400 million. BAA's response identified several other areas in which the Department for Transport consultation got the figures badly wrong. On pavements and aprons, the department calculated £232 million for Glasgow and £159 million for Edinburgh. BAA assessed those figures and then produced its own figures of £190 million for Glasgow and £300 million for Edinburgh. On land costs for runway developments, BAA's response showed that significantly more expensive land around Edinburgh airport had not been taken into account. The department's consultants estimated £27 million for Glasgow and £18 million for Edinburgh, whereas BAA's figures were only £20 million for Glasgow and £110 million for Edinburgh. In a similar way, estimates on road access costs, civil engineering and utilities were shown to be widely inaccurate. Glasgow airport's costs for civil engineering and utilities were overestimated by a whopping £143 million, and for road access by £96 million. Given the evidence that I have presented today, I believe that it is my duty, and that of other MSPs who represent the Glasgow area, to ensure that the case is made loud and clear for Glasgow to receive its fair share of investment. A new factor has entered the equation. As I said, Alistair Darling has been appointed as Secretary of State for Scotland in addition to his responsibilities as Secretary of State for Transport. Mr Darling, an Edinburgh MP, is on record as saying that Scotland needed just one big airport; he is also the head of a Government department  that has already dismissed the case for developing Glasgow airport as a hub. In its response, BAA concluded that both airports met the Government's test for sustainability and that expansion in the manner outlined would ensure that Scotland's vital national airport infrastructure was secure into the future.

My motion specifically mentions that both airports be utilised to their full potential. I hope that Bill Butler's question will be answered by Nicol Stephen when he winds up the debate. The Executive and the Minister for Transport must liaise to ensure the best future for both airports and for Scotland's economy. I mentioned securing infrastructure into the future. The Government and the Scottish Executive face the challenge of ensuring that the right balance between economic, social and environmental objectives is struck. That is why I ask the Executive at least to speak to the Secretary of State for Transport, who is also the new Secretary of State for Scotland. I also call on the Scottish Executive to seek assurances that Mr Darling will listen favourably, as Bill Butler has suggested, to the case for both airports to be developed, and that he will have an open mind about both airports. I call on the Scottish Executive to support the view of BAA, which called on the Government not to put Scotland's long-term prospects at risk by developing one of the country's main airports in favour of the other. That would not be productive for Scotland in any way. Glasgow has never sought special favour to ensure a successful future for the airport. All that we have asked for is a level playing field to allow Glasgow airport to develop. I hope that that will be reflected both in discussions between ministers and in the white paper that I believe will be published in September.

I was about to start my speech by saying that we have had a very good debate—[ Interruption. ] If George Lyon wants to go on, that is fair enough, but I for one do not want to listen to any more of his ramblings. The debate has been very emotive. Indeed, I see that George Lyon is getting emotional himself. We must ask a number of questions, one of which  has already been answered by several speakers. If the Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition is really spending more money on care homes, why are they closing down and why is the number of places decreasing? I think that all members know the answer to that question—I hope that I will have time to address the points that Duncan McNeil made in his speech—which is that the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive's financial contributions are just not enough. In its amendment, the SNP calls for an urgent review not only of the Executive's financial contribution, but of its long-term plans for and commitment to care homes. We should all support the call for such a review. I agree with David Davidson that the meeting that is to be held on 29 July must be brought forward. Even the care home owners and the Church of Scotland say that the meeting must be held sooner rather than later. I sincerely hope that the minister will agree to hold the meeting sooner. Stewart Stevenson was absolutely right to talk about people and not profit. We should not forget that care is about people and that people are much more important than profit. The SNP fully supports John Swinburne's amendment, which mentions means testing, and we will vote for it at 5 o'clock. John Swinburne mentioned the announcement of inspections of care homes. I remind him that there are two types of inspection—announced and unannounced. The care commission has admitted that it has not been able to follow through the system of inspections. That is unfortunate. Will the minister examine that issue? I believe that it is not enough to have two inspection visits—and even those visits are not always carried out at present. There should be more visits, especially unannounced ones. That issue is a great anomaly in the work of the care commission and it should be considered. Andrew Welsh and Carolyn Leckie mentioned care in the community, which is a good concept that has never been funded properly. Care in the community must be considered carefully and properly costed and funded. I have a couple of seconds of my speech left, so I will mention Duncan McNeil who, as usual, has been muttering under his breath about spending, spending, spending. I remind him of one point: when Gordon Brown decided to go to war with Iraq, he had no qualms whatever about spending millions of pounds. I remind members that some of the people who are in care homes have been through two world wars. It is time that we got the finger out and owned up to our responsibilities for those people.

I apologise to the chamber for not being present at 9.30 this morning for the start of the debate. My knuckles have been duly rapped and I assure members that it will not happen again. Who said that it is only youngsters who misbehave and get themselves into trouble? The Executive's motion is worthy and I applaud its positive aspects, particularly the praise of young people's contribution to our society. As I and others have said in previous debates, we often hear only about the negative aspects of young people, so it is good to hear about their positive achievements. We have all heard the old saying that labels stick. With young people, because of peer pressure, the label not only sticks, but things become worse—young people start to emulate the behaviour suggested by the label that they have been given. That is sad, especially when we consider that only 2 to 3 per cent of young people become offenders. It is sad that we give all young people the same label. I do not blame any one person, but I must single out some of the newspapers that make out that all young people are vandals. As I said, only a small percentage of young people commit crimes. Campbell Martin said in his speech this morning that the vast majority of youngsters want what everyone in the chamber and outside wants—they want to be treated fairly and equally and they want to achieve their aspirations, just as we want to achieve our aspirations. We should remember that. I thank Campbell for mentioning that in his speech and for reminding everyone in the chamber that young people should be looked on as citizens of the future. No one will disagree with the statement that we were all young once. Every one of us was young once. I am sure that some of us—or most of us—got up to some kind of mischief in our lives. Perhaps we dressed strangely. Irene Oldfather mentioned that the Minister for Justice had pink hair and wore Doc Martens in her young days. I hope that Nicola Sturgeon will not be too mad at me if I reveal that, as I recall, at one stage in her life, although she did not have pink hair, she wore Doc Martens—perhaps it is something to do with  justice. That did not make either of those people delinquents. Members may agree or disagree with that, depending on their political party. We are not all perfect. We should remind ourselves of that. The motion mentions many things and I applaud many of them, such as education and sport and leisure facilities. I do not want to get into a debate about PFI or PPP—whatever people want to call it—because that is for another day. However, I assure the chamber that those members who visited schools during and outwith the election period and spoke to pupils and teachers can verify that the pupils said—they certainly said it to me at the schools that I visited—that they had lost facilities because of the new PFI or PPP schools. That is a fact of life. They lost meeting places, some of them lost sports grounds and some lost assembly halls. I urge the Executive—if this is not the responsibility of the Executive, I will take it on board myself—to carry out an audit of the facilities that were available in those schools prior to PPPs and PFIs. I am not surprised, although others might be, at the lack of space and the lack of available rooms to hire in the new PPP schools. I ask the minister to respond to that issue when he sums up. One concern that I have about the motion relates to sports facilities. Yes, it is all well and good to mention sports facilities—they are marvellous things—but we have to realise that we are losing sports facilities to developers hand over fist. We are also losing green-belt areas. Some kids cannot afford to use the new sports facilities and some kids just want a green space to kick around in. I was going to mention various other issues, but I see that my microphone light is flashing. Do I have one minute left?

I am sorry; my light is flashing. As I was saying, we have to examine the issue carefully. We are losing a tremendous amount of playing fields and green spaces. That is frightening. The issue has to be examined with the National Playing Fields Association. The SNP amendment refers to "powers to ensure that young people do not ... leave Scotland". We also need powers to correct the terrible benefits system, whereby 16 to 18-year-olds cannot access benefits. The Parliament has to have powers over that. Most of the young rough sleepers who are seen on the streets are 16 to 18-year-olds, who get no help. I know that Barnardo's and other groups help, for which I applaud them, and that there have been lots of initiatives.  However, those kids are the most vulnerable in society. They come from care homes. We have to examine giving the Scottish Parliament power over the benefits system. That would be one small step, but we should be pushing for it. The Scottish Youth Parliament could have more to do with matters other than just youth issues. I have spoken to many members of the Youth Parliament and attended many of its meetings and I know that its members desperately want to be more involved. I hope that we can take up the rough sleepers initiative and explore it further, not just within the committees, but with ministers and members of the Youth Parliament. I know that its members want to be more involved with the Scottish Parliament. It would be a marvellous if we could arrange that. The motion does not mention anything about nutrition or the eradication of poverty. If the Scottish Parliament does not do something to eradicate poverty and deal with the associated health issues, we will let down not only young people, but everyone in Scotland.

Before I make the affirmation, I would like to state that I believe in a free and independent Scotland in which the Scottish people would be independent citizens rather than subjects. Therefore, I make the affirmation under protest.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab) Allan Wilson (Cunninghame North) (Lab)

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support the relocation of the European Maritime Safety Agency to Glasgow. (S1O-6716)

I presumed that the minister would have been aware of the letters between the Executive and Neil MacCormick MEP, who asked it to support the relocation of the agency in Glasgow. Is the minister aware that Greece, which is another contender for the siting of the agency, has set up a website to support its bid? Should the Executive not liaise with Westminster or the European Parliament to set up such a website to promote Glasgow's bid?

The minister said at the beginning of her speech that we have to listen to older people. The SNP does that and when we do so the one issue that is raised all the time, particularly by pensioners, is the state pension. The state pension gives single people £75.50 and a couple £120.70 a week. There is the minimum income guarantee, but surely if it is described as a minimum the Government must be saying that a top-up is necessary. That means that the state pension is far too low. We must get to European levels—in Germany and France, the state pension is 11 per cent of the gross domestic product, whereas in the UK it is 4.3 per cent. The Scottish Parliament cannot get away from the fact that the state pension is far too low. Today's debate is about closing the opportunity gap. One way of doing so is, as others have suggested, to encourage and allow people who want to get back to work to do so. We know that age discrimination legislation will come into force in 2006, but I am worried that most employers and people in Scotland do not know about it. When I attended a conference in Glasgow on the subject a couple of weeks ago, Scottish employers' lack of knowledge of it was mentioned time and again. Wales and England are far ahead of us on the issue. One reason for that is that we are not promoting the legislation enough. I think that it was Iain Gray who replied to my questions on the matter, for which I thank him. He mentioned the publication of a booklet called "Are You Over 50?" How many of those booklets have been produced? Where are they being distributed? Who is taking them—employers or the general public?

I thank the minister. I have spoken to old-age pensioners and groups and they ask about the publication when I mention it, but nobody seems to know exactly where it is distributed. Will the Executive promote an advertising campaign on television or somewhere else that deals with age discrimination? It is important that the public at large and employers know about the forthcoming legislation. We all know that older  people—by which I mean those who are 50 or older rather than necessarily 70 or 80—contribute a great deal to society. They want to get back to work. Alex Neil mentioned pensions. Some people who have private pensions in particular will be forced to go back to work. We want to give them a choice. They should be treated fairly. I mentioned choice. I commend the SNP's amendment, especially the final words, which are: "to address the needs of older people in Scotland the Parliament needs the full powers of an independent sovereign state."

The debate may not have generated as much heat as this morning's debate, and the bill may not be the most earth-shattering piece of legislation that the Parliament has produced, but we should be in no doubt that the issue is of much importance to many members of the public. Given the volume of correspondence that I and others have received on the subject, I congratulate Keith Harding on the bill. It deals with an important matter and will make life much better and safer for people in our streets and public places. The case for introducing the legislation has been well made. It will attempt to solve the problem by making dog owners responsible for their dogs. I congratulate Keith Harding, the staff and members of the Local Government Committee and Trish Godman, who is its convener. Keith Harding has been very brave. Some newspaper reports have said that the bill, when coupled with the fact that this morning's debate was on the Iraq situation, is something to have a bit of a laugh about. I can assure members that dog fouling is  not a laughing matter to the people outside. The bill shows the Scottish Parliament at its best and shows how we can all work together. The legislation will make a great difference to people's lives. Once again, I congratulate Keith Harding.

I support amendment 1, which is eminently sensible. The Local Government Committee had a large discussion about the possibility of procurator fiscal offices being clogged up. The amendment makes  a lot of sense and will bring clarity to the bill. I am pleased that Keith Harding, who said at stage 2 that he would be happy to accept such an amendment, has accepted it with such good grace. I also welcome the minister's accommodating attitude. As Keith Harding said, Peter Peacock was forthcoming and helpful when he was asked to consider various amendments. I also thank the non-Executive bills unit for providing such clear amendments. I am sure that the bill will be good legislation. I support amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on her long commitment to fair trade. I agree with Susan Deacon's point that, many years ago, when people bought Fairtrade goods, they could not always eat them. I remember that when I bought such products, my children thought, "What is that?" Thankfully, things have moved on and the products are much better now. Last week, I went to a Fairtrade shop in Dennistoun called GreenCity Wholefoods, which will celebrate its 25 th year in business in May. I was amazed by the quality and quantity of the food that the shop sells and supplies to other shops in Glasgow and Scotland. That shows us how near to home Fairtrade products have come. Many years ago, people had to travel to get them, but now they are available in cities such as Glasgow. A fair trade organisation has been operating for many years—we all know it as the Co-op. The principles of the Co-operative were basically the same as the present fair trade principles. I am not being flippant, but perhaps because there used to be Co-ops on every corner we took them for granted. The Co-op started the type of fair trade society that, I hope, will begin to emerge throughout Scotland and the world. The issue is serious: it is about stopping the exploitation of people in what is called the third world. Such people want to make a decent living for their families and do not want to be exploited. I congratulate Linda Fabiani on the motion. If, by debating it and receiving answers from the minister on how, as Phil Gallie says, there can be better advertising of and a more positive spin put on fair trade, we will have achieved something. The debate has done wonders and Parliament should be congratulated on accepting that something can be done about the exploitation of people in third world countries. I hope that there will be more motions and answers from the Executive on fair trade and on the treatment of  people throughout the world.

I want to pick up on two points that the minister mentioned: his announcement of £375 million for Edinburgh and his statement that he will make another announcement next week on the Glasgow airport rail link. The minister will be aware that half of that £375 million would have guaranteed both the  Glasgow airport rail link and a crossrail link for Glasgow, so I want to know why Glasgow has received no money whatever. Will next week's announcement be a positive announcement? Will we be guaranteed moneys for the rail link and for crossrail? Will we be given a time scale that will at least start this year, rather than simply another report?

The minister will be aware of the British Airports Authority's announcement about bringing forward plans to upgrade Glasgow and Edinburgh airports five years early. Will the minister assure us that  the link to Glasgow airport and the crossrail scheme will coincide with the plan that BAA has just announced?

I thank the clerks and committee members for their work and, although I will not support the bill, I also thank Margo MacDonald for raising the subject and for giving us the opportunity to debate it. My colleagues Tricia Marwick and Iain Smith mentioned the legal and practical powers that local authorities now have and those that they have always had. They rightly pointed out that legislation on the matter is not required and I support that stance. If we consider honestly and carefully what has been said, we will find that the bill is really about the management of prostitution. We must ask whether we want to manage prostitution or help women to get out of it—that is the crux of the matter. Various facts have been mentioned, including that 95 per cent of prostitutes are drug abusers, that most prostitutes have a history of abuse and, as Trish Godman eloquently said, that most of them do not enter prostitution through choice. We must remember that. In Trish Godman's excellent speech, she explained the difficulties that the Local Government Committee had in discussing and reaching a decision on the bill. I think that we reached the right and proper decision, which is to have further debate on the matter. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Justice will say whether he intends to set up a working party.

Prostitution can be managed to the extent that we can have outreach workers, and prostitutes can get to health centres and so forth. Some members, including Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Donald Gorrie and others, made strong points about areas with residential properties. Prostitution can be managed for the benefit of the women's health, but not for the benefit of such areas.  I greatly object to some things that Donald Gorrie, in particular, said. He said that it is not an argument to say that the violence occurs outwith the tolerance zone, and I would like to challenge him on that. That is the crux of the whole argument. What is the point of having a tolerance zone, which Margo MacDonald recently said was part of a "duty of care" to prostitutes? That is part of what the bill is supposed to be about. How can that be a duty of care to prostitutes when violence happens outwith the tolerance zone?

I am sorry. I do not have much time, but I may take up the issue with Mr Gorrie privately after the debate. I would like to return to what Trish Godman and Bill Aitken said regarding the drugs courts. We must look very carefully at that. Trish Godman also mentioned that legislation must be implemented to deal with the user, or as I call them the abuser or buyer, of those services. We must consider introducing criminal legislation so that the men involved are brought to justice. That will mean that the women get justice. It is wrong that the woman and not the man is always seen as the criminal. Concentrating on the zones, Margo MacDonald said that they are not pick-up points. They are, and I have already mentioned that the violence happens outwith those zones. That is why I cannot possibly support the bill. However, we must look at that point carefully. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and a few members mentioned residential areas. However, they never mentioned the fact that women are being abused. Residents may complain that their area is being used as a tolerance zone. However, are those women supposed to be shipped out to an industrial area? How will they get there? There is absolutely no sense in that proposal. Those people are basically saying that the tolerance zones are an annoyance. Margo MacDonald said that the bill aims to minimise annoyance and embarrassment to the public. What about the annoyance, embarrassment and violence that the women suffer? That is what we should be looking at. I cannot support the bill for those reasons.

I support John Scott's amendment. He and I attended the meeting with Scottish Water when the problem came to light. Illegal soldering by builders and plumbers is a problem not just in new-build houses, but in new-build public buildings such as hospitals and schools. That causes great concern, so I hope that the minister will accept the amendment. I congratulate John Scott on lodging it.

I thank Robin Harper for securing this debate. I am not a member of any theatre board and I certainly do not have Lloyd Quinan's experience, but I am very fortunate to come from a family that talked about the theatre a lot and, from the age of two, I was taken to theatres such as the Panopticon, the Alhambra, the Pavilion and the Kings. I am greatly interested in the theatre: it has certainly brought great joy and I have taken my own children along to it. The country needs alternative, satirical and thought-provoking theatre that is properly funded. For example, last Friday, I attended a performance of 7:84's excellent production of Dario Fo's "Can't Pay? Won't Pay!" More people should be able to get out and about and see such productions. Robin Harper touched on the important issue of community theatre. On Rhona Brankin's point about funding, I should tell her that, at Christmas, I attended a performance of Team Pinewood's excellent pantomime in Drumchapel, which involved all the kids, parents, teachers and so on from five to 55 years old. David Bell must be thanked for his work on that production. However, the company is about to fold due to lack of funding. As for other theatre companies, I must congratulate David Wallace for starting up PACE Theatre Company—indeed, I was involved in that myself through Renfrewshire Council. However, although the company has become one of the biggest wee theatre companies in the whole of Scotland, it is also desperately short of funds. Lloyd Quinan mentioned theatre hands and their families and the fact that they have to work for very little money. I should remind Rhona Brankin that, not so long ago, the Citizens Theatre had to close down between September and November because it could not pay anyone in the company. There is a shortfall in funding for the theatre and the arts in Scotland. It would be very sad if the Parliament let great theatre companies such as TAG, Borderline, 7:84 and other community theatres such as I have already mentioned go to the wall for lack not so much of funding as of support from the Scottish Parliament and the Executive. I call on the Parliament and Executive to consider the figures already quoted and to please support the local arts. They bring a great joy to people and they help to give us our Scottish identity and culture.

I am glad that Sylvia Jackson clarified a point for Iain Smith.  The bill did exist in another form and was introduced by Alex Neil in September 2001, to be exact. I echo the minister's words when I say that that bill was introduced for all the right reasons that he mentioned—transparency, openness and accountability. I hope sincerely that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Bill will attain all that has been mentioned. I thank Peter Peacock for the genuine interest he took in the many amendments that the SNP lodged. They were lodged not only by me, but by Alex Neil, Tricia Marwick and others. He listened carefully, although he did not always agree with us, and he introduced amendments at stage 2 and stage 3 that most of us in the SNP can live with. I also thank the clerks—who worked so hard on the bill—and my colleagues on the Local Government Committee. Many groups were involved in consultation on the bill and we held many evidence sessions. Openness and transparency are what this Parliament is all about and they are necessary if we are to justify ourselves to the public. My only regret is that amendment 5, which would have strengthened the bill, was not agreed to. It is unusual that the Conservative party supported amendment 5, because we do not agree with it on many issues. Although I am disappointed that amendment 5 was rejected, I suppose that we can live with that. I welcome the bill and I accept what the minister and members of the Local Government Committee have said. I look forward to the implementation of the bill and to scrutinising it during the next session of the Parliament, when it has been enacted.

I am pleased with what the minister says—I tried to illustrate the same points when I spoke to a similar amendment at stage 2. Iain Smith made the very point that I was going to raise about sections 7 and 8. I accept what the minister says and I look forward to the amendments that he mentioned being moved. I am pleased that he accepted the need for the bill to provide scrutiny and transparency and therefore I will withdraw amendment 6.  Amendment 6, by agreement, withdrawn.

Once again, Iain Smith has the wrong end of the stick—if it is allowable to say such things in the Parliament.  I support amendment 5 for the simple reason that it seeks to protect the integrity of the applicant and of the Parliament. Its purpose does not come from McCarthyism or Blairism—which I would expect from Labour members. It would protect the integrity of the applicant and of the Parliament.

Amendment 6 concerns the investigation of complaints—we will now see which members are liberals and democrats and who believes in transparency. The bill asks the commissioner to investigate complaints. All that amendment 6 seeks is that the complaints and the results of investigations be laid before Parliament so that MSPs can see why the complaints were lodged, whether they were upheld and why the commissioner upheld them or otherwise. It is a simple amendment, which opens the process up to scrutiny and makes it transparent. I ask all MSPs to support the amendment. If members do not support it, we will wonder whether the Parliament and certain MSPs have something to hide. The amendment is innocuous. The commissioner is being asked to consider evidence and come back with results. All that the amendment seeks is that the results of the investigations be laid before the Parliament so that MSPs can see them. I move amendment 6.

rose—

I will speak to amendment 3 instead of Alex Neil. I am sorry about the confusion; I did not press my request-to-speak button in time. Amendment 3 pertains to the preparation of the code of practice and would require a draft code to be laid before the Parliament. The amendment would ensure that the Parliament was aware of and approved the code of practice before it was published, which would ensure transparency and parliamentary scrutiny. I move amendment 3.

I thank Gordon Jackson for taking the time to lodge the  motion for debate. I remind members that this is the fifth time that we have discussed the regeneration of the Clyde. Members from all parties have lodged motions on the issue. I hope that this time we will get action, rather than just fine words. Gordon Jackson's motion refers to joined-up thinking and action—something that was not mentioned in other motions on the issue. A lack of joined-up thinking is at the crux of the current problem with the Clyde. Annabel Goldie mentioned the Finnieston bridge. I have met representatives of the Glasgow harbour waterfront regeneration project, Clydeport and all the other bodies involved. I have been forced to meet them individually, rather than collectively, to find out what each of them is doing. That is a great worry not just to me, but to everyone who is interested in the Clyde. I have written letters to the minister on the issue. Perhaps legislation can be introduced to deal with the dredging of the Clyde, quay walls, flood prevention and the Finnieston bridge. We know that navigation legislation will have to be repealed—I have written to the minister about that. I would like legislation to be introduced in the Parliament that clarifies what is happening. In areas throughout Glasgow that I represent, the Finnieston bridge is now called the luvvie bridge. People believe that the bridge is being built especially for the BBC and they are desperately worried that the Clyde will be closed. Duncan McNeil said that the Clyde is beautiful down at Greenock and Gourock. I am not being parochial when I speak only about Glasgow. If the bridge is allowed to go ahead as proposed, ferries will not come right into Glasgow. That is a major worry. I have spoken to businessmen and residents in the area, who fear that if the bridge is built as planned, it will mean the closure of the Clyde at that point. We are here to discuss the regeneration of the Clyde. We want to open up the Clyde not just as far as Inverclyde, but all the way up to Dalmarnock, so that the Clyde may be the jewel in the crown that it should be, not just for Glasgow, but for all of Scotland. I would like river-boats to travel along both the north and the south of the river. That will not happen without joined-up thinking. I urge the minister to meet the responsible authorities and to produce legislation. He should get together with local representatives, MPs, MSPs, communities and all those who are interested in this issue to thrash out problems. If we act too quickly, we will once again miss the boat—if members will pardon the pun—and the Clyde will be closed at Finnieston bridge. That would in no way benefit Glasgow or the whole of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

As Pauline McNeill pointed out, one of the key findings of the review of HMOs is that landlords are not coming forward for licensing. In fact, only half of the HMOs have been licensed. I would like the minister to respond to that. Is the minister aware that another key finding of the report was the underfunding of local authorities? Indeed, the report states: "Unless addressed, continued under-resourcing ... will constrain increased effectiveness of the scheme, as will evasion of licensing." Can the minister guarantee that if local authorities—particularly Glasgow City Council—require extra funding, the Executive will accommodate them?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on introducing the motion for debate on a subject that is dear to our hearts, not just because of the aspects to do with anti-social behaviour, of which I have personal experience. I tried to find the landlord of a property and found that he had moved to South Africa and there was no way for us to get in touch with him. Johann Lamont has covered that issue. I will talk about tenements, particularly in the heart of Glasgow and the west end where some of the property should be condemned, given its unbelievable state of disrepair. It is not the tenants who are anti-social but the landlords. The tenants are vulnerable people. I have walked up tenement closes with spiral staircases where the railings are falling apart or do not exist and the spaces are big enough for a child to fall through. Nothing is done about it, because no one can contact the landlords, who are the sharks who are taking money from vulnerable people. I will support any legislation that brings them to book and makes them stand up and accept their responsibilities. We can make them do that. The terrible conditions of the buildings as a whole, once they are sold on, can be described only as pre-war. Many areas in the west end of Glasgow are like that, particularly the many houses in multiple occupation. Nobody can seem to get hold of the landlords, who just abdicate responsibility.  We have to protect people from anti-social tenants, but if legislation comes from the Parliament and the Executive it must protect tenants from unscrupulous landlords. Plenty of people come to my surgery complaining about the conditions that they have to live in. How can we possibly get hold of someone in South Africa who has bought a house in a terrible condition and has let it out to 10 or 15 people? The problem affects not just the people who are living there, but those living next door and in the streets beyond. We must put a stop to such behaviour as quickly as possible, and make sure that legislation is introduced so that people who live in these conditions suffer no further. I congratulate Johann once again on lodging the motion.

After today, no one will be able to say that this Parliament does not debate diverse issues. I congratulate Keith Harding on introducing the bill and on all the work that he and his assistants and researchers have done. I also thank him for coming along to the Local Government Committee to give coherent evidence and for allowing members to question him, sometimes quite ferociously, if I can use that word in this context. Many members have picked up on the health issue, which is probably one of the most important. Young children are prey to the problem, but so are elderly people or those who may have an illness. Trish Godman outlined some of the illnesses that people can get from dog faeces. However, one of the problems of standing in dog faeces or getting it on one's hand is that the symptoms of a resulting infection might include headaches and aching limbs, and people often do not realise before it is too late just how serious those symptoms can be. I hope that the education that is proposed by the Executive and by Parliament will make people aware that touching dog faeces is very unhealthy. I welcome the bill, but there are a couple of provisions in it on which I questioned Keith Harding and other witnesses. One was the enforcement issue, which other members have raised, particularly with regard to elderly people. I know that some people, including blind and partially sighted people, are exempt, but I worry about people who are elderly. Most elderly people do pick up after their dogs, but I hope that, if they cannot, enforcement officers will look on them kindly. Another category of people that has not yet been mentioned is children under 16 years of age. I have some difficulty with the bill's provisions in that respect, as I mentioned in the committee. I hope that those children and their parents will not have a criminal record if they are persistent  offenders. I have been told by councils and by other committee members that the enforcement officers will be lenient, questioning children and taking them to their parents. However, we must beware of the enforcement issue with regard to elderly people and children under 16, and particularly children under eight. That is something that we must keep a careful eye on. I was also concerned about the costs. I am sorry to bring up again points that I raised in the committee, but COSLA and councillors also raised the issue. The proposed cost is £6,630 for 32 local authorities. I do not think that that will be enough, but I do not blame Keith Harding for that. I call on the Executive to provide more money for literature and education if councils want it. The Executive and the Parliament should look favourably on such requests. The proposed total works out at around £207 per local authority, and that is really not enough. The education issue is probably the most important, as all members have said. As a dog owner, I always take a bag and a poop-scoop, but I know how awkward it can be if my dog embarrasses me and I happen not to have a poop-scoop or bag. The first thing to do is to look for a piece of litter, on a tree or lying on the street, to wipe it up, but there is an embarrassment factor involved in that. Getting over that comes from education. I welcome the £100,000 that the Executive has pledged for an education programme, and I welcome the bill, which I am sure will be enacted diligently. Once again, I congratulate Keith Harding on introducing it.

Perhaps I can help the minister with some information. Is she aware that in America fluoride toothpaste carries a poison control warning label? Is she also aware that Belgium has banned fluoride gum and tablets because of concerns about brittle bone disease? Does she agree that a more effective way of eradicating tooth decay in our young people would be for fizzy drinks and sweets to carry Government health warnings?

Lessons have been learned in the chamber today. Trish Godman mentioned the powers of back benchers and I believe that we have seen the power of the Parliament today. I hope that the Executive has learned lessons today. If nothing else, this Parliament should be democratic. I want to thank the clerks, Eugene Windsor, Ruth Cooper and others, who have done many hours of stalwart work to draft amendments and help members of the committee. I also want to thank various members of the committee for their work in the scrutiny of the amendments—those that we were allowed to scrutinise. I did not always agree with members of the committee, but they always listened to me with respect, unlike the members of the Executive, who appear not to want to listen to anyone. There are many good things in the bill. I welcome the policy of community planning, which is excellent. If it works properly, it will be an asset to local government and the people whom it serves. Along with the power of well-being, the policy will result in dramatic changes in local government that will benefit people throughout Scotland. Although they deal with a matter that is important, sections 25B and 25C have not been mentioned today. They deal with rate relief for food stores in rural settlements and the derating of automatic telling machines in rural settlements. In the committee, I asked the minister to consider extending those provisions to cover other areas of deprivation in which the population was under 3,000. Many people in deprived areas across the country would benefit from rate relief for small food stores and the derating of automatic telling machines. I ask the Executive to consider those points. We welcome the bill. There are elements that I would like to have been included but which have not been. However, unlike the Executive, if we have any amendments to make to bills, we will certainly ensure that the relevant committee has the opportunity to scrutinise them.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the minister for his clarification, because I have asked numerous questions about amendment 22. The amendment does not mention stock transfer, but the minister has explained that he thinks that it is prudent to refer to general debt rather than just stock transfer debt. I am a little concerned that we might not know what the debt is, but the minister has confirmed that any payment will be brought to the attention of Parliament. Will the minister clarify whether that will be done by affirmative instrument, which would allow a parliamentary debate about any debt that the Executive might write off?

I voted for a similar amendment at stage 2, and I congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on lodging amendment 1 at stage 3. I do not want to get into an argument with Murdo Fraser, but I find his tone and the content of what he said absolutely disgusting. He said that the organisations that do not have equal opportunities policies are now being discriminated against. We have fought for many years to secure equal opportunities in this country, yet equality of opportunity is still not spread throughout the work force. The bill provides us with an ideal opportunity to introduce proper legislation that ensures that people are not discriminated against—whoever they may be—and that equal opportunities prevail throughout local government. I hope that the Parliament will lead the way for once and I urge members to support amendments 1 and 2.

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing this debate. Unlike Mr Monteith, I share the worries of the staff of The Herald , the Evening Times and the Sunday Herald . They have been in limbo for the past couple of months and have wished for an end to the situation. Obviously, they are frightened about what will happen with their jobs.

That might be the member's recollection of what he said; my recollection is that he said that we should be having this debate not now but later on. However, I feel that, as far as the staff on the newspapers are concerned, the debate should perhaps have been held sooner than this. I again congratulate Karen Gillon on securing it. I am a Glaswegian who grew up with The  Herald and the Evening Times , and I certainly remember the Green Citizen , which is no longer with us. Indeed, I remember The  Herald when it was the Glasgow Herald . Since it lost "Glasgow" from its title, the newspaper has gone on to become one of the best newspapers—if not the best—in Scotland. I know that Mr Monteith will challenge that point.  The Herald has become one of the best Scottish broadsheets because it consistently prints unbiased news, which is not something that many newspapers in this country do. That is why we must fight very hard to ensure that whoever takes over The Herald and the Evening Times lets the editorial staff and journalists speak with their current voice, not only for the people of Glasgow  but for the people of Scotland. We must watch the sale closely to ensure that the independence of the newspapers is not compromised in any way. I am sure that the Parliament will take that issue into account. In Glasgow, the Evening Times is an institution. As Ian Jenkins pointed out, it was something to roll up in your pocket on a Saturday night, or to read on the subway or the bus. It was also handy for giving children a wee clip round the ear, which is something that I experienced. It is a very much-loved newspaper in Glasgow and beyond, because it speaks with the voice of the Glasgow people. People do not simply read the Evening Times ; they also contribute to it. The fact that it is such a campaigning newspaper is another reason why I am worried about the sale, and why I ask the minister to take a careful look at it. I believe that Gannett is up front and honest and hope that the company will maintain the newspapers' independence. However, I will be watching what happens very carefully. I should point out that Maggie's Centre was started through an Evening Times campaign. That shows that the editorial staff of the newspapers give their journalists the freedom to be unbiased, which is very difficult to find and very unusual in this day and age. Diversity is very precious to a democracy, and if we do not hold on to freedom, democracy and diversity in Scotland, we will have nothing at all. Although I congratulate Gannett and hope that it takes over the newspaper, I must echo Karen Gillon's comments about the unions. Like most members, I have received letters from journalists on The Scotsman about the appalling practices that are used against them. All members in the chamber know exactly what I am talking about. As a result, we need to keep an eye on things and ensure that good work practices are adhered to. Moreover, we must look after the uniqueness, the independence and the voice of these newspapers for the people of Glasgow and of Scotland.

Will the minister confirm that the statement includes full provision for inflationary pay increases, and will he detail the percentage increases included for pay? Furthermore, following strikes, or threats of strikes, by almost every service in local government during the Labour Executive's term in office, does he agree that the policy of self-financing pay awards should be abandoned? According to COSLA, which has been much vaunted today, that system has stripped some £800 million from local government budgets and is fatally flawed.

I will do my best, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Women's Aid on 25 years of listening and on its excellent presentation this afternoon. Like the minister, I have been a long- term supporter of Women's Aid. I welcome the minister's announcement of £237,000 for training, but as she would expect, I do not think that that is enough. I look forward to more announcements of long-term funding for training and for workers. We have made progress on some domestic abuse issues. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I do not like the use of the word "domestic". Abuse is violence, whatever form it takes. Some of the bills that are being considered and that have been passed are excellent and will help to push forward the legislation on the powers of arrestment, which have been mentioned. I would like the minister to pick up on that, because I do not know whether that will be in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. Legal aid payments that are made in instalments will help some domestic abuse victims, particularly if they do not have money right away and need help immediately. The implications of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001 for the power of arrest, which have been mentioned, will be excellent, too. Those are positive moves in the right direction, but they cannot stand alone. I think that every member would agree on that. Initiatives must be supported by other projects and especially by long-term funding for training and staffing. I would like the minister to deal with the involvement of Women's Aid groups in multi-agency partnerships, which is important. Various women's groups have approached me about that. The expertise that women have gained through working with women who suffer domestic violence is essential and cannot be lost because those groups do not have enough money for training, to which Maureen Macmillan referred. An emphasis must be placed on their working in multi-agency partnerships. I ask the minister to look into that. We all agree that violence or abuse—whatever label we give it—is a crime that cannot and must not be tolerated.

I welcome the minister's announcement of the allocation of £1 million, but is he aware that 14 organisations have responsibility for flooding issues in the Clyde catchment area? The minister mentioned his amendment to the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill, but will he now end the piecemeal approach to the management of the Clyde and introduce primary legislation—not amendments—to enable the establishment of one dedicated body for all aspects of the management of the River Clyde?

I applaud  Donald Gorrie's tenacity on the subject. Will the minister join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council on its implementation of the section in the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 that relates to anti-sectarianism and anti-racism, which led to the suspension of the licences of two public houses with sectarian associations? Will he support me in urging other councils to follow that example?

I congratulate Shona Robison not only on securing the debate, but on her tenacity in pursuing the issue through, for example, contacting community councils and the Executive. I hope that her proposed licensing scheme for retailers of fireworks (Scotland) bill will eventually be passed, because it is urgently needed. We sometimes do not seem to realise exactly what a firework is. We should remind ourselves that a firework, whether it is a mini-firework or a huge firework, is an explosive. Some people enjoy the sight of exploding fireworks. However, it is an unfortunate fact that some people use fireworks to cause harm. I hope that Shona Robison's proposed bill will help to put a stop to that. I have an elderly mother and I own a dog and a cat. Those three and I have suffered terribly because of fireworks, not just on bonfire night but in the weeks prior to it. My mother and my pets are still suffering. My dog is practically a nervous wreck and the cat refuses to go out. Elderly people in the constituency complain that people are still throwing bangers and other fireworks about. We must tackle that situation. Much has been said about Scottish Parliament and Westminster legislation and codes. We in the Scottish Parliament have an ideal opportunity to use Shona Robison's proposed bill to amend the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, which I think would be quite easy to do. If Westminster proposed similar legislation, that would be fine and good. However, I do not see why the Scottish Parliament should have to wait for possible Westminster legislation. We should act as quickly as possible to amend the 1982 act through Shona Robison's bill and enforce the bill's provisions. If Westminster wanted to follow suit with similar legislation, that would be fair enough. We would not prevent it from doing so. I think that I said to the minister previously that I would not mind a Sewel motion in reverse. However, the Scottish Parliament has an opportunity to do something about fireworks in Scotland and we should act as quickly as possible. We need Shona Robison's proposed bill because of the inadequacy of the codes. The voluntary code, as its name implies, has no legally enforceable obligations. I think that Shona Robison mentioned that the voluntary code states that fireworks are not allowed to be displayed for three weeks prior to 5 November. However, a BBC television report on 31 October showed that, according to Strathclyde police's injury statistics,  almost 2,000 incidents involving fireworks were reported in the six weeks prior to 31 October. That shows the scale of the problem. We need legislation now. I hope that the minister will take on board the fact that the Scottish Parliament has the power to amend the 1982 act. I hope that Shona Robison's bill will come into force some time next year—not necessarily before bonfire night—to prevent firework incidents involving vulnerable and elderly people and animals. I congratulate Shona Robison again.

The minister has mentioned the benefits system. Does he think that the money that  pensioners get—£75.50 a week—is adequate? Would he not like to change that, as the SNP would?

How will I follow cyclone Wendy and ranting Raffan? I will do my very best. I shall be honest and say that I think that everyone will agree that, as we have often said before, Scotland is a rich country. It is rich in resources, it has wealth in its people and it is a wealthy country. We should all agree that not everyone shares in that wealth; that is what the SNP is most concerned about. The so-called Labour Executive sits and pontificates, but the Labour Government in the past five years has put forward more of Thatcher's policies than the Tories ever did. Labour is an absolute disgrace to the people of Scotland and it tries to lecture the SNP on what we should be doing. Scotland needs independence and I shall go on to explain why.

Sorry, but Ms Alexander has had her turn and she did not take any interventions. Pensioner poverty has been mentioned in the debate. As the convener of the cross-party group  in the Scottish Parliament on older people, age and ageing, I feel that it is right that I bring the issue to the attention of the Parliament. We have all heard about poverty throughout Scotland, but I would like to concentrate on pensioner poverty. Research shows that older people are more likely to live in poverty. We must make the point that, unlike many others, pensioners have few opportunities to increase their income without state help. Members have said that we are in a marvellous position in the union. I ask members, and urge them to ask their constituents, whether they could live on £75 a week—I very much doubt that they could. Some members say that the union is a marvellous place, but do they know that 17,200 pensioners are forced to claim income support? I do not call that a good price to pay for the union and members should acknowledge that. Hugh Henry mentioned fuel poverty last week at question time. Some 58 per cent of Scottish pensioners have to spend 10 per cent of their income on ensuring that their house is heated adequately. When Hugh Henry answered a question on the central heating installation scheme, he said: "Some 7,000 households are waiting for heating systems ... However, there is a limit to the number of available heating engineers and to the number of heating systems that we can install."— [ Official Report , 7 Nov 2002; c 15094.]  That demonstrates some ambition from the Labour party. I think that Margaret Curran was a member of the Social Justice Committee at the same time as me, when we took evidence about the situation in Europe. When I asked one of the witnesses whether people in other European countries ever died of hypothermia, they said that they did, but not in their own homes. It is terrible to admit that, in Scotland, people die of hypothermia in their own homes. We should examine that situation carefully. We should be ashamed of the fact that members are claiming that poverty does not exist. The Executive is trying to mix the figures. I remind the Labour party that it was dragged, kicking and screaming, into supporting free personal care. The Executive bowed to Westminster when it was asked to give back £40 million in attendance allowances. It is a terrible indictment that the Executive bowed to Westminster and gave back the money. Doubts are emerging about how the Executive will meet its commitment to implement its proposals on free personal care. In parts of Scotland, some councils are even talking about introducing means testing, because they do not have the necessary funding. The free travel scheme has been described as a  shambles. Why did the Executive not take on board the SNP's proposal for a national travel scheme such as the scheme that has been implemented in Wales? If the Executive had done that, it would not be in the mess that it is in now. The Executive is supposed to be a Government. It must show real commitment by providing the resources that the older people in Scotland need to take them out of poverty. The Executive must stop spinning. Let us have some substance instead.

I agree with what Trish Godman said about the bill's being Scottish. She fought vociferously on that point in the Local Government Committee, where she had members' support, and I congratulate her on mentioning it in her speech. I will concentrate on two main issues in the bill. The most important part of the bill concerns the appointment of a commissioner, their independence and the powers that they shall or may have. I also want to touch briefly on the abolition of the six non-departmental public bodies, particularly the Historic Buildings Council. A lot has been said about the powers that the commissioner shall or may have. I thank Mike Rumbles for raising the point about changing a simple word in the bill. That might happen at stage 2 and I hope that the minister will consider the matter, because it would clarify a lot for members throughout the chamber. The minister gave evidence to the Local Government Committee on the powers that he sees the commissioner having. I shall read out some of them, which Tricia Marwick and Trish Godman have mentioned already. Of the commissioner he said: "If the code is not being observed properly, they may step in before the appointment is made." He also said: "If they are sufficiently concerned, they may direct ministers not to make any appointment."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 10 September 2002; c 3206.] I hold the minister to those words and I hope and believe that he will hold firm to them when the bill goes to stage 2 and stage 3. We believe that the commissioner must be independent and that they must have the freedom to express any concerns that they might have not only to ministers but to the Parliament. That is why I congratulate Mike Rumbles on the simple point that he made. I hope that an amendment to that effect will be lodged at stage 2. The dedicated public appointments committee has been mentioned. The minister might live to regret the fact that on many occasions he has said to me, Alex Neil and the Local Government Committee that he would welcome the setting up of a dedicated public appointments committee—in fact he suggested it. I might—to use old Glasgow slang—be chancing my arm by asking this, but if the minister's suggestion appeared in an amendment at stage 2, would he be prepared to support it, regardless of the political persuasion of the member who lodged the amendment? I would like to hear the minister's answer to that question in his summing up.  The bill is important and the independence and freedom of the commissioner are paramount. We in the Parliament want transparency. We want things to be open and the bill is one of the first steps down that road. If amendments would help us along the road, I would be more than happy to lodge them at stage 2. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee and others have carried out far more research and work on the HBC and other bodies than I have and I want to touch on that work. I have read the Official Report and the evidence that the bodies submitted and I was absolutely stunned. I will read out a small paragraph of the Official Report . In a question to Graeme Munro of Historic Scotland, Karen Gillon asked: "91 per cent were in favour of retaining the HBC. Why did you advise ministers to abolish the HBC? On what basis did you do so, if the responses were clearly against that?" Graeme Munro answered: "I am sorry, but I cannot tell the committee what our advice was to ministers because that must be confidential." —[ Official Report , Education, Culture and Sport Committee , 10 September 2002; c 3651-52.] The bill is all about transparency. When I read the report on the bill, I found that attitude horrific. I have mentioned one part of the report; I am sure that Karen Gillon will provide further examples. An inquiry into Historic Scotland would not go amiss. I hope that the minister will discuss that in his summing up. The minister mentioned that he would give us further information on Historic Scotland. The committee was concerned that to abolish the HBC at this stage would be a terrible error. I look forward to receiving more information.

I thank the Presiding Officer for the promotion, although I thought that I had more hair than Mr Chisholm. What are the criteria for providing adequate transport to the hospital sites that are identified? I speak in particular about the Southern general hospital. Are there contingency plans in the event that the Clyde tunnel is closed or are there new plans for extra transport links to be provided?

While listening to the speeches, I have to ask myself why it is so bad to put Scotland's interests first in the Scottish Parliament. Other members should also be asking themselves that. Where are their ambitions? Perhaps Wendy Alexander's letter was right; their only ambition is a Mondeo car or something like that. There is no question but that air transport is crucial to the growth and well-being of the economy. As the minister said, it is important for tourism and industry. It is vital that investment should be made to develop international routes and to enhance accessibility of airports by improving transport links. Glasgow airport has suffered from the lack of support from BAA and successive Governments. BAA has evidently prioritised its airports in the south-east of England, as has been stated by many members. The Executive has failed to show any vision, commitment or speedy action in putting in place the decent transport links that are required by Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. The importance of rail links was highlighted in BAA's paper on rail strategy. It proudly lists lots of improvements in rail links to many of its airports  and I shall mention a few. The Heathrow express was launched in 1998 at a cost of £500 million. There are now plans to extend that rail link at a further cost of £150 million. The Gatwick express runs four times an hour, seven days a week. Stansted has one of the highest shares of rail access, at 27 per cent, and there are plans there for a new fleet of rolling stock and for investment in stations and infrastructure. The BAA paper describes how Southampton is linked by excellent rail services to the local area and by an express route to London. Let us see what it says about Scotland. It proposes a mere 7 miles of rail links, which tells us how BAA has participated in the studies into the potential for rail access. That is shameful on the part of BAA. A lack of vision and investment on the part of BAA and the Government are responsible for the sorry situation. We still have no rail links to Glasgow or Edinburgh airports. Now we have a proposal for a new so-called central airport—a hare-brained scheme for a super-duper airport costing God knows what and taking God knows how long to build. For Mr Mundell's information, it is a smokescreen to hide the fact that it is in BAA's interest, as Brian Adam mentioned, to push traffic through Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted and ignore the needs of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen. It might be all right for us if we want to pay extra air fares to fly from London, but our constituents either do not want to or cannot afford to. I say to Sarah Boyack—who is leaving the chamber—that it may be okay for her, but it is not okay for people in the rest of Scotland who wish to fly directly from Glasgow, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Inverness or wherever. Why should they not be allowed to do that?

No, I will not. The main problem is that BAA owns every single one of those airports. I find that rather strange. I ask the Executive to write to the Government—I will certainly write on my own behalf—because it is about time that the Office of Fair Trading looked into the dealings of BAA. It is obvious that not just Glasgow but the whole of Scotland is suffering from BAA's monopoly. I hope that the Executive will pick up that point. I know that the matter is referred to in the Executive's consultation document, but I would like to see it in writing—and I would like the letter to be copied to me—that BAA is becoming a monopoly and is doing down the whole of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During the previous debate, Karen Gillon accused our members of not voting for the School Meals (Scotland) Bill to proceed beyond stage 1.

It is a point of order. What Karen Gillon said was untrue. I ask her to withdraw that remark.

I wish that I was not taking part in the debate today because that would mean that we had begun to eradicate these terrible diseases. As a Glasgow MSP, it is with deep concern that I note that the British Heart Foundation puts Glasgow at the top of the United Kingdom league for coronary heart disease. Other members have mentioned the research that points to the links between coronary heart disease and deprivation, physical inactivity and poor nutrition in childhood and adolescence. It is for that reason that I welcome the strategy to tackle the problem of coronary heart disease. The big question is whether the strategy will go far enough. Deprivation has been identified as one of the key factors in creating the conditions in which heart disease and stroke flourish. The Scottish health statistics demonstrate a clear link between deprivation and the death rate from heart disease. It is unfortunate that the Scottish Parliament does not have the full powers to tackle the fundamental problem of deprivation. My colleague Nicola Sturgeon mentioned the reasons for that. The strategy mentions briefly the socially disadvantaged, but we need real action to end deprivation, which is the cause of these terrible diseases in so many areas of Scotland. Physical inactivity has been mentioned in the  debate. It is another key risk factor for heart disease. Children must be encouraged to take up sports and exercise, which have been recognised as providing protection against heart disease in middle and later life. Schools have a key role to play in increasing the amount of physical activity in which children and adolescents are involved. However, if members examine the Executive's record, and that of previous Governments, they will see the sell-off of playing fields and the decline in the provision of community facilities. People in Glasgow are having to pay additional money to use those facilities. The Executive must address that. We must provide our children with accessible alternatives to television and computer games. We must reverse the trends that have seen the number of obese six-year-olds double and the number of obese 15-year-olds treble in the past 10 years. Good nutrition is paramount in the fight against coronary heart disease. It is crucial to improve our children's eating habits. They need to be educated at an early stage to become knowledgeable about nutrition and the benefits of good nutrition. It is also crucial that healthy eating is promoted in schools in place of the fatty snack foods that are commonly consumed at lunch and break times. Colin Campbell mentioned that. The Executive must address and replace the so-called "fuel zones", with their menus of junk food and soft drinks. We had an opportunity to do something about that when we considered the School Meals (Scotland) Bill. The Executive rejected a bill that could have gone some way towards instilling the practice of healthy eating amongst our children and so helping to prevent the development of coronary heart disease. I hear Karen Gillon saying something. Does she want to intervene?

Karen Gillon is very much mistaken. The bill passed its stage 1 reading. The Executive voted down the bill in the chamber. If the Executive had had the courage of its convictions, we could have had that bill. Karen Gillon should check her records.

The issue may be a laugh for the convener, but it was the Executive that voted  down the bill. She must recognise that. The SNP welcomes the Executive strategy and the additional investment. [Interruption.]

Vision and commitment are required if the problems of deprivation, poor diet and physical inactivity are to be solved. I sincerely hope that the strategy will go some way towards resolving those issues.

It seems  that I join a committee whenever members start consideration of a new bill. The Local Government Committee was no exception to that rule. Perhaps I should warn other conveners that if I become a member of their committee, they might find themselves starting work on a new bill. I thank the clerks for their hard work, which was much appreciated. As Trish Godman said, although they are largely in the background, we could not have completed such a large amount of work without them. Trish Godman also pointed out that this could have been a flagship bill for the Parliament. Unfortunately, the exclusion of proportional representation and local councillors' remuneration means that we have missed a golden opportunity to pass a bill that could have encompassed all the good aspects of local government. However, I will speak to the areas that the bill covers. The bill contains three main themes: best value; community planning; and the power of well-being. Iain Smith, Trish Godman and the minister have all mentioned best value. I am pleased that the minister has at least recognised that councils must be allowed to compete on a level playing field. It is absurd that councils will be restricted by legislation and guidance when other public agencies are not. How can councils go out into the big, bad world and compete against such bodies under such terms? If we are to work in partnership—to use a famous Labour party word—there must be common legislation and guidance. I ask the minister to consider the matter again. On community planning, I endorse all the committee's recommendations on Communities Scotland. The minister's assurance that he will lodge new amendments on that part of the bill shows that he has at least taken heed of that section of the committee's report. As Trish Godman pointed out, community planning is an important part of the bill. Only yesterday, we were in my old hunting ground of Paisley, where I was a councillor. I will not bore the chamber with details of the 10 years that I spent there. We visited the town not to take evidence on the bill but to ask people for their thoughts on various aspects of local government. In the workshop group that I chaired, community planning was discussed in great detail. It touches everyone from the local authority to local people, and forms one of the bill's most basic aspects. I am intrigued by some of the minister's remarks about co-operation among various agencies. Indeed, I asked the minister about that issue when he appeared before the committee. I want to know the extent to which the different bodies will co-operate. The minister also mentioned that there would be an announcement about community funding, and I look forward to hearing details of  that in his summing up. I know that the minister is sympathetic to the idea of cross-cutting funding. After all, when I asked him about the matter, he replied: "I say—wearing my finance hat, rather than my local government hat—that we are already interested in some of those matters."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee, 25 June 2002; c 3153.] I hope that the minister will follow through on that remark. I will be examining the new announcements very carefully. The power of well-being—or what was called the power of general competence—follows naturally from the community planning process outlined in the bill, particularly where other agencies are concerned. I fully support the committee— [Interruption.] Sorry, Presiding Officer, I thought that I had gone over my time.

It is just that the light is flashing and I thought that I was being told to be quiet. Like Trish Godman, I am not used to having six minutes to make a speech. I support the committee's stance on the provision for prior consent between agencies being written into the bill. We do not know how the process might work if prior consent is not included, for example if a particular agency says, "The health board wants to do this," and two or three agencies think that it is a good idea but one does not. Without provision for prior consent, there would be great confusion. It is important to clarify the situation not just for the Local Government Committee or for Parliament, but for councils. In his summing up, I would like the minister to expand not on the wine lakes or on the various extra moneys that were mentioned, but on the use of the power of well-being by councils to supply agencies with various services. I asked the minister about that matter in the committee, but did not get a reply. I asked the minister about deprived areas and he did not deny or confirm my point. The example was of a particular council that decided—and the people agreed—that it would be a good idea for the community if the council supplied inexpensive fruit to a deprived area. Would that be allowed for under the power of well-being? In a rural area, cheaper fuel could perhaps be provided under the power of well-being. The introduction of the power of well-being will give councils the power to benefit communities. Local government is at the coalface—we in Parliament only make the legislation. I would like local government to be given sufficient funding and attorney to make proposals. Everyone here—and members of the SNP in particular—would like  the bill to create more powers. As it stands, we support the powers that are being given to local government, if it is allowed to use them. Will the minister expand on the capability of local government to provide free fruit and cheaper fuel to communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council concerning the provision of social work services in the city. (S1O-5535)

Is the minister aware of how the lack of social workers impinges on children's panel hearings, which by law require social work papers to be received three days before a hearing. In up to 50 per cent of hearings, there were no social work reports or the reports were not available until the actual meeting. Will the minister investigate and take action on the matter urgently because it is serious and represents a denial of children's rights?

I reiterate the point made by Nicola Sturgeon about political point scoring, but not by the SNP. We are talking about delivering the best possible  health service for Glasgow and the people of Glasgow. We know modernisation is needed and we welcome the £700 million, but we do not believe that two accident and emergency hospitals are sufficient for Glasgow. Much has been said about the consultation process. Greater Glasgow NHS Board spent hundreds of thousands of pounds on the so-called consultation process. It hired the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, Hampden football ground and another football ground and it produced a video. What did we get from that process? We got the original proposals and a quotation from a document dated August 2000, which says: "Our aim is to create two adult Accident and Emergency Departments/Trauma Centres—at the GRI and on the Southside." Hundreds of thousands of pounds were involved as well as hundreds of members of the public. Doctors, clinicians and nurses gave of their time. People have said that the consultation was a sham and I agree with them: it was a deliberate sham to present proposals that were presented originally in 1999-2000. We have not advanced one iota. Transport links have been mentioned today. Gordon Jackson said that the hospitals were difficult to get to. I refer to the west end and the north of the city. I presume that some members have tried to get through the Clyde tunnel and city centre at peak times or at weekends. Believe me, even at off-peak times, the roads are congested and the tunnel is often closed or only one lane is open. We cannot afford to deal with people's lives under such conditions. Two accident and emergency hospitals for Glasgow are not sufficient. That is why I support the motion. The Glasgow royal infirmary is already under great pressure, as we all know. During the consultation process, doubts were raised about whether the GRI could cope with the projected number of patients it would receive. The consultants and nurses told the health board that they did not think they could cope. A letter that I received from west Glasgow hospitals says: "The Health Board and Trust have yet to provide any sensible reasons for this plan or indeed any evidence that it is workable. Despite the lack of evidence neither the Board nor the Trust have ever seriously considered a proper option appraisal between one or two sites for North Glasgow." That says it all. Hundreds of people have given of their time, as I said before, for the consultation process. What about the ACADs? It is insufficient to have an ACAD that is not attached to a hospital. The public know that and we agree with them.  As I said, the SNP motion is not about political point scoring. The amendment, however, "endorses a commitment to keep named services at Stobhill and Victoria over the next five years" and "recognises the particular concern over the number of accident and emergency departments and supports a review of this in two years time". There has been no political point scoring from this side, but there certainly has been from the minister's side. The amendment is a cop-out and would lead to the worst possible scenario, with Glasgow left in limbo for five years—and perhaps for a further five years after that. This is all about saving Lord Watson's skin and the Lib-Lab coalition in Glasgow. I am glad that I have said that. This is a cop-out. If any Glasgow MSP votes for the amendment, they will have to answer to the people of Glasgow. I remind the minister that, if we close down hospitals in two years' time, and if we remove commitment, we will not get those hospitals back. Please, members, support the motion and get rid of the amendment.

As someone who left Glasgow this morning at half past 6 and did not arrive in Edinburgh until 8.45 am, I very much welcome the debate, not only on my behalf but on behalf of all the commuters who face the journey every day. If the underground has not broken down, something happens on the motorway and there is only a half-hourly service from Glasgow to Edinburgh. I ask the minister when we will get the 15-minute service back, because its absence is why we are all constantly delayed. Our transport system, not only the railways, is in a state of collapse. I support the SNP motion and congratulate the transport and business communities on supporting the motion. We must take control of the rail industry if we are to do justice to the people who have voted us into this Parliament. Consider the record of successive Governments. First there was a right-wing Tory Government and now we have a right-wing Labour Government, in both Edinburgh and London. Neither can be proud of the transport system that it has introduced. Stability and investment have been required, but all that we have seen is fragmentation and underinvestment. Private profit has been put before public service. Members will know that for some time I have been campaigning for the implementation of the Glasgow airport direct rail link and crossrail. My colleagues will mention other schemes, such as the Borders rail link. We desperately need those schemes to be implemented. There is growing consensus in this country that the way forward is for the Parliament to assume complete responsibility for the rail network in Scotland. The Scottish Government should join that consensus. It should take the powers and  ensure that Scotland gets a fair deal in funding. We must have control of the Scottish share of the Strategic Rail Authority moneys. I wrote a letter to the minister on 15 May, but unfortunately I have not received a reply. Malcolm Reed, the director of SPT, revealed that SPT has consistently been awarded approximately 50 per cent less per capita than each of the six passenger transport authorities in England. Scotland cannot afford to lose out on that cash. Let us consider a couple of examples. West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority, which serves a population of 2.5 million compared with the 2 million people in the SPT area, was awarded £50 million for 2002-03; SPT was awarded £28 million. In 2001-02, the WMPTA was awarded £47 million and SPT was awarded £16 million. Is that what the minister calls equality? I asked him that earlier. Is that fair or is it the price to be paid for having a Lib-Lab coalition that has no ambition? If we had control of our railways and our finances, we could build the crossrail north-south link and many others. The Executive claims to be committed to tackling urban congestion, but it is failing to take the steps that would reduce congestion. Once again, the Lib-Lab coalition is strong on rhetoric and weak on action. We need the powers that any normal nation has to build a nation and a rail system that is fit for the 21 st century. We need those powers to give our people the safe, fast and reliable service that they demand. I ask the Executive to support our motion.

I thank Robert Brown for the opportunity to debate this subject once again. I have a sense of déjà vu. I think that we have debated this subject in members' business four times. That is why I proposed an amendment to Robert Brown's motion. I hope that he accepts the amendment in the spirit in which it was intended—to try to hurry the project along. We are concerned and I am angry that we have debated the rail link so many times, yet nothing has come to fruition. I could go on and on about all the debates that we have had and reiterate the information, but I hope that the minister will take on board the new information about legislation that Robert Brown mentioned. I said that I was angry. My reason for being so is that, although other airports are coming up, Glasgow airport is coming down. Flights are losing passengers because of the inaction of this Government and past Governments. Stansted airport was opened in 1991. Let us not forget that the Glasgow rail link was first mooted in the early 1990s. We are nearly in 2003 and there has been no movement whatsoever. In the early 1990s Stansted had 1,127,000 passengers and Glasgow had 4 million passengers, but Stansted got a rail link and we did not. Stansted's passenger numbers have risen by 17 per cent, but Glasgow's passenger numbers have risen by only 2.2 per cent.  Robert Brown mentioned regeneration, which was mentioned in the debate on local government earlier. If we want regeneration in not only the west of Scotland but the whole of Scotland, we have to push forward with the rail link. I would like the minister to clarify in his summing-up the statement that he made on 28 February. He said: "I know that recent press reports have suggested that the Executive has already decided to express a preference for the construction of a link to Edinburgh airport rather than to Glasgow airport. I will take the opportunity that this debate offers me to say that that is not the case."— [ Official Report , 28 February 2002; c 9898.]  A leaked report on the cities review states that "there is no commitment in the review to either the vital cross-rail link or Glasgow airport links." I would like that to be clarified. Although the cities review might contain some good news, if that is true, it is bad news. As the story has already been leaked to the press, I am sure that the minister will be able to give us an honest answer about whether the airport link will go ahead. Many members want to speak in the debate, so I will not take long. The lack of action by the Executive and by previous Governments will eventually result in the demise of Glasgow airport and the demise of the west of Scotland. The SNP and, indeed, the Government cannot let that happen. The Scottish Parliament was elected by the Scottish people to represent the Scottish people and to show that we care for them. We must show that we care about all our cities. As a Glasgow MSP, I am pushing Glasgow's case. I ask the minister to take on board our arguments and to act as quickly as possible—by the end of the Parliament's first session, as Robert Brown indicated—to ensure that the airport link will be implemented and that Glasgow will be able to look forward to the regeneration that it rightly deserves. I have a small aside. We know that the BAA is spending £38 billion on terminal 5 at Heathrow airport. What did Glasgow airport get? A car park. I rest my case.

I would like to pay tribute to the clerks and staff of the Local Government Committee for the long hours that they have put in to create the report and so on. They have done a good job and I am sure that all the committee is very thankful. I also pay tribute to Trish Godman and Sylvia Jackson for all their hard work and for the fairness and integrity that they showed to committee members from other parties. It is a pity that there are no other Labour members here to speak on behalf of the Local Government Committee. As far as I can see, we have only Trish Godman who opened the debate and Sylvia Jackson who will close it. Given that local government finance is important to everyone, not just to councillors or to local members of Parliament, I find it disgraceful that no Labour members will speak on the subject. The contempt that Labour has shown for local government is shocking, given the amount of work that Trish Godman, members of other parties and the committee staff have put into the report. I hope that the Executive will take that on board and ask its party members why they were not here to speak in a debate that is so important to COSLA and others. I am sure that COSLA and others will not forget their absence. As a Glasgow MSP, I am acutely aware of the problems all councils face, but I would argue that such problems are particularly acute in the Glasgow area. Like other cities, Glasgow is facing the loss of economic functions, poverty, area abandonment and the steady shift of the economically able and mobile population, which has a major impact on services such as health and education and on the remaining residents. As the base declines, social problems are concentrated while the fixed costs of service delivery remain constant. In cities such as Glasgow, where 60 per cent of residents live in regeneration areas, regeneration policies are crucial. It is important that we address the problem of decline. Returning the right to retain the revenue that the city generates has been identified in the cities review as a key measure to aid regeneration. I am pleased that the cities review team recognised the problem and recommended that Glasgow retain a higher share of the business rates raised in the city. That would go some way to rectify the appalling situation that has led to the estimate that, over the past five years, Glasgow has lost some £300 million.

I disagree with Iain Smith. The problems in Glasgow are so acute that the amount of money it receives is not fair. He could argue with Charlie Gordon of Glasgow City Council until the cows come home—

I will finish my speech. I disagree completely with Iain Smith. He should examine the figures for Glasgow. If he does, he will see that the city needs more money, not less. I am surprised that the views he expresses come from a Liberal Democrat. Of course, I do not expect anything less of someone who voted against the retention of Braehead shopping centre within Glasgow's boundaries. Glasgow relies increasingly on a poor council tax base due to a higher than average level of low-band council tax payers. Those who are on low incomes are effectively subsidising services that are used by wealthier people from outwith the city. I will address some of the points that were raised by the Executive and the Local Government Committee. Local income tax has been touched on. I do not agree with the comments of the Tories, and I disagree slightly with those of the Executive. I am pleased that the Local Government Committee took on board the recommendation that the introduction of a local income tax should be examined. Unfortunately, it calls for it to be examined in the longer term, rather than the shorter term. I was going to say that I am being flashed at, but that carries the wrong connotation. Am I being told to stop, Presiding Officer?

The light on my microphone was flashing. I am disappointed that the minister and the Executive have said bluntly that they will not consider a local income tax. The report is supposed to be looking at local government finance for the future. We are supposed to be taking an ambitious look at local government finance. We should not be afraid to embrace new ideas. The problem with the Executive is that it is afraid to embrace new ideas. I congratulate the Local Government Committee on proposing a local income tax. Ring fencing has been mentioned. It is a contentious issue, not only for councils but for the  electorate. We spent many hours arguing about it. Two issues that were raised constantly by COSLA and others were the requirement to match fund and the fact that the national priorities of the Executive and the Westminster Government take precedence over local priorities. Those issues must be treated seriously. We should have proper consultation with local government, so that services can be provided properly. In conclusion, I have a question for the minister, which I would like him to answer with a yes or no in his summing up. It relates to the leak from the cities review team. The team announced that Glasgow would be allowed to keep some of its business rates. Will that be additional money, or will it be taken out of the grant, as I have been told on many occasions?

I am glad that the minister has said that the report will be brought before Parliament in the autumn. Is the minister aware of the report by the Glasgow council voluntary sector and work foundation, which states that current programmes will create only 7,500 jobs and that only 4,000 of those will go to Glaswegians? Glasgow needs 50,000 jobs. Will the minister tell us what measures are in the cities review to address the problem and create the jobs that Glasgow badly needs?

I thank the Scottish Cancer Group for its input to the cancer strategy document. Reading through it, I find that it gives an honest appraisal of the situation in Scotland. I also praise the dedication of health service staff, who sometimes must work under difficult circumstances. All of us should welcome any strategy that will result in improvements in the standards of cancer treatment, as much improvement is needed. Tory and Labour Governments cannot be proud of their record. Adrian Harnett is one of the specialists who recently resigned as a result of the crisis at Glasgow's Beatson centre. He accused politicians of always talking about wanting a world-class health service, but delivering the cheapest service that they could get away with. Politicians have a duty to ensure that action replaces talking and fine words. Mechanisms and finances must be put in place to produce a world-class service, which this country desperately requires. There must be the best possible cancer services and treatment in a country in which one in three men and one in four women will be  diagnosed with cancer. Some 25,000 cancer cases are diagnosed and 15,000 people die of cancer each year—we desperately need improvements. I am a Glasgow MSP and am deeply aware of my native city's appalling health record. Some 52 of the 90 most deprived postcode areas in Scotland are in Glasgow. The incidence of cancer is higher in Glasgow than it is anywhere else in Scotland—if the Scottish average is taken to be 100, the incidence in Glasgow is 111.2 for men and 107.6 for women. Therefore, it was particularly distressing to follow the catalogue of problems at Glasgow's Beatson centre, which treats 60 per cent of Scotland's cancer sufferers. The centre seemed to go from crisis to crisis. Recently, it was also revealed that Scotland's only centre for eye cancer at Gartnavel hospital was under great pressure as a result of staff shortages. That was a knock-on effect of resignations at the Beatson. I am grateful that measures are being taken and that there is some investment at last. However, the Executive must ask itself why it has taken so long to act when the warning signs have been clear for many years. We must end the scandal whereby up to half of Scotland's cancer patients do not get to see a cancer specialist. Statistics show that oncologists see only 25 per cent to 50 per cent of patients. We must end the scandal whereby sufferers from bowel cancer commence chemotherapy treatment within the standard eight weeks of surgery at only two out of 34 hospitals in Scotland. We must also end the scandal whereby only three out of 31 hospitals that were visited by the CSBS met the target of making a decision on initial treatment for lung cancer patients within four weeks of diagnosis. The Executive must take action to end the postcode lottery that means that the length of time that cancer patients must wait for an MRI scan after diagnosis can vary from around seven weeks to a year, depending on where they live. It is a disgrace that, because there is a national shortage, health boards do not have enough trained staff. We must provide sufficient specialist cancer doctors and more specialist nurses. The SNP's proposals, which Nicola Sturgeon announced today, would go a long way towards addressing the shortages. The Executive and the Labour party have promised much in respect of the health service, but the debate has shown that they have failed to deliver. We welcome anything, but action should have been taken much sooner. The health service requires resources to bring it up to 21 st century standards. There should be no spin or paper to cover the cracks of failed policies.  I said that the announcement of more moneys is welcome. It is a start, but action must be taken as soon as possible. We must consider patients—they do not have time to wait.

Does the minister agree that the Glasgow airport link, in conjunction with the Glasgow crossrail scheme, is vital for the regeneration of Glasgow? Does he not understand that the airport link could have been up and running by now if so much money had not been spent on studies of the link and the crossrail scheme?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Glasgow Housing Association since the result of the housing stock transfer ballot. (S1O-5094)

Is the minister aware that Bob Allan, the GHA chief executive, said recently that he had serious doubts whether the building labour was in place to deliver the GHA plan, which put in doubt the promise that was made to tenants who have waited a long time for repairs to be carried out? Will she guarantee Glasgow tenants that repairs will be carried out as promised?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

As far as I am concerned it is a real point of order, and I am sure that you will agree. Is it in order for a minister to continue with propaganda on the housing stock transfer when she is supposed to be answering a question?

Will the member give way?

I thank Sarah Boyack for securing the debate and the various organisations that supplied information for the debate. Sarah Boyack's motion mentions specifically the 65 to 74 age group, who feel aggrieved that they have been dumped on the scrap heap. I will concentrate on people aged 50 and over, who also are deemed to be on the scrap heap. That includes me and quite a few folk here. As the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on older people, age and aging, the issue raised in the motion has come up time and time again at our meetings. In fact, we received a comprehensive presentation by Lesley Hart on the issue. The motion calls upon the Scottish Executive to "identify and address areas of age discrimination in Scottish public life". I will concentrate on that point. The Scottish Parliament should be the first organisation to omit agism from its job application forms. I will provide a couple of examples of agism from Scottish Executive job application forms. Under the heading "Age", the first form states: "the normal retirement age in the Scottish Executive is 60". Under "Equal Opportunities" it states that the Executive does not discriminate on the grounds of age, gender and so on. An updated Executive application form quotes the same phrase as before under the heading "Age". However, under "Equal Opportunities" the reference to age has been removed. In my wisdom, I wrote to Angus MacKay, the then Minister for Finance and Local Government, asking for information on the Scottish Executive's recruitment policy and referring to the requirement to retire at 60. A new form of words has been added to Scottish Executive application forms: "There are no specific age limits. However, the normal retirement age in the SE" is still 60. That is under review. Perhaps the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care can update me on that. Sarah Boyack told us about the disadvantages that women face, but everyone is disadvantaged from the age of 50, in particular people who live in areas where there is a great deal of poverty. They find it difficult to secure jobs. I congratulate the  firms—there are four or five of them—that have policies to recruit people over the age of 50. Those companies see those people as loyal workers, who take little time off. That is a marvellous and positive way in which to look at older people, if we can call folk over 50 older people. I return to my earlier point about discrimination and the Scottish Executive's policy on working in this Parliament. MSPs are not age restricted, so I do not see why employees should be. If we are to place this Parliament at the forefront of the issue—I see Hugh Henry laughing, but I am sure that he will give me a straightforward answer—why have we not taken up the European directive from November 2000 on a general framework for equal treatment in employment? The directive says that legislation to implement it should be in place by 2003. Will the minister assure us that that directive will be implemented by 2003 for the Parliament and will apply for people who want to be employed by the Parliament?

As someone who, along with other members, spent many hours poring over the Housing (Scotland) Bill, I welcome the debate and the report of the homelessness task force. Housing in Scotland is an issue that merits the attention of the Parliament. Unlike Bill Aitken and other Conservative members, I think that the issue merits even more time because of the massive problems in all sectors of the housing stock and the appalling conditions in which some of our citizens have to live in the 21 st century. In particular, solutions are urgently required for the problems in the private sector. The scandal of people living in Dickensian conditions is undeniable. It is ridiculous that the Parliament oversees that situation. The task force's report highlights that issue, and I hope that the second report will consider some solutions. I want to highlight houses in multiple occupation, which are normally referred to as HMOs. Johann Lamont mentioned the issue, but I would like to take it further. It is estimated that there are around 12,500 HMOs in Scotland. In Glasgow alone, the figure is almost 3,000. HMOs are the main choice for people who require affordable accommodation, such as young people, students and low earners. However, such people's need for low-cost housing means that many of them are forced to live in poor, and often extremely dangerous, conditions. Members will know of the case of the two students in Melrose Street, which was a terrible tragedy. In October 2000, the HMO licensing scheme, which replaced the existing discretionary scheme, was introduced. Many people welcomed the licensing scheme as a step in the right direction of eradicating the appalling conditions that many people who live in HMOs must endure. However, I and others—I think that Johann Lamont highlighted the matter in the Social Justice Committee—have raised concerns about whether the legislation is being backed up by the resources that are necessary to make the system effective. That issue has been raised with me and with various councils on many occasions.

I am not attacking what the Social Justice Committee said about HMOs—I am talking about councils and their concerns about moneys for the legislation. I am not attacking anything that the Social Justice Committee said and I am sorry that the member took what I said in that way. I am highlighting issues that the report and councils have raised. If Cathie Craigie lets me finish, I will  let her know what I mean. The University of Strathclyde's consultation response stated that it believed that the HMO unit in Glasgow lacked the skills and necessary resources to monitor and influence the worst excesses of the most unacceptable landlords, as did many local authorities. We all agree that there are unacceptable landlords in the city. The university stated that the worst landlords were deliberately evading the legislation. The University of Glasgow supported that view and said that the practical and financial implications of the licence requirements were extremely onerous. I will skip some of those implications and consider the costs of licensing in places such as Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen. Glasgow charges 440 per cent more for a licence than Dundee and a massive 1,130 per cent more than Aberdeen.

I am sorry, but I have only about a minute left. I would have given way if I had more time. A licence for six to 10 tenants costs £295 in Aberdeen, £750 in Dundee and £1,700 in Glasgow. That situation must be looked at properly. Why are there such different charges? Most people have supported the improved safety and conditions for tenants in the legislation, but concerns have been raised over the costs of and differences in HMO licences. The task force report also raised such concerns. The minister should understand that nobody has targeted that problem. We want answers. Why is there such a vast difference in licensing costs for HMOs? The minister should answer that in his summing up.

I thank the minister for replying to my questions and I look  forward to receiving written replies. On the whole, the SNP welcomes the bill. It makes a lot of sense to have a one-stop shop for the sort of procedure that the public can understand and can access quickly and more easily. I am almost sure that the minister gave us assurances on this point at stage 2, but I urge him to advertise the changes in procedure, perhaps with a booklet or leaflet that the public can access in post offices, shops, libraries or local government buildings. It is important that the changes are advertised so that the public are aware that the Scottish Parliament's intention is to make the system much easier, more open and transparent for those who want to express their concerns. I look forward to the minister doing that work to ensure that the public are aware of the changes and of how easy it is to access the ombudsman. The SNP is thankful that the minister has acted on the concerns about the TUPE regulations that were raised at stages 1 and 2. I am sure that the staff will be most grateful for that. My only concern is about the change of name. Everyone said that they would like a more politically correct name, but I am sure that we can all live with the new name. I welcome the bill and the SNP will support it in its entirety.

I seek the minister's clarification on a point about amendment 2, which defines the term "service failure". Will the ombudsman be able to investigate a grievance about service failure by a social inclusion partnership?

I seek clarification on amendment 9. I am pleased that there will be consultation and co-operation with other bodies. Subsection (1)(a) of the new section that amendment 9 would insert in the bill refers to the parliamentary commissioner for administration. Would that provision also apply to the Scottish Legal Aid Board? I understand that, at the moment, investigations cannot be conducted in respect of contractual or commercial transactions. Will the Scottish public services ombudsman have the power to conduct such investigations? Will they be able to consult the other ombudsmen on the matter of legal aid funds?

The minister mentioned that various authorities would be expected to contribute towards the costs of airport links and crossrail. Do the authorities know that they are to contribute and how much they are to contribute? I understand that SPT does not have a lot of money. Is the minister aware that the Stansted rail link was funded by national Government? If so, why is that not the case for the rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports?

As Kenny Gibson and Robert Brown said, it would have been better if the debate had been longer. However, we have to remind ourselves that, if we were at Westminster, the debate would not have taken place. It is excellent that the Scottish Parliament is debating the subject, no matter how short the debate is. The report of the homelessness task force has been welcomed broadly by every party, and especially by the SNP. A wide range of groups that work to resolve the problems of homelessness have welcomed the report. The task force's report is timely, as action to resolve the homelessness problem is urgently required. As has been mentioned by previous speakers, research shows that homelessness remains a serious problem in our society. Homelessness has risen by 40 per cent since new Labour came to power. We have to ensure that the recommendations of the report are backed up by the necessary action from the Executive. The resources that are required must be provided to eliminate the scourge of homelessness from our society. The report was described by the Scottish Council for Single Homeless as "firing the starting pistol to make inroads into homelessness in Scotland".  I welcome that comment. However, as Brian Adam said, the report will have failed if it sits on a shelf gathering dust. I am sure that the Executive will take on board that the recommendations must be turned into action. The minister may shake her head, but for too long, we have seen reports gather dust.

The Executive acted on the interim report, but we must not allow the report to lie on the shelf doing nothing. On many occasions, reports have been published, task forces have been established and yet no recommendations have been produced. I ask the minister to take note of that. Action speaks louder than words. The Executive has pledged to eliminate homelessness by 2012. The SNP believes that homelessness must be eliminated long before that. Although the report gives a date of 2012, I hope that action will be taken to eliminate homelessness before then. I welcome the Executive's pledge, but I hope that the Executive will accept the genuine concerns of the SNP and many agencies that although 2012 is an acceptable date to have in a report, for the sake of homeless people homelessness must be acted on before that date. I want to concentrate on priority needs. Other members, including the minister and Jackie Baillie, mentioned that matter, as have many campaigners in the housing field. I welcome the assessment that people's needs should be re-examined. Anyone who is homeless has a priority need. Slippage must not be allowed. The Chartered Institute of Housing also welcomed the extension and the eventual phasing out of priority need. The institute said that the funds that were allocated by the Executive would not cover the longer-term need to increase the provision of decent, affordable homes. The money that has been provided is welcome, but it is not sufficient to implement the report and to end homelessness. The Executive should put its money where its mouth is. We need action as soon as possible to eradicate homelessness once and for all. It should be eradicated sooner rather than later.

How do I follow that? I do not want to get into a slagging match with any party; I just want to get the best deal possible for the elderly. The onus is on the Executive to deliver care for the elderly. I am the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and aging. I congratulate Donald Gorrie on his appointment as depute convener of the group—I am sure that he will do a good job. As the convener of the group I have a particular interest in community care and care of the elderly. Everyone in the Parliament should have an interest, as hopefully we will all grow old and receive the care that the Parliament supports. Various parties have bandied about the subject of community care. I take issue with what Labour members have said. The contribution of the previous speaker in particular was not helpful to the amendment or to Labour's cause. We do not need such speeches in the Parliament, especially when we are discussing care for the elderly. Yesterday, at the cross-party group's annual general meeting, we had an interesting speaker from Ireland, Sylvia Meehan, who is the president of the Irish senior citizens parliament. Throughout her life she has championed equality, not for just women, but for elderly people. She talked about how Ireland is dealing with care and help for the elderly and is making elderly people more independent. She mentioned joined-up thinking between health services, hospitals and communities, so that elderly people can live their lives in relative security, in the knowledge that they have health services on their doorstep. I found that interesting. She also mentioned a helpline for elderly people. What emerged from her speech and from a discussion that I had with her later was that the Irish Government funds all of that, without quibbles. The Irish senior citizens parliament was  pushing forward its ideals and the Government was listening. As we all know, Ireland is an independent nation. Is that why it has a different approach? It did not need to wait for permission from another Government to implement its proposals. That may tell us something about the difference between Ireland—an independent nation—and Scotland, which has devolution. The SNP, along with other parties, has campaigned throughout for the full implementation of the Sutherland report. We will continue to do so, and to monitor any backsliding by the Executive on the implementation of free personal care. Sutherland enshrined the values of free personal care, for example that older people are an important part of society. Our approach to long-term care should be to enable older people to lead fulfilling lives, not only in care homes, as was mentioned before by Margaret Jamieson, but in their own homes, with personal care to back that up. That is an important point. The funding system for long-term care—which is what Mary Scanlon's motion is about—should provide opportunities for older people to lead their lives the way they want to. As politicians, we should listen to that. It is important that there is unified and joint working. We should not keep quibbling about which local authority should be responsible. Older people—and I—do not care how it is done. We just want the money to be made available and for the health boards, local authorities and the Parliament to work together to ensure that care is delivered, regardless of whether it is delivered through a partnership—the buzzword—or whether it is unified. We must have joined-up working. As politicians, we have a duty to everyone in Scotland to ensure that every section of our society is treated fairly. We must ensure that personal care and unified budgeting are implemented as quickly as possible.

I also congratulate Dorothy-Grace Elder on securing this excellent debate and thank the people who have turned up to listen to it. I cannot think of anything worse than being in constant pain day after day and sometimes year after year. I pay tribute to the many people who, although they suffer, still have plenty of time to get involved in voluntary work and other issues. In fact, there is a lady in the gallery whom I took home from Faslane after she had been demonstrating for a few hours. I do not know whether my driving or my car was to blame, but I think that she was in worse pain when she got out of the car than she was when she arrived at Faslane. As I said, it is marvellous that, although those people suffer pain, they still involve themselves in so many other issues. As Elaine Smith pointed out, the fact that chronic pain is debilitating is well documented. She also mentioned that other long-term acute illnesses are associated with chronic pain. That issue is not so well publicised, and it would be an excellent idea to publicise it more. Of course, chronic pain also leads to relationship break-ups, which are terrible, and to long-term unemployment, which can be debilitating not just to one's health but to one's state of mind. We must recognise and publicise the impact that long-term pain can have on the country's economy and on people's well-being. Dorothy-Grace Elder's motion suggests that the Executive should get together with health boards and push chronic pain patients to the top of the agenda, and also highlights the dire shortage of  pain clinics and staff. I urge the minister to take those serious points on board. The Beatson clinic was mentioned earlier; Malcolm Chisholm intervened on that situation. I hope that, in her summing-up, the minister can give some hope to the many people in the gallery that she might take the same action. Health boards and trusts have been running the agenda for too long, and people have been suffering. I ask the minister to give us something positive and to tell us that she will push the issue up the health boards' agenda. I also hope that she will tell us that the Parliament, not the health boards, will run that agenda.

We have heard about the cosy partnership between the Liberal Democrats and the Labour party. Iain Smith mentioned 15 January. It must be said that if it had not been for Alex Neil, there would have been no proposals from the Executive. They are just proposals; we do not know whether they will be enacted by 2003. Alex Neil's bill, if agreed to, would be enacted by then. The Executive's proposals were put through as a gut nerve reaction to Alex Neil's bill and that is the honest truth. Mike Rumbles mentioned the committees. One of the strengths of the Parliament is the committee system and our ability to take an independent view. I respect Trish Godman's sincerity in her summary, but as a member of the Local Government Committee I have been greatly disappointed by the part the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats have played on the bill.

I am sorry; I do not have time. The Liberal Democrat and Labour members of the committee have tamely followed the Executive's pathway. They have tamely agreed to go along with the Liberals and the Labour party and continually voted for the Executive's proposal, which SNP members—and Keith Harding—voted against. They have not opposed their party. That is a real worry for the committees. They should be independent. It is unfortunate that in this case they have not been. In her summary, Trish Godman says that she agrees with some of Alex Neil's bill but cannot vote for it on principle. That is rather sad.

I will come on to the points that Michael McMahon made shortly, if he will be quiet. It has also been said that the bill would deter people from diverse backgrounds from applying for public appointments. That claim is based on a vague assertion that the Executive makes in its consultation paper. There is no hard evidence to back it up. Reference has been made to concerns expressed by the Equality Network, but the Equality Network supports the bill and does not believe that it contains flaws that cannot be overcome.  Michael McMahon said that, under the bill, nominees would be more vulnerable to discrimination. Some members of the Local Government Committee argued that the Parliament is not bound by equality law as the Executive is, but the Parliament is required to consider any statutory requirement relating to appointees, including the application of anti-discrimination legislation by the Scottish ministers. Furthermore, the Parliament's legal office stated that it is widely accepted that the Scottish Parliament is a public authority as defined by the Human Rights Act 1998. I do not see Michael McMahon's problem. There is also the option of judicial review. It has been said that the bill would lead to the politicisation of the appointments process. That claim is deeply flawed.

I will not. There has been no politicisation of the appointments process in countries that use systems similar to that proposed in the bill. Indeed, many believe that the current system is already politicised. The Executive and the Lib-Lab pact seem to be saying that their politics are the politics of patronage and should never come under democratic scrutiny. The Labour party—and now the Lib Dems—like to maintain their grip on power and on public life. They rely on keeping control of public appointments. I suspect that that, and no other reason, is the real reason for their opposition to Alex Neil's bill. The Labour party's power in much of Scotland depends on patronage, favouritism and cronyism. Once again, Labour's only motivation is to work in its own selfish self-interest. I am sorry to say that the Lib Dems have joined that party. I call on members to support Alex Neil's bill and to reject the Lib-Lab Executive's proposals.

Government's announcement on local government finance is subjected to proper analysis it turns out to be like so many of new Labour's policies—all packaging and no content. Government claims of increases in local government grant support, subjected to proper scrutiny such as that from COSLA, are exposed as a trick of smoke and mirrors. Members need not take only the SNP's word for that, but can take that of COSLA and other councils too. COSLA expressed its disbelief and bitter disappointment with the settlement. It said that the Executive's headline figures were being used to camouflage the realities of another difficult financial settlement for local government. As COSLA said, the announced settlement was £130 million less than it had asked for. I am glad that Glasgow can no longer be accused because of its role in COSLA—that magic word again—as it is now not a member. However, COSLA also pointed out the increased pressures on local government because of the cost of financing long-term care for the elderly, the McCrone settlement and teachers' pay, and police and fire pensions. Local government has suffered for far too long from underfunding and interference from central Government, which many believe has undermined local democracy and accountability. In a recent submission Unison contended that: "Local government has suffered from the effects of year on year cuts in funding coupled with restraints on freedom of action. The effects of persistent neglect can be seen in declining local services and under investment in staffing and infrastructure." Those are not my words, but Unison's. That position has not improved—nobody has mentioned this—since the election of new Labour in 1997. I seem to remember that new Labour said something like "things can only get better." An awful lot of people are saying that things can only get worse. New Labour's ideology is driven by Tory ideology. I am thinking particularly of PFI, or PPP, whichever way one wants to put it. I believe that those schemes will lead to further pressures on local government finance. The means of financing public services is wasteful and expensive. Every £1 billion of PFI contracts will cost the public purse £50 million more per year than borrowing through traditional public sector avenues would. That will only further undermine public services in the years to come. If members do not believe me they can read COSLA's submissions. The minister mentioned ring fencing, or hypothecation, call it what one wants. The minister  and I had a full debate about ring fencing at a Local Government Committee meeting. I remember that he thanked me for my kind words—I am sure that he was sincere. However, concerns remain regarding this type of hypothecation or ring fencing. COSLA mentions in its report that 30 per cent of all the moneys that local authorities get, which amounts to £6.6 billion over the next three years, comes with those strings attached. That is our concern. The SNP, COSLA and local government are basically saying, "For goodness sake, give us less interference from central Government, less ring fencing, and less Executive talk about pushing through its policies and priorities at the cost of local needs and local people." I wish that the minister would take that on board. I know that we have had this discussion before, but I ask him to look at the matter again. The Executive may have priorities, but local government must be given the proper funding to address them.

The minister says that he is prepared to listen. I am glad of that. Is he aware of the situation that has been going on for two years regarding staff safety at the Glasgow royal infirmary? A petition has been lodged on the subject with the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee. Staff had discussions with management—[MEMBERS: "Speech."] It is not a speech—I began by asking whether the minister was aware of the situation. Is the minister aware that staff had discussions with management two years ago, and that staff have requested a police presence at GRI? Will the minister give a commitment to meet staff and management at GRI to alleviate the situation?

I congratulate Trish Godman on her speech. She has taken seven minutes, which might cut my time by about two minutes. She raised some of the points that I was going to make, and did so more eloquently than I could have done. She covered practically everything in the bill. As Trish Godman and other members said, everyone in the Parliament favours a one-stop shop. It is right and proper that people should not be confused—deliberately or not—about whom they should approach. The one-stop-shop approach is sensible and I am sure that the public will welcome it as long as it is transparent, open and fair. After leaving Glasgow at half-past 6 this morning, I sat for nearly two hours in a traffic jam, so I looked at the list of organisations that are covered by the bill to see whether long-suffering motorists might be included, but unfortunately they are not. Perhaps that is something that I should address in a private bill. The only transport-related organisation that I could see listed was the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority. Perhaps the needs of long-suffering motorists should be considered. Members have raised a number of concerns. Trish Godman explained very well the concerns of Michael Buckley and the housing association ombudsman about informal resolutions and the ombudsman's vulnerability to challenge. I think that the minister has taken those concerns on board. If he has not already mentioned that point, I  am sure that he will do so in summing up. Committee members and witnesses also expressed concern about formal investigations. Other members have mentioned that point and I am sure that the minister will comment on it when he sums up. Witnesses from the Office of the Housing Association Ombudsman and James Dyer of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland raised that concern as well, and those people should be listened to. I very much favour the proposal to remove the MSP filter. I have had representations on that point. At present, any complainant who wants to approach the Scottish parliamentary commissioner for administration must do so through an MSP. The bill proposes that that filter be removed, so that approaches can be made through another process. I am pleased about that and I am sure that, once the bill is passed, the constituents who have approached me will also be pleased. It has been said that a one-stop shop for the people of Scotland—I think that the minister used those exact words—will be welcomed by the people of Scotland. It is certainly welcomed by the Parliament. The Local Government Committee scrutinised the bill in great detail and suggested various ideas. Members of the committee and SNP members will lodge amendments at stage 2. I recognise that the minister has taken on board most of the Local Government Committee's concerns and I look forward to stage 2 of the bill.

I notice that the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning is not here—perhaps her portfolio is as overloaded as the transport infrastructure. Does the deputy minister agree that the Government has failed in respect of the lack of progress on the airport direct link and the crossrail link? Will the Government find the time to ensure that progress is made toward implementation of those vital long-awaited schemes?

Will the member take an intervention?

Like other members, in principle I welcome the bill, which is basically about equality and choice. As Euan Robson said, couples who wish a civil marriage are at present limited in their choice of location. The bill sets out to rectify that. Like other members, however, I have reservations about what might be seen as over-legislation. Some witnesses, such as the one from Dumfries and Galloway Council, stated that extending the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to include within local authorities' licensing powers the power to register approved places would suffice. That could be done without the bill. Perhaps the minister will correct me if I misheard him when I was trying to listen to his speech, but as the 1982 act is under review I would like him to say whether he knows what the outcome of that review is. When will we know the outcome of that review? I ask that question because speed is of the essence. I would like clarification on another point the minister made. Did he say that nothing in the 1982 act prevents local authorities approving suitable places?

I did not catch all that Mr Robson said first time round, but I think I understood  exactly what he said. That is why I want to ask this pertinent question: why do we need a separate piece of legislation? Local authorities and individuals are asking that question, and I too am asking it now, because I have reservations about what is being proposed. At the moment, many local authorities are cash-starved or cash-strapped. In evidence to the Local Government Committee, a representative of Dumfries and Galloway Council said that the council might have to use more resources going through the approval scheme under the proposed legislation and that that would be a waste. Why do we need separate legislation if what is being proposed can be incorporated in the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982? I have raised that issue before. However, having made that criticism of the bill, I repeat that we support it in principle. I believe in it. I will be parochial on this point. Everyone who reads the newspapers knows that Glasgow is to become St Valentine's city because St Valentine's bones were found in the Gorbals a number of years ago. There will be a week-long festival, which is absolutely marvellous. Glasgow is already a great tourist attraction, but if the current proposals came into force—through a separate act or as an add-on to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982—they could promote Glasgow's chances of becoming even more of a tourist attraction. If people came over to celebrate what I hope would be an annual St Valentine's week festival, they could perhaps even get married in Glasgow—on Glasgow green, in the botanic gardens, or wherever they wanted. I approve of the proposals in the bill—it is marvellous that people should have the choices that they will offer—but I wonder whether separate legislation is required.

We have heard the self-congratulatory remarks and rhetoric from the Labour party, just as we have heard the latest batch of endlessly—and I mean endlessly—recycled reannouncements that we constantly get. Make no mistake about where the blame for the current predicament and the current state of the railways lies—with the parties opposite. I do not just mean Labour, but the Tories as well. Under the Tories, investment declined, but new Labour has spent even less than them, believe it or not. This year, only £1.5 billion will be invested, compared with £3.3 billion in 1994-95. The Tories and new Labour are equally guilty of causing the crisis in our railways. Perhaps Keith Raffan would like to ask Nora Radcliffe—

This is part of my speech, Presiding Officer. Perhaps Keith Raffan would like to ask  Nora Radcliffe how much the Lib Dems are prepared to invest in the railways. That was an aside. The SRA plan that was announced this week offered some improvements, but a bold vision, radical ideas and the promise of the massive investment required to bring a rail system into the 21 st century are lacking. Where are the plans for the major projects that have been mentioned, such as the electrification of the Glasgow to Edinburgh line, the reopening of the Borders line, the Glasgow crossrail scheme and the Glasgow and Edinburgh air links? There is no commitment to commence work on those projects before—or after—2010. Like many others, I have been campaigning strenuously for many years for the implementation of the Glasgow crossrail scheme and the Glasgow airport link. Believe it or not, plans for the crossrail scheme have been on the board since 1960.

I talked about recycled rhetoric. Recycling rhetoric is all that Labour seems to do. Let us have an independent Scotland, where we can invest properly in our railways. The crossrail scheme has been identified as vital to enhance the accessibly of the rail network, not just in Glasgow but throughout Scotland. Improvement of the rail infrastructure would also provide a massive boost to the regeneration of certain areas of Glasgow that are run-down or derelict. The crossrail scheme would bring in the Glasgow airport link and would improve access to the airport from the north and west and even to Stirling, Aberdeen and Edinburgh. The Glasgow airport link has been on the cards since the early 1990s. I came across a website that tells us about a proposed new Doncaster/Finningley airport. An old air hangar there is now being remodelled to accommodate a rail link. Guess what the website says—that there will be "a new rail link, new railway station". The best part is that the airport does not even have any passengers yet—yet it is still getting a new rail link. Glasgow airport has 9 million passengers, but it has no rail link, and there is no rail link for Edinburgh airport either. The Government should be ashamed that the proposed airport at Finningley, which is not even off the ground yet, can have a planned rail link, whereas Glasgow airport cannot.

I heard you.

I am quite happy with the minister's reply.

I thank the minister for that statement, but she forgot to say: "subject to suitable resource being available". I quote the minister in today's newspaper. That seems always to be her war cry. It was also in her press release. I wish to move on to the Strategic Rail Authority.

Begin to wind up? Okay. I have spoken about Scotland needing vision; I also mentioned Scotland taking control of its railways. Let me illustrate that: of the 17 major projects announced by Stephen Byers in the rail plan, 15 are located south of the border and 11 are in London and the south-east of England. What do we say to that? We say that, again, Scotland is losing out and the bulk of investment is going south.

Like Colin Campbell, I am not a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, but I was a member of the Public Petitions Committee, and I concur with John McAllion's comment that if it were not for the Public Petitions Committee many members of the Scottish public would not get a fair hearing in the Parliament. I hope that the Public Petitions Committee continues to serve the public of Scotland as it has. I am not a professional, I do not have a personal interest in this issue, and I am not the kind of person who has a knee-jerk reaction to every issue that comes before the Parliament. Judging by the comments and recommendations from the Health and Community Care Committee, I think its members do not believe in knee-jerk reactions either. However, I am a person who feels angry about injustices. The group we are talking about  has been dealt an injustice by the Parliament, which I hope will be rectified. I commend the committee on its balanced and informed recommendations and report. I congratulate the committee on its recommendations, which we in the SNP wholeheartedly support and hope will come to fruition. Many members have spoken about the events that led up to the tragedy—that is what it is for the people involved—and in particular about the lack of information that was given to patients. That has been brought to the attention not only of the Health and Community Care Committee and individual members but of hospital boards for many years. We should not look to the past; we should look to the present and the future, because that is the concern not just for people who suffer from hepatitis C but for their relatives. We should put the lack of information in the past. The issue has had a fair hearing, but we should concentrate on the matters that are at hand and on the future. I listened carefully to the speeches of Margaret Smith and Malcolm Chisholm. They were fine words, eloquently delivered, but unfortunately—and for this I make no apology to Mr McAllion or anyone else who wishes to have consensus in this Parliament—they were just a fudge. What did we actually hear?

I do not doubt Margaret Smith's sincerity and that of the committee, but I am concerned about the last part of her intervention. She said that if it takes six months, a year or two years the committee will keep an eye on it, but that  is the problem—the people who are affected do not have 12 months, a year and a half or two years. We are debating the committee's recommendations, one of which is that compensation should be delivered within 12 months. However, Margaret Smith is now accepting that Malcolm Chisholm said that people might even get no compensation. That is what worries me. I do not doubt Margaret Smith's sincerity.

I thank Margaret Smith. She cannot make herself any clearer to me. I said that I do not doubt her sincerity. I know that she and the other members of the committee are sincere. However, I want her to ask whoever does the summing up—Mr Chisholm or Mr Henry—to do a U-turn and accept fully the committee's recommendations. Margaret Smith and Malcolm Chisholm gave us fine words that were eloquently put, but fine words do not deliver action. Hepatitis C sufferers need action, not in two years' time or even in 12 months' time, but as soon as possible. I challenge Margaret Smith, as the convener of the Health and Community Care Committee, to question the convener in summing up. I do not mean the convener—that is Margaret Smith, who has been questioned.

Yes. I bet Margaret Smith was up all last night questioning herself about what her speech was going to be. However, she should question the minister and ask him to please do a  U-turn and take out the pieces about summits and everything else. People who have hepatitis C deserve better than that. I make no apologies for saying that. I remind every member who is here today, and the people in the public gallery, that this debate is about people. I will read out an e-mail from Dave Bisset, which I believe all members received. I could not put the matter any better myself, nor could anyone else. Dave Bisset says: "I hope you will all support the vote to compensate Hepatitis C sufferers infected before 1988 and put an end to this scandal where sufferers infected after this date together with sufferers of HIV and CJD are being compensated, because it seems to have escaped everyone's notice"— and this is a fact— "that people like myself and my two brothers who have been infected for over 20 years are the ones who are dying and the ones who are suffering the most. So do the decent thing don't bury your heads in the sand while we are being buried in the ground." I put that to the minister and ask him to make a U-turn and give those people the compensation that they deserve.

Mike Rumbles has a cheek to talk about humbug. He must be the biggest humbug in the Liberal Democrats. I expected the rattling of chains from the Ghost of Christmas Past, but he did not get as far as that. I will make a few quick points. I thank the minister for listening to some of the concerns that were expressed when he came to the Local Government Committee and for taking on board the point about public access and access for the disabled.

I am told that I am being too nice. Even though we could not all agree that the two elections should be held on the one day, I thank the minister for listening to the committee. Four-year terms have been mentioned. Everyone wants a four-year term for local councillors. Most people also want a decent wage and a pension scheme for councillors, but the bill does not cover those things. A four-year term is an excellent idea, but the local elections should not be held on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections. Mike Rumbles and others raised the question of the voters not being discerning. That is not the issue. The voters are discerning. The fact is that local government issues will be swamped under all the media attention that is given to the national issues that are debated in the Scottish Parliament elections. That was one of the main concerns that came across from councillors and other witnesses.

Yes, for another bit of humbug.

The Liberal Democrats made a point about a 7 per cent, I think, difference. I am trying to make the point that nearly every councillor who gave evidence to the Local Government  Committee, whether they were from Labour-controlled councils, SNP-controlled councils or Liberal Democrat-controlled councils, was concerned about media coverage. The point was raised with the minister.

I will finish this small piece and then I will let Trish Godman intervene. The councillors who gave evidence to the Local Government Committee were worried that, in the elections, the coverage that the media—television, radio and the newspapers—gave to the national issues that the Scottish Executive pushed forward would swamp local election issues. That is a point of fact. If Mike Rumbles reads the Official Report , he will see that many people raised that issue.

I am sorry; I have only a couple of minutes. I asked the minister to examine that point. Other members of the committee also asked him about that. It was agreed that the issue is a big problem for local government.

I am sorry; I am just winding up. The fact is that the Scottish Parliament pushes forward issues that will swamp local government issues. That is our main concern. On different voting patterns, some people may vote in supermarkets, whereas others will have to go somewhere else. That point has been raised on a few occasions. The minister must consider that, too. The reason why the SNP does not support the bill is that local government is for local people led by local councillors. The dual election will not give people the choice that they want. Local government elections will be swamped by national issues.

Since Duncan McNeil mentioned intervention in the health service, can he tell us why it took more than two years of doctors, clinicians and patients telling the then Minister for Health and Community Care about the situation at the Beatson centre before the Government intervened?

Will the member give way?

When I came in, I picked up a copy of the report on the west of Scotland cancer service. I do not need to read more reports. They give statistics, but the debate is about the suffering and worry that people go through when they have cancer. A member said yesterday that all of us probably know someone who has attended the Beatson. We should remind ourselves that the debate is about the people and the care that they should receive. The staff have been mentioned. We must make clear the tremendous debt that we owe to the workers in the NHS. Daily, they demonstrate their loyal dedication to the health service, often working under extremely difficult conditions to service the health needs of the nation. However, the unfortunate reality is that our hard-working health service workers have not had the support that they deserve. The new Labour Government's custodianship has been a catalogue of failure and disasters. The failures are all too apparent to me, as a Glasgow MSP, and to other members. The Government's record on the health service and on cancer services in particular is not one of which it can be proud. For too long, the Government has buried its head in the sand when  confronted by the problems that are faced by cancer services. Those problems are real and have been identified by patients and staff in the health service. That is not scaremongering, as Labour members often say. If the Government had taken those problems seriously, perhaps action would have been taken to solve them at a much earlier stage and the crisis at the Beatson might not have arisen. I welcome the fact that, at long last, the minister and the Government have taken action to resolve the Beatson's problems by installing new management and removing the centre from the control of the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust. However, questions must be asked. Why has it taken them so long to act when problems were identified—as has been stated—at a very early stage? The trust that mismanaged the Beatson was a creation of the new Labour Government. As early as November 1999, Dr Nick Reed, the clinical director at the Beatson, identified the problems. The Beatson serves almost 3 million people in Scotland, but had only six radiotherapy machines when it required 12. As a result, patients waited up to nine weeks for treatment. Unfortunately, some patients had tumours that returned after six to eight weeks. That is a sad indictment of the mismanagement of the Beatson. At the time, the Scottish Executive said that it was aware of the problem, but it washed its hands of it by saying that the problem was purely a matter for the trust. I am glad that that has now been resolved. The question remains: why has it taken until now to act when the Executive was aware that there was a problem over two years ago? I have spoken to staff at the Beatson and have been concerned about the problems that they face. The new site at Gartnavel has been welcomed, but only now has action been taken to speed up the transfer to the site. Problems remain, as Nicola Sturgeon highlighted in asking the minister about care in the south side. There are many doubts about whether the Executive's plans will result in the improvement that is required in Scotland's appalling cancer rates. We all recognise that cancer requires the earliest possible diagnosis and treatment if a patient is to be cured. It is an absolute scandal that the situation at the Beatson has been allowed to continue and to deteriorate into the crisis that it is today. Studies carried out at the Beatson have identified that cancers are becoming inoperable because of a lack of machines. A study identified that 29 cancer patients had to wait between 18 days and more than four months between diagnosis and their second CT scan. In this day  and age, that is not acceptable. Five hundred women suffering from breast cancer have now had their check-ups postponed for at least a year as a result of the staffing crisis at the Beatson. Patients who have been identified as low risk have had their appointments put back. I say to the minister that people could die if the crisis is not resolved. The minister's announcements, and those of the Labour party, about new cash represent a drop in the ocean in comparison with the investment that is desperately needed for the treatment that is required in the 21 st century. Scotland is a wealthy country, but that is not apparent from the health treatment that is provided to our people. We can afford better standards of care. The Government must take steps to resolve the crisis at the Beatson and to give back confidence to the Beatson and cancer services throughout the country.

The motion "invites the Scottish Executive to investigate the introduction of BSL to the school curriculum". We are not saying that we will take it on board right now, but that we want its introduction to be investigated.

Presiding Officer, may we have extra time for the debate, because of the number of members who wish to speak and because the previous debate overran?

Thank you. I would like to welcome all the interested parties in the gallery and to thank them for travelling here on such a miserable night. I also welcome Cathy Jamieson, the Minister for Education and Young People, who has a personal interest in Kincaidston Primary School in Ayrshire. I would also like to thank the many groups of the deaf community who have been extremely supportive in pushing for the debate, particularly Deaf Connections, the British Deaf Association and the Scottish Council on Deafness, whose support and information has been invaluable. The debate has been long awaited by many people involved with the deaf community. It is my third attempt to debate the motion; I first lodged the motion in mid-2000. I am delighted that the motion has been taken for debate tonight. It is particularly timely as it is fewer than four weeks before the end of the European year of languages. The motion covers a range of issues on which many people have been campaigning for some considerable time.  My interest in the issues contained in the motion was first stimulated by my involvement in the millennium schools project. It was my great delight to take part in the project when Deaf Connections in Glasgow organised activities with St Brendan's Primary School in Yoker. The millennium schools project aimed to teach the basics of British Sign Language and deaf awareness to primary 7 classes in Glasgow. I was delighted when I heard that the project had been awarded a further three-year grant from the Community Fund and that it was to be extended to secondary schools both in and outside the Glasgow area. The project sought to instil a greater knowledge, understanding and awareness of deaf people and their language in mainstream schools. As 90 per cent of deaf children are educated in mainstream schools, the introduction of BSL and deaf awareness programmes would enable deaf youngsters to feel more included in activities. That would set a solid foundation for the future, with more hearing people having some knowledge of sign language. It would help make Scotland a more inclusive society for those of us who are deaf. The deaf community would like BSL to be added to the school curriculum so that both deaf and hearing children can learn it at school. A key issue for the deaf community is the shortage of sign language interpreters, lip-speakers and deaf-blind communicators. As more deaf and hard of hearing people leave school, the demand for communication services has become so great that it is outstripping supply. Deaf people find great difficulty in securing the services of interpreters. In Scotland there are only 37 qualified BSL interpreters. That represents a ratio of only one interpreter to 135 deaf people. Many in the deaf community believe that the recognition of BSL and its introduction to the school curriculum would be a tremendous step forward in alleviating the situation. The European year of languages has been welcomed as an opportunity to celebrate linguistic diversity and to highlight the benefits of a multicultural, multilingual society. The deaf community has used the opportunity to increase awareness of one of the most significant minority languages—sign language. The British Deaf Association estimates that in Scotland there are about 7,000 people whose first or preferred language is BSL. In the UK as a whole, more people use BSL than use either Gaelic or Welsh. Many deaf people speak English only as a second or third language. Sign language is more accessible to deaf people than English, making it extremely important for BSL to be recognised. The UK has now signed and ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The charter states that it is a basic  human right to use a minority language in private or public life. The deaf community would like information produced by local and central Government to be available in BSL format. Deaf groups such as the BDA have called for recognition of BSL under the charter, as that would ensure for the deaf community fuller access to public services, education, the justice system, broadcasting and cultural life. Recognition would also encourage study and research into BSL and would enhance its position as one of the UK's most widely used indigenous languages. Last week we had a debate on audiology services, when we were informed that delivery was the responsibility of the health trusts. This week we have a real chance to deliver, as education is the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. I hope that the minister will take steps to help create a better future for the deaf community and will make some positive moves to demonstrate that the Scottish Parliament is making progress towards a more inclusive society.

As the minister says, a pilot project is being conducted at 20 sites in England. Would not it be beneficial to set up a pilot scheme here in Scotland? What is the Executive's view on that?

I thank Mike Rumbles for securing this debate. I also welcome Mary Mulligan to her post. I fully support Mike Rumbles's motion for the Executive to make a commitment to provide digital hearing aids on the NHS. That is long overdue. For too long, audiology services and the deaf have been sorely neglected by Scottish society. Mike Rumbles mentioned that people had written to MSPs; I am sure that, like me, he has a pile of correspondence. I received copies of questions that constituents had put to the Government, the latest of which is dated 23 November. One of the questions was about pilot schemes. As we all know, the answer given was that pilot schemes operate down south, in England. I ask the minister why schemes have not been set up in Scotland. Another question concerned the central purchasing of digital hearing aids, which has already been mentioned. The answer that we received was that central purchasing has been possible since June 1999. Why is the option not being taken up? A third question concerned free digital hearing aids from the NHS. The answer that we received was that they were already available free. Why is that option not being taken up? Two speakers—Mike Rumbles got it right—indicated that the problem lies with health boards. That is a big problem. When members from all parties lodge questions on this issue, the answer that they receive is always, "It is up to each individual health board." I think that the Parliament must say to health boards, "It is time that you gave out digital hearing aids. Go into bulk purchasing. Give them out free." In written answers Susan Deacon indicated that digital hearing aids are available free, that it is possible to bulk-buy and that pilot schemes are on-going. It is high time that we and the Executive told the NHS, "It is time that you took your finger out and got on with it. The hard of hearing in Scotland are fed up waiting." I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care responds to some of those issues. We pussyfoot about too much with trusts and the NHS in Scotland. It is time that the Parliament exercised some authority and gave deaf people in Scotland what they deserve—better digital hearing aids.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take to ensure that there are adequate numbers of community police. (S1O-4187)

If the minister will excuse the pun, his answer that the matter is up to the chief constables was a bit of a cop-out. Is he aware of the concerns of members of the public and the police—which were put to me when I was given a tour of Maryhill police division—about the numbers of community police officers and the fact that they are often deployed elsewhere, which leaves no coverage in the community? Will he look into those concerns and provide adequate resources to ensure that numbers of community police officers are adequate?

This afternoon we will be asked to rubber-stamp our new First Minister—a First Minister given a shoo-in with the help of his friends in the Liberal Democrats, and for what? A promise to make progress on progress on PR. If the Liberal Democrats were serious, they would have had PR included in the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill. What price democracy? This morning, we are being asked to vote on synchronised elections for local government. That would undermine local government, and greatly diminish the local issues at the heart of our local government democracy. Once again, the bill will be pushed through with the help of Labour's little helpers, the Liberal Democrats.

Certainly. I was going to clarify that. We would do the same as the Welsh Assembly, and put back the local government elections to 2004 or else hold them in 2002. Does that satisfy Hugh Henry? We certainly would not synchronise local government elections with the Scottish Parliament elections—a proposal that is being desperately pushed through with the help of Labour's Liberal Democrat helpers. I wonder what they got this time. Perhaps it was a new ministerial car. Let us examine the policies in the bill. The bill proposes a four-year term for councils. That is fine; we agree with the four-year term. As the Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government said, we need a four-year term to plan ahead and sustain local government. That is vital and welcome. Pilot schemes to examine new and innovative ways of getting people—particularly disabled people and the disadvantaged—to polling stations have been mentioned. We welcome that. Capability Scotland's briefing paper outlined the need for access for all. But do we need elections to be held on the same day? No, we do not. Many members have mentioned that in their speeches. Many statistics have been bandied about. Iain Smith mentioned raising the voter turnout figures.  In response, I say that the Welsh Assembly has put back local government elections to 2004 to prevent them clashing with the Welsh Assembly elections. Iain Smith should note that. As I said, we do not need the elections to be held on the same day. As has been said many times, there is a great danger that local government elections will be swamped by national issues. That would not be good for local democracy. Trish Godman referred to the counting of votes, with which there is a problem. Will counts be done simultaneously? Will they be done on the same day or on different days? Who will do the counting? Will counters be paid overtime? Will we have counter fatigue? We do not know. The minister must answer those questions and answer them quickly. People will go along to polling stations and have PR for one election, no PR for another, and half-and-half PR for the Scottish Parliament elections. That must be examined. People will wonder what is going on. They may go to the supermarket to vote, but they will have to go somewhere else to vote in the Scottish Parliament elections. That is not clear enough for those people who wish to vote. It will be confusing for everyone. The Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill will introduce synchronised elections, allegedly with the aim of increasing voter turnout. I do not think that turnout will increase. The best way to increase turnout is to have good government, not to undermine local government.

I have many papers and answers to questions regarding studies that have been carried out on the Glasgow crossrail and the Glasgow airport link. Does the minister agree with many people—not only with me—that there have been enough studies and that not enough action has been taken? Will she fulfil her responsibility to our public transport system and show some initiative, provide the necessary investment and take the action that is required to make those long-awaited schemes reality?

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing this debate. I am wearing two hats: I am the convener of the cross-party group on older people, age and aging and I have an elderly mother who suffers from Alzheimer's. The minister, who is a previous convener of the group, will be aware that we have discussed Alzheimer's and dementia at length. We decided that inadequate information is available to carers, who are often therefore unable to recognise the symptoms of early dementia or even later Alzheimer's. I hope that the minister will respond to that point. Education is important. Robin Harper mentioned the elderly man who was left on a trolley for five hours. Perhaps some of the nurses and porters who were there did not realise that that elderly gentleman was suffering from dementia. It is important to remember that carers have a difficult job. The arrangements for respite care are inadequate. It is distressing for the carer to be able to spend only a couple of hours away from the sufferer. It is also distressing for the sufferer to be confined within four walls and unable to get out. Home support would be helpful, as would extra day care and respite care. I hope that the minister will respond positively to that point and to the others that I have raised.

I welcome what the Minister for Social Justice said about having meetings with Westminster ministers on the subject of asylum seekers and refugees. I would have preferred the Executive motion to have made some reference to that. Rather than containing just a "commitment to work in partnership" with various groups and communities, the motion should also have contained a commitment to work in partnership with Westminster and the national asylum support service. I will return to that point. I begin by thanking the many groups and ordinary citizens who have worked tirelessly in Sighthill and other areas of Glasgow to integrate the refugees into their community. If they had not highlighted publicly the injustices and unfairness of Westminster's dispersal system, we would not be here discussing once again the plight of asylum seekers. I thank those people, many of whom are voluntary workers, for all that they do. I will concentrate on two issues: dispersal and the effects of dispersal. I will focus on the situation in Glasgow, because I am a Glasgow MSP and know the Glasgow area better than anywhere else. Glasgow has also taken in most of the refugees who have come to Scotland. The areas to which refugees have been dispersed in Glasgow—Sighthill, Castlemilk, the Gorbals, Maryhill and Scotstoun—have one thing in common: they are all areas of severe deprivation. As has been mentioned, no packages were put in place and there was no communication with communities. Glasgow City Council, to which several members have referred, was given little notice. I congratulate Brian O'Hara of the Asylum Support Project, based in Kelvinhaugh Street in Glasgow, on the hard work that his team does. Like Paul Martin, I have received correspondence from various agencies and committees of Glasgow City Council. I will quote from a letter that I received from the Asylum Support Project, which will indicate why I think it essential that we contact NASS and Westminster. The letter tells us that the Home Office phoned the  council and pleaded that there was a crisis. It said that every bit of accommodation in the United Kingdom was full up and asked whether Glasgow could take some refugees. The letter states: "We were asked to take one full coach"— which later became two full coaches— "a day starting from 15 th December. We advised NASS that, in our opinion, the timing for this was not ideal, given the run up to Christmas, but we ultimately agreed to their request." The letter continues: "In the main, NASS had not thought their process through and Asylum Seekers were sent to Glasgow without proper documentation and there were indeed initial problems with vouchers." The letter indicates that Glasgow City Council has had problems with NASS. My second point concerns the effects of dispersal. We have all heard about hundreds of people—people who are already frightened—arriving during the night, particularly in the Sighthill area. If we are to believe one tabloid newspaper, which I will not name, they were arriving in an area that was very hostile. It is to the credit of the people living in that area that they thought differently. They welcomed the refugees. The tabloid newspaper to which I refer should be ashamed of itself, as it did a lot of scaremongering and bad work. Members have already mentioned the media. Some of the remarks that have been made in the media are not welcome. I want to be honest about this issue. If we are honest, we must admit that people have been dumped on communities. There was no consultation. No amenities were made available to the refugees and, more important, to the local people. There are empty halls in the areas that we are discussing. I have pleaded that those be opened up instead of being closed down. Community centres should be opened so that local people can use them. The problem is that we need better consultation—not just with this Parliament and the local communities, but with Westminster and NASS. We must get them to work with us. If they do not, the situation will not be resolved.

The minister referred to investment. Does he agree that if £2 billion is invested in the Jubilee line, a similar investment should be made up here in Scotland?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Brown was not in the chamber to hear the speech from his Liberal Democrat colleague so how can he make assumptions about it?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate my colleague Andrew Wilson on his innovative proposal. I hope that members from all parties will vote for the motion. We have heard members refer to the difference between the railways down south and the railways up here, but we have not got to the nub of the problem. The nub of the problem is that in Scotland we do not have control of the development of and investment in our railways. Andrew Wilson's proposal would solve that. I hope that members have read the proposal thoroughly. If so, they will realise how much work went into it. Christine Grahame referred to moneys that have been spent in her area. The minister also made great play of moneys that have been announced to fund transport throughout Scotland. Let me take the example of Glasgow, which has received £7 million. Money has been spent in Glasgow on bus corridors, closed-circuit television in buses, upgrading bus shelters and providing four or five new items of railway rolling stock. With great respect, that is not what Glasgow needs. For 30 years, Glasgow has been crying out for a decent railway link to integrate the city centre and for a direct link to Glasgow airport. Under the minister's proposals, we will never get those things. Liberal Democrat and Labour members said that investment had to be made down south before it can be made up here. Let us consider some of the moneys that have been spent down south. More than £2 billion has been spent on the Jubilee line; £255 million on the Limehouse Docklands link; more than £1 billion on the channel tunnel link; and £440 million on the Heathrow express. Those are staggering figures. In the Glasgow area, only just over £20 million has been spent. The people of Scotland and the Scottish National Party are not asking for too much—we are asking for fairness  across the board, but we will not get that if we do not have control of vital investment and development links. The Parliament grasped the nettle on care in the community and the Sutherland report. We went ahead and did something on that. Why do we not grasp the nettle now and produce a proper integrated transport system for Scotland?

Consensus is rife in the chamber today. That is always welcome during stage 1 consideration of a bill. Amendments can be made at stages 2 and 3. This bill contains three contentious provisions. The first is the 3 per cent limit, the second is the requirement for consent by the constituent authority and the third is the requirement for ministerial consent. The minister has said that the Executive will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to deal with the issue of constituent authority consent, and I welcome that. I have been a member of the Local Government Committee for only two weeks, but I know that it had considered the relevant documentation and debated the issues before I joined. The committee was happy that the minister had committed himself to lodging an amendment to the bill. I was even happier than other members, because I was concerned by what Iain Gray said in his letter to the committee of 11 September. In the final paragraph of that letter, he stated: "a local authority would have to have made a conscious decision that it was willing to suffer a lower standard of policing or fire services than that enjoyed in neighbouring areas and to have spent the money thus saved elsewhere. Ultimately it would have been up to the electorate to decide whether they agreed with that order of priorities". I now do not have to write to Mr Gray to ask him to explain what he meant. He may say more about the matter in summing up, because I was  confused by the suggestion that politics should come into the police and fire services. The issue of ministerial consent is more problematic. Mike Rumbles has already pointed out that we might have lost the isle of Arran if we had had to wait for ministerial consent. I did not want to raise that issue, because I thought that it might frighten people to death. Instead I will quote Councillor Hinds, whose comments are short and to the point. He said: "The difficulty is the bureaucracy of the system." That is right. The councillor continued: "If the Scottish Parliament is about nothing else it is about trust and devolving power and resources. That is the principle of the matter."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 4 September 2001, c 2144.] I hope that the minister will reconsider that issue. I am sure that the Local Government Committee will do so. The other issue that I mentioned was the 3 per cent limit. After being questioned by the committee, representatives of COSLA and the fire and police boards appeared to agree that they would accept the 3 per cent limit if that was the only of ensuring that the bill was passed. However, they felt that the same limit was not imposed on councils and that it amounted to a form of capping. Others have also raised the issue of the 3 per cent limit. Along with ministerial consent, that is the only contentious matter remaining in the bill. The bill is sensible and I am happy to support it at stage 1. We know that a variety of amendments will be lodged at stage 2, but, on the whole, it is a sensible bill. It was crazy that police or fire services could have been prevented from carrying out their duties simply because a council would not give them money. I welcome the bill at stage 1 and I welcome the amendments that the minister is to lodge at stage 2.

I apologise for being late for the debate—sometimes a car is not the best mode of transport. I welcome the report and the fact that it has taken on board what Sir Stewart Sutherland said. However, there are anomalies that must be addressed and questions that need to be asked. It has been said that the whole Parliament—especially the Health and Community Care Committee—is to be congratulated, but we should recall that it was necessary to pull some members along kicking and screaming. I am glad that they have seen the light. Malcolm Chisholm, who was previously convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on older people, age and aging, will know just how vociferous that group can be. As the present convener of the group, I would like to report what has been said to me about the implementation of the proposals. To begin with, members of the group were delighted. However, when they saw the recommendation from Westminster that, although this is supposed to be a grown-up Parliament, Scottish people will not be allowed to have an attendance allowance, the phone calls started to come in. I will not repeat half the words that were said to me down the phone—this is not the appropriate place to do that. However, members will gather that the people with whom I spoke were not at all happy with the situation. We should not go to Westminster cap in hand. We should make it clear that its response is a slap in the face of this Parliament. We are being been told that this is not a grown-up Parliament and that people do not deserve an attendance allowance from a fund into which they have paid for many years. I will quote from someone whom Labour members will all know—Jim Devine, who is Scottish organiser for the health union Unison. He said: "Our generation owe a debt to these people. They were the ones who campaigned for the welfare  state, created the welfare state and contributed to the welfare state all their lives." Exactly. We should not be too complacent. We should not pat ourselves on the back when Westminster is still saying that it holds all the power and that it will tell us what to do. That is a disgrace. I have another question for Malcolm Chisholm on the care development group's report. Page vi of the executive summary states: "We have assumed that Attendance Allowance will continue to be paid as a contribution towards personal care costs for people in care homes." Was the care development group given assurances that that would be the case? I am sure that all its recommendations were made in the best faith, as I know that all the members of the group are hard-working people. However, the Parliament should know whether the group was given assurances on that point. Christine Grahame touched on the fact that attendance allowances and the costs of care for the elderly are different in different areas. The care development group suggests £145 per week for personal care. It says that that is the national average, but in seven local authorities in Scotland the average residential home charge is higher than the national average. That needs to be considered. Forty per cent of those in Scotland who fund their residential home care privately live in areas where the average weekly charge is higher than the national average. For those people, personal care would not necessarily be entirely free. We also need to consider older people who are in nursing homes. Although we welcome the report and are prepared to give the Executive half a pat on the back, we must say to Westminster that this is a Scottish Parliament, that we will deliver free personal care for elderly people and that it cannot tell us what to do. The people who voted for a Scottish Parliament deserve better. We should tell Westminster to stop being so petty with our people and our money. We also need clarity on some of the issues that have been raised today.

I note that the First Minister has said that the review will cover boundaries and tax bases and that the report will be ready in early 2002. Will he ensure that any recommendations that the review makes will be backed up by the necessary investment? Will he give a guarantee to the Parliament and to the people of the cities on which the review will concentrate that resources will be made available to implement any solutions that are identified?

I want to make it clear that no one is against money being distributed to good causes. For a long time, I have championed and campaigned for the good cause of using schools for sports activities outwith school hours. What concerns me and other members who have spoken in the debate is that the lottery funding road that we are going down is one of pushing through Government policies without adequate consultation. I hope that the minister will look at that. Members have discussed where lottery money is going—into sport in schools, cancer care and child care. As members have said, those are all good causes. That is true, but should not those projects be funded by national money rather than propped up by lottery funding? I will dare to mention the £5 billion of lost lottery funding. In essence, that loss means that projects may fall and that in other cases, as Mary Scanlon mentioned, it will be impossible to do long-term planning. We must get away from the assumption that we can give money to good causes on a hit-and-miss basis. What will happen to lottery funding next year? Will it fall yet again? We cannot prop up Government policies through lottery funding. I want to mention the criteria that are used to decide on lottery funding for projects. The groups that seek funding must meet criteria set by the funder. That puts the cart before the horse and it is the wrong way for money to be made available. Local examples of that problem include Maryhill, Whiteinch, Partick and—dare I say it—even Govanhill, which has recently been in the news. All those communities, and many others, want to improve their facilities and yet community centres, swimming pools and schools are being closed down. If local people and their young children are to be encouraged to use their schools, sports facilities and community centres, they should be encouraged to apply for lottery funding, but they cannot get that funding because the projects for which they want it do not match the criteria. That issue has been raised by various members. I hope that the minister will consider it. I welcome any funding at all, but we should not use lottery money to prop up Government policies. My fear is that we are pushing through those policies with that money. We should have an explanation about that—it should be changed. Mary Scanlon mentioned honesty; I would use the word "dishonest".

We have just had a heated debate on the extension of the right to buy, which I do not want to revisit. However, I echo the comments of other Opposition members who have said that we must deal with reality. Amendments 89, 90 and 91 deal with reality. The reality is that the extension of the right to buy has been agreed to by the Parliament, and the amendments would set out the level of discounts and time scales for purchase of houses under the extended right to buy. I listened carefully to what John McAllion and other members said. If members are serious about the right to buy being a reality, I hope that they will support amendments 89, 90 and 91. Much has been said about pressured areas. In the constituency that I represent, most housing belongs to housing associations. Many young people cannot afford private houses and they cannot afford to buy houses under the extension of the right to buy. Amendments 89, 90 and 91 protect and extend discount levels and time scales for the housing associations that will benefit from the extension of the right to buy. The amendments give added protection to people who want to remain in their areas, but who cannot afford to buy houses under the extended right to buy. The amendments would provide fairness, sustainability and protection of the very depleted stock of public sector housing that we now have in Scotland. I ask members to consider amendments 89, 90 and 91. If members are serious about the extension of the right to buy, which has just been passed, and about the protection of public housing in Scotland, they will support the amendments. I move amendment 89.

I am not surprised by the responses by Karen Whitefield or Jackie Baillie; indeed, they were nothing short of what I expected. However, I remind them that every committee member is an individual and is not party-led, and makes proposals in that spirit. Perhaps they should remember that in future. I congratulate Karen Whitefield on having her amendment accepted at stage 2, even though my stage 2 amendment—which I have lodged again—was not. I am sure that members will make up their own minds on that particular point. I appeal again to members who might be against the extension of the right to buy—I am being very responsible by admitting that the right to buy exists. I am also responsible enough to lodge amendments 89, 90 and 91, which will help the people who cannot afford houses and who will be left with the dregs of public sector housing. We must protect those people and the public sector houses that we have left, which are few. There will  be even fewer if the housing stock transfer goes ahead in Glasgow. I plead with members who have shown sympathy with the position that the right to buy should not be extended to vote for the amendments. They would not be onerous, but would ensure only that we protect the public sector housing that is left.

Will the minister give way?

I do not wish to move amendment 77.  Amendment 77 not moved.

I will be as brief as possible. I take on board what Margaret Curran has said, but I ask her, even at this late stage, to withdraw amendment 59. As she pointed out, at stage 2, the relevant amendments received the overwhelming support of the committee. I had hoped that the minister would take on board the committee's views—this is a democracy, after all. Amendment 62 appears to be an afterthought, because ministers decided to delete part of my stage 2 amendment. I urge the minister not to move amendment 62.

I take on board the minister's comments, which I welcome, as I did at stage 2. However, the bill does not go far enough, as it should include reference to independent advice. Amendment 14 is a technical, tidying-up amendment and it is obviously acceptable. I have some worries about Tommy Sheridan's amendment 17, although I know that it was lodged with the best of intentions. The wording of amendment 17 could prevent councils from giving advice, although sometimes they are best placed to do so. Amendment 20 is necessary. It proposes that homeless people should have access to all agencies that may be able to offer assistance, not just to councils. Independent advice is available from such agencies and it is important that people can access that advice and that they know where those agencies are located. Amendment 20 is not a slight on local authorities—it is about giving homeless people a choice. They should be able to choose, independently, from a citizens advice bureau, Shelter, a lawyer, a local authority or any other agency. The amendment is important and I  hope that the minister will accept it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received concerning the proposed sale of the Kelvin Hall International Sports Arena. (S1O-3505)

Mr Wilson must contact different people in Glasgow City Council from the ones I do. I have received plenty of representations on the issue—nearly 1,000 signatures. Does he agree that the loss of the Kelvin Hall would be a major blow for Glasgow, and that we need investment in community facilities, not the sell-off of vital public assets?

I welcome any initiative aimed at improving the health of our young people and the future health of our nation. It must be recognised, however—it is a proven fact—that wealth and good health go hand in hand. As has already been mentioned, children in deprived areas are more likely to die young, which is a terribly sad fact. In Sweden, the infant mortality rate is 3.1 per cent; in Scotland, it is 5.3 per cent. If we are serious about improving the health of our young people, we must consider the infant mortality rate and do our best to improve it.  We cannot get away from the fact that poverty remains the biggest influence on child health, as has been mentioned in many speeches. No matter what the Executive has said previously, no children have been lifted out of poverty since the Executive came to power. In her opening speech, the minister mentioned best practice, yet some of our school canteens are run, dare I say it, like burger bars or other fast food outlets.

I agree that Glasgow City Council should be congratulated for trying to encourage kids to eat healthily, but I disagree with the existence of such burger bar type facilities and of Coca-Cola machines, which basically form part of a profit-making industry. I do not see why schools should be used as places for such profit-making industries to operate, with kids forced to see those machines. I ask the Executive, apart from supplying fruit to schools, to encourage schools to supply decent, nutritional meals, and to get away from the burger bar type of canteen. Glasgow City Council should indeed be congratulated for starting an initiative. The Executive should ensure that schools in other areas get away from the Coca-Cola and burger bar image, which the companies concerned clearly promote. Exercise was also mentioned. In case Johann Lamont wants to intervene again, I applaud the initiative taken by Glasgow City Council to allow free entry to swimming pools. However, I condemn the council for closing down many community facilities, as people in deprived areas did not need to pay bus fares to get to them. I also condemn the recently announced proposal to demolish the Kelvin Hall, which is important locally and nationally. I hope that all members will join me in condemning the council's plans. In winding up, I mention the breakfast clubs initiative, which appears to be going well. I say "appears" because there do not seem to be any figures on how many clubs there are, how many people use them, and where they are. I urge the minister to gather that information.

Robert Brown is right to say that extra money should be given to Glasgow. I have a generalised question, which I hope that the minister can answer. I appreciate that the methadone programme has a stabilising effect, but I am concerned about the long-term use of methadone. Is the Executive putting any measures in place to help long-term methadone users towards long-term rehabilitation?

Andy Kerr says that 60 per cent of residents in the area that I represent do not own a car. His facts and figures are wrong. He should go back and check them. I do not think that people in Kelvin or other areas are particularly interested—

I heard the word "clear" mentioned. I do not know whether it is as clear as muck, but the Liberal policies and speeches sounded like that to me. I am very pleased that I am a member of the Scottish National Party. It is clear from the speeches given by members of the other political parties that we are the only party that stands up for Scotland. David Davidson mentioned that the minister was being honest. Mr Davidson was certainly very honest—he said thank goodness for the union—whereas the Labour and Liberal members kid on that they do not really believe in the union until it comes up to a general election. I thank Mr Davidson for being honest. We know where all the other parties come from—Great Britain and that is it. They are not interested in Scotland or how the price of petrol affects the people here. The minister said that we should be honest. Well, let us be honest. Is the cost of fuel too high? Yes. Is that caused by the tax? Yes. Who is responsible for that? New Labour. I will give an example, which I will quote in litres rather than gallons. In April 2001, diesel costs 77.9p per litre, 77.1 per cent of which is tax. How is that fair? The minister said that we should consider local issues and the details that affect people's daily lives. Unfortunately, she forgot to mention urban areas, as did many members. I hear a lot about rural areas and rightly so, because they are being crucified by the costs of fuel, but so are the urban areas.

Thank you. I let Helen Eadie in for a question, not a speech. The best taxation is fair taxation. Fuel tax is not a fair tax; it is a punitive tax, which affects everybody. The minister mentioned people's daily lives. I will provide a couple of examples. In urban areas, the minister may not realise—although perhaps she does, as she is the Minister for Transport and Planning—that people travel to work, and they use cars and transport—

Yes, they use buses as well. Thank goodness somebody is listening. They take the money for travel out of their wages. Fuel tax is a punitive tax. People who are on low wages have to pay it. The tax does not discriminate, which is unfair. Take the example of a family on a low income with a small car—

Sorry, but no. That family may have a small car and a couple of children. They may want to go out for the day, for example, to take their kids swimming. They have to pay high fuel prices, and they are on a small wage. In housing schemes there are few local shops. Perhaps all there is is a mobile van. Food in those areas is expensive. People who live there have to pay the high cost of food—not just young people, but pensioners—yet the minister tells me that this is fair taxation. I asked for honesty in this debate, and the minister said that she would be honest, but she has not been. Fuel tax affects poorer people, not the folk with lots of money, and the minister does not realise that. The tax takes no account of income, which is why the SNP's motion is fair. The minister mentioned rural Scotland a lot. Yes, tourism is one of the main employers in rural Scotland. People are not coming to Scotland as a result of high fuel prices. When will the minister realise that and go to Westminster—I see that the minister is shrugging her shoulders, but that will do her no good. People out there are listening and waiting for something to be done. High fuel prices are a disgrace, and they must come down.

On value for money, capital projects and capital receipts, will the minister confirm whether income that is generated from the sale of former hospital sites is fully incorporated in the health budget? If it is, how much of the money is incorporated; if not, where does the money go?

I thank the minister for saying that he will accept the amendment, which goes to show that we agree on some things some of the time. I will confine my remarks to two areas—the running of children's homes and the concerns of people who live near those homes. Members may think that the concerns of people living near the homes should not be mentioned—they may be considered taboo. However, I think that they should be mentioned. The Parliament should listen to everyone's views and I hope that all members will listen to these views, which are not only from constituents but from care workers who work in the homes. If we do not listen to everyone's views, we will not have the opportunity to hear the opinions of the children and to learn how they got into the homes. Some people may feel that these points are controversial and that I should not raise them, but we must consider them. The people who live near homes do not always know the circumstances of the kids, and one of the complaints that I hear most often from constituents—and, as I say, from staff—is about how the homes are run. That must be addressed; it cannot be swept under the carpet. In the past couple of months, there have been tragic cases of kids in care in Glasgow. If we are concerned about the safety of children, we must be concerned about how some of the children's units and homes in Glasgow are run, and I hope that the minister will address that issue. I add that they are not all secure units. Shortage of staff in children's homes is a big problem. The minister mentioned—if I understood him correctly—a 10-point hit list. Social work staff were in that list. I welcome that. It would be most helpful if the minister, when summing up, could say whether a time scale has been set. When will measures come to fruition? In Glasgow and other areas of the west of Scotland, places are running  with a 25 per cent reduction in social staff. Some local authorities are at crisis point. They cite various reasons for the lack of staff. There are three good reasons. The first, apparently, is low wages—I say "apparently", but I will leave it to the minister to say whether it is true or not. The second is low staff morale. The third, and most important, is stress-related illness. It is not just me saying that; it has been widely reported by social workers, staff and the press. I would like the minister to consider that point. The minister said that adoptive parents would be included on the adoption policy review group. If the group is to examine social work and children's homes, I ask him to ensure that the views of social workers, carers and, if possible, children in children's homes are taken on board, because they are the ones whom the review will most affect.

I agree with Cathy Jamieson. I know about the institute. My point was that, in the 10-point plan, the minister did not expand on the issue that I am raising. If he takes on board my point, or the views of the groups that Cathy Jamieson mentioned, I would be more than happy. There is a shortage of good-quality social workers, who are required not just to run homes properly but to run them for the good of the children. Continuity is required. If people are happy in their work, they will not leave or go off with stress-related illnesses. Continuity can only be good for children in care. I have visited homes. People who listened to Cathy Jamieson's speech would say that it was tragic that kids were in homes; they would do their best to help, instead of knocking homes. I say that with all respect, because Cathy Jamieson raised the plight of children. I am trying to get the point across to the minister that if we all work together, and everyone—including residents, children and social workers—is given all the available information, that will go a long way towards implementing a good strategic plan for the decent running of homes as well as for fostering.

Data collection is important. Is the minister aware of the concerns of many people who work with the deaf, who say that because no data is collected, there are postcode prescriptions for digital hearing aids? Will she address that problem? Probably not. Will she continue to fail the health service on that issue in exactly the same way as the Government has failed the service on many other issues?

As I joined the then Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee only in November, I did not take part in the inquiry. However, after seeing the sheer volume of evidence that the committee received, I must pay tribute to the committee's hard work. Robert Brown said: "From the papers that we have, I see that we expect to receive more than 80 written responses, which is a hell of a lot."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 5 April 2000; c 983.] Irene Oldfather is right to say that children should be allowed to play football. However, in the city of Glasgow, so many community centres are being closed down that children in deprived areas are not getting that opportunity. Perhaps the minister will pick up that point in his summing-up. Drugs and deprivation are certainly linked; drugs are often said to be the scourge of society and addicts the lowest of the low. However, I could be called an addict, as I use two drugs: the only difference is that both drugs are legal—although it might be said that I sometimes abuse one of them. We must take the distinction between legal and illegal out of the debate. As Cathie Craigie pointed out, we should be targeting dealers instead of addicts. In every community—particularly deprived ones—people want to know what the police are doing about catching drug dealers.

I take Tommy Sheridan's point. I was involved in a project that took schoolchildren out to Bridge of Weir to educate them about drugs. The children were not told that some of the group were actors from the PACE Theatre Company and were taken in as they were encouraged and then threatened by those people to take drugs. When the children came out afterwards, they told the policemen and the rest of us present that they had been asked if they had wanted to take drugs. That great project helped with drugs education in most of the schools in the Renfrewshire and greater Strathclyde area. Margaret Curran knows that I am always asking questions about social inclusion partnerships. The committee clearly states that SIP funding should be hypothecated for use in projects to counter local drug misuse. Perhaps the minister should find out whether SIP funding is getting to projects, because from what people in SIP areas have told me, I do not believe that it is. The new futures fund was mentioned in relation to employment and other issues. However, the Executive's response on the matter is rather disappointing. It says: "The creation of jobs is ultimately a matter for public and private employers." We cannot just brush the matter aside in such a way; it is the Parliament's duty to create jobs for our children. Members have mentioned their experiences in the current drug wars—for example, Fiona Hyslop talked about the young woman in Fife—and the number of young people I see on the streets who are suffering through drugs makes me sad. Indeed, it makes me weep at times. However, it also makes me angry and more determined to do something about the problem. That is why I think the committee report is excellent. It is also very honest, and I ask the Executive to take on board the committee's views. In some areas, we are dealing not only with first-generation drug users, but with second-generation drug users. We must act quickly.

I welcome the many organisations in the public gallery. Some people have made their way here from as far afield as Shetland and Glasgow. They are very welcome and I appreciate the support that they have given during stage 1 of the bill. I would also point out the lack of people in the press gallery. Whenever something really important is discussed in Parliament, the press do not bother to turn up. The bill contains some good points. Margaret Curran will be glad to hear that I am praising the bill—especially the proposed measures on homelessness, which others have mentioned. Over the years, we have desperately needed to tackle homelessness. I would like to pay tribute to our staff and to Lee Bridges in particular. I would also like to pay tribute to Shelter Scotland and all the other agencies that have worked very hard to put homelessness right at the top of the political agenda. There are two areas in which I believe the bill could be improved. The first concerns the common housing register. Much of the evidence that we have heard from various agencies has suggested that we should introduce the power to compel the implementation of a common housing register. It would be best to set up that register by consensus, but many people who work in homelessness feel that ministers should have the power to require such a register to be set up, so I would like that point to be considered. The second area for improvement concerns the arbitration process when a request for housing is refused. Areas in which the bill can be improved have been pointed out time and time again. I hope that the Executive will accept the argument that a time limit should be set so that we do not clog up the arbitration process. The Executive must also make resources available so that the requirements  in those two main areas can be implemented. I will move to what is perhaps a contentious issue. Tommy Sheridan has touched on it, as has Bill Aitken—who pointed out that it was a Tory policy. I am talking about housing stock transfer. I cannot let this debate go by without mentioning it. The bill does not specifically mention housing stock transfer, although I think I saw a reference in one tiny little line. Whether we have taken evidence, spoken to people in the street, or talked to tenants organisations or councils, they have always said that the bill has been described as the housing stock transfer enabling bill.

I think that the minister has seen the SNP's proposals—and other organisations' proposals—on housing stock transfer. Ministers have seen them and can read them. I have only four minutes; Jackie Baillie had 20. I will send her a copy of the proposals; she can read them at her leisure and bring them up at stage 2. We are talking about housing stock transfer and homeless people. The issue is not about the tenants of Glasgow only. Housing stock transfer could seriously impinge on the council's ability to house the homeless—that is a fact. The minister asked what the SNP would do with the moneys if there was no stock transfer. I would like the minister to give us a guarantee that people in Glasgow in particular, but also those in other areas, will not be penalised if they vote against stock transfer. People should also be made aware that housing stock transfer is not the only show in town. Unfortunately the Executive and its ministers have not made people aware of that. I want to talk about new strategies and the new duties that councils will have if stock transfer goes ahead. Those duties have been laid out by the Executive, which is saying to councils, "You must do this." However, there has been no mention of where the extra money will come from. Where will it come from? In Glasgow, for example, will council tax payers have added to their bills the cost of paying for those new strategies? If the housing stock transfer goes ahead, will council tax payers in Glasgow also have to take on the cost of that? Will Glasgow, therefore, suffer a double whammy? That has not been explained properly by the minister. In conclusion—

In conclusion, I will say very quickly that we are talking about housing stock transfer in relation to the Housing (Scotland) Bill. The Labour party is great at mentioning John Wheatley, but will not he be turning in his grave because the Labour party—once the promoter of decent, affordable rented social housing—is introducing measures that will bring an end to such housing when it is clear that there is still a crying need for it?

rose—

I thank Margaret Curran—a woman who will take an intervention, particularly when she is summing up. Will she give us a categorical assurance that the pensioners in Glasgow will receive central heating in April 2001?

A lot of heat has been generated in the chamber in the last couple of minutes. The minister will appreciate that I cannot commend the Government for its commitment to fuel poverty, especially as it was not mentioned at stage 1 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I acknowledge that Jackie Baillie mentioned that the Executive would lodge amendments on the matter at later stages. I suppose that it is better late than never. I congratulate the minister on her lovely quotation in the Key Housing Association magazine. She said: "At the end of the day, the lady is not for turning." Where have we heard that before? The article promotes stock transfer in Glasgow, which is an old Tory policy reiterated by new Labour.

No, I have only four minutes. Much has recently been made of the £350 million. The announcement of heating for the elderly and for tenants has been reiterated on television, in the newspaper and so on. That is all fine and dandy, but when will it happen? The minister's motion says that it will be 2006.

I am answering the minister's question for her. Her motion says that it will happen in 2006.

Cathie Craigie will get her chance. If we examine the nitty-gritty, the Executive has budgeted only £110 million.

I am sure that Margaret Curran is capable of replying to my questions in her summing-up.

I shall, but I will clarify something for Cathie Craigie. In case she did not realise, what usually happens during a debate is that ministers can answer questions in their summing-up. A great press release from Age Concern  Scotland is entitled: "Free central heating: too good to be true". It probably is too good to be true, particularly for a pensioner in the middle of a stock transfer ballot. There is absolutely no guarantee that the pensioners in Glasgow will receive free central heating or that moneys have been budgeted for future years—

No, I will not take an intervention. Even if the stock transfer goes ahead, the free central heating will not be installed until 2003-04. Let us not even mention what will happen if the tenants vote no in the housing stock transfer ballot. The minister has given false hope to pensioners in the Glasgow area. "Too good to be true" is a perfect description of what is happening. Glasgow has the worst health record in Scotland; this is postcode discrimination at its worst.

No. I was going to quote from a letter that I received, but I really do not have the time. I can quote it for the minister after the debate. While we were taking evidence on this matter in the Social Justice Committee, I asked one of the interested parties—who came from all over Scotland to give evidence—whether people ever died of the cold in Sweden or Denmark. They replied that although they might die of cold, it never happens in their homes. That is a terrible indictment of what is happening in Scotland. Fiona Hyslop is absolutely right. Scotland should have its own fuel poverty strategy; it should not have to wait until Westminster gives the nod before the Government acts. I ask members to support amendment S1M-1700.2.

Will Cathy Jamieson give way?

I do not particularly congratulate the minister, although she has provided fine glossy documents that are thick, heavy and compact. We must be honest with one another, as a member said, and we must be honest not only with ourselves, but with the public. That means facing the fact that everything is not well—if members will excuse the pun—in the health service. We must take many further steps to develop the services that the Scottish people need. I would like to refer to many sections in "Our National Health", but I do not have the time. I am sure that someone will pick up on section 3, which refers to funding of services that are provided to  more than one NHS area. I look forward to scrutinising that issue further when other proposals are made after March. I am especially interested in the plight of the homeless in accessing medical care. I do not think that any member discussed that in detail, although the minister touched on it. That is an important aspect of the NHS in Scotland. Every day—especially during such weather as we are experiencing—people out there suffer and cannot access information or care from the medical profession. We must address that. I noted the minister's comments about the voluntary and professional agencies—particularly the initiative in Edinburgh and various agencies in Glasgow—that deal with homeless people, sometimes in difficult circumstances. That is an onerous task, and I congratulate those agencies. The lack of up-to-date data on the health of homeless people does not make the task easier. I acknowledge the work of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which has done a marvellous job in tracking aspects of homeless people's experience of health care in the 1990s. Those data are a wee bit out of date, so we should update them. Section 2 of "Our National Health" contains patter that mentions a health and homeless co-ordinator. I welcome that idea, but there is just a mention of it. The first part of the document refers to NHS hospitals; I look forward to scrutinising those proposals and getting back to the minister on them. The proposals and relevant action that I hope will accompany the plan should give people—whether a family or a single person—who have no permanent home access to medical services. I stress the plight of the single homeless. In my opinion and in the opinion of professionals, they are the most vulnerable people. They cannot access help. They are folk without any support. I ask the minister to consider that carefully. Those people are slipping through the net. I do not want to give any figures. I am sure that some exist, but the data are pretty out of date. Even in the current weather, the single homeless have no access to information, and access is important. They need to be able to access medical care, whether they have a serious medical problem or something that we might not consider serious, such as a need for dental care. Toothache may not be serious but, on a cold day, it may seem just as serious as other medical problems. I received a letter from councillors in Renfrewshire who say that they are establishing a one-stop shop. I congratulate them on that and I will study the initiative closely. Perhaps the minister could contact Renfrewshire Council and see the good work that it proposes to do.  We must be honest with one another, look deeply into the issues and admit that all is not well with the health service for everyone and particularly for homeless people. We do not have current figures. The figures that are available on the number of homeless households, rough sleepers and hostel and night service users are all estimates. A chief aspect of the health plan must be to obtain up-to-date figures on which to base work. There is ample evidence that single homeless people have poorer physical health than the rest of the population in Scotland. Some researchers, including some from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, have argued that the key threat to single homeless people is inadequate access to health care services. We must rectify that situation. I have a couple of suggestions. It would help if we advertised the agencies and provided information in areas that rough sleepers and the single homeless frequent. It would also help if we collected up-to-date data. I look forward to the minister's reply on how that can be co-ordinated. We must act sooner rather than later. I ask the minister to please take that on board.

The minister said that funding is based on a Scotland-wide formula. I presume that she is aware that health boards do not retain all of their capital receipts. I also presume—perhaps I presume too much—that she has received details of the case put forward by North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust.

The question is this: the trust has said that it wants to keep all of its capital receipts from the sale of hospitals. Will the minister give a categoric assurance that health boards will retain all capital receipts so that they can be reinvested? Will that apply to Glasgow royal infirmary, which is, as doctors have said, sinking like the Titanic?

The minister said that she is glad to have today's debate. I am not particularly glad that we are having the debate and I am not glad to speak in it. I am not glad about it because the debate should and need not have happened. It could easily have been avoided if the First Minister—unfortunately, he is not here—had had the courage of his convictions. This, as we all know, is the Scottish Parliament and the Executive is—in Mr McLeish's words—the Scottish Government. It is time that everyone, particularly the Scottish Government, acted on behalf of the Scottish people. I am convener of a cross-party group on the elderly. In that role, I have met numerous groups across Scotland and the topic that is raised most often is the Sutherland report and its implementation in full. I see that Malcolm Chisholm has turned to speak to one of his colleagues. Perhaps he should be listening, given that he was the former joint convener of the cross-party group. Clearly he is not listening, just as he did not listen to most of the people who spoke to him at the cross-party group.  I would like to mention a couple of people who were involved in the cross-party talks with Malcolm Chisholm and me: Phyllis Herriot and John Wilson of the Scottish Pensioners Association. Those people, among others, came to our cross-party group in the faith that we would listen to them and perhaps put forward their concerns and those of the pensioners whom they represent. Those people have been let down by the Labour part of the Scottish Government. Malcolm Chisholm should think about that. On several occasions, Henry McLeish made announcements to the newspapers about the implementation of the Sutherland report. He gave hope to such people, who took the time to visit us. He gave them hope and then snatched it away. I will give Age Concern Scotland's comment: the world is divided into two sorts of people—those who care and those who do not; those who have had to deal with the difficulties of arranging and paying for the care of older people and those who think that old age and its attendant difficulties are nothing to do with them. Tony Blair has indicated that the Government seems to believe that the majority of the electorate are in the latter category. Let us not allow the Scottish Government to be in the latter category.

I congratulate Pauline McNeill on lodging the motion for debate tonight. It shows the true strength of the Parliament that an exclusively Glasgow matter can be debated—that would never happen in Westminster. I would like to reminisce a little. Perhaps folk who are near my age will remember this. I remember getting the ferry from Govan to go on school trips to Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum. I wonder how many people know that the only place they can see the inside of a honeycomb is at that museum. I am not talking about an artsy-fartsy museum and art gallery—it is a good old-fashioned museum and gallery in which school kids can participate. The beauty of Glasgow's museums is that they are diverse. As Mike Watson said, there is the People's Palace and the Kelvingrove, but there is also the Burrell collection; there is something for everyone. I will take up Pauline McNeill's point—what exactly do we want to get from this motion? I think that we want fairness and equity. Edinburgh has three nationally funded galleries. Galleries in the south of England, such as the Tate Gallery, are nationally funded. In Glasgow, none is nationally funded; that is the crux of the problem. I hope that the Executive can give us some answers on this. People talk about Glasgow having problems, but what city does not have problems and what city does not have museums? Dundee has problems, but it also has excellent museums; the McManus Galleries in Dundee is excellent. As far as I am concerned, Glasgow is the first city—not the second—in Scotland, so its museums should be nationally funded. In Glasgow, we cannot afford to continue to charge council tax payers to keep the museums running. I do not usually praise the council, but it does a marvellous job with the museums. As Robert Brown mentioned, artefacts sometimes languish because there is not time to find out exactly what is in storage—and an audit has not been done—and to exhibit them. On the whole, the museums have moved with the times. For example, the Kelvingrove moved with the times by introducing a cafeteria area in which new pictures are put up every so often. The public can tick off which picture they would like to be hung in that area. The picture that gets the most ticks is hung there: it is a people's museum. Glasgow deserves better, so I hope that the minister will tell us that Glasgow should and will get national status for its museums. In Glasgow, we have never charged for people to enter museums. As Janis Hughes rightly said, the Government in Westminster announced yesterday  that 17—not all of them, but 17—national galleries in the greater London area and Manchester will no longer charge, yet Glasgow museums get more visitors than the science museum in Manchester. It is only fair that Glasgow should get national status for its museums.

Thank you kindly, Presiding Officer; I will do my best to keep to two minutes. I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on her tenacity and the committee on listening to her and seeing the matter through. Although I had comments on various parts of the bill, I will confine my remarks to interdicts, which form the fairest and most important way of proceeding with the proposals. Members have welcomed the fact that the proposed bill will mean that more people will have protection from abuse. However, unless the bill includes provision for interdicts, it will not have any teeth and will not reach the people whom it is supposed to reach. Trish Godman mentioned the powers of the police. I ask the minister and the committee to examine that issue carefully in connection with interdicts. If the bill allows the introduction of interdicts, it will proceed more positively.

I take on board the comments that were made by Frank McAveety and the minister, but I have concerns about the SIPs. Perhaps the minister could alleviate those concerns. Is she aware of continuing concerns about the misuse of SIP funding in the north of Glasgow? Will she guarantee that the investigations—which I understand are still going on—are being conducted thoroughly and rigorously? Will such investigations continue throughout the life of the SIPs?

On a point of order. I did not make allegations. The allegations were made by a  constituent, not by me.

The SNP welcomes the principles of the bill. In fact, we feel that such legislation is long overdue. As Fiona Hyslop said eloquently in her opening speech, the SNP lodged an amendment to the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill 18 months ago. That amendment was not agreed to, unfortunately. However, agreement to it would have meant that the provisions in the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill would have been well on their way to implementation by now. I congratulate Cathie Craigie on her bill's having reached the stage at which its general principles are to be agreed. I am sure that it will meet with the approval of all members. Fine words are all very well, but the public—the people who would be affected by the legislation—want to know exactly what agreement to the bill will mean, what it would change and what it would deliver. It would certainly mean that repossessions would decrease. As has been mentioned, 3,000 homes were repossessed in 1999. Enactment of the bill would mean that homelessness through mortgage default would decrease. There were 1,200 applicants for housing in such circumstances in 1998-99. As Jackie Baillie said, such homelessness is on the increase, so the bill should help to decrease the number of people who are made homeless in that way. The bill would give people a better opportunity to rectify defaults on their mortgages. It would change the way in which mortgages were looked at. People would be properly notified and their circumstances considered by a sheriff. For once, people would be heard—the bill would provide for a fair and honourable way to go about that. If a landlord defaulted on a mortgage but did not notify the tenant, that tenant would now be notified, were the bill to be enacted. I ask Margaret Curran to comment on funding. I know that the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux has been involved in the bill. Bill Aitken also mentioned the Edinburgh agencies. I ask ministers to consider carefully the funding of those agencies and to ensure that they are adequately resourced. Citizens advice bureaux and other agencies are the first port of call for many people; if we do not fund them properly, we will fail the very people whom we are trying to help with the bill.  Many members have mentioned disruption to families who are made homeless because they are unable to pay their mortgages. We all know that that can happen to anybody. Any one of us could lose our job or fall ill. Anything could happen—every member of society is affected by the problem. The principles and resulting legislation of any bill must be about delivery. I see Margaret Curran laughing, but—

I know why Margaret Curran is laughing. Well, I shall certainly contest her seat at the next election—she might then be one of the people I am speaking about. My sincere wish is that, through the bill, children and families will not have to go through such disruption. Losing their home can make people suffer from depression. Children are moved from their schools. The current system is crazy, when all that is needed is a couple of hours to explain the situation and a couple of months to allow people the opportunity to pay off their debts. As has been proved, they will probably do that. I welcome the principles of the bill and I look forward to its being brought to fruition.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received concerning the reorganisation of the health service in Glasgow. (S1O-2760)

The minister says that she has copied the letters to Greater Glasgow Health Board, but I wonder whether she has replied to each letter individually and how long that took her. If the minister has received 690 responses, she  will realise that people in the north and west of the city are very concerned about the closure of the Western infirmary, which would leave that end of the city without an accident and emergency department. What are the minister's concerns on the high cost of private finance initiatives, which many believe will lead to the further decline of the national health service, not only in Glasgow, but throughout Scotland?

Is the minister aware that asylum seekers and refugees who wish to volunteer their services as interpreters and helpers for the Scottish Refugee Council and for other asylum seekers are prevented from doing so because they are not allowed access to bus fares that would take them to the middle of town? They are not even allowed money for lunch, which means that they are prevented from helping out. Does the minister agree that that situation is detrimental to asylum seekers and refugees and to the voluntary sector? Furthermore, will she give me an assurance—

Can I finish the question?

I will make it quick. Will the minister make representations in order to remove that anomaly, which is happening in Glasgow in particular?

On a point of order. Will the Presiding Officer give a ruling on the release of statements and information, as was requested? Although the press statement has been requested, no member in the chamber has received it. No copies are available. I think that the Executive is holding Parliament in contempt.

I apologise for my sore throat. I welcome the minister's announcements, but I would have liked more money to have been made available. Perhaps he could persuade the drinks companies that they should, as Shona Robison said, put some of their profits into an advertising campaign or give it to the Executive. They have a responsibility to the consumers of their products. We all know that alcohol abuse is a serious problem in Scotland—there is no denying that. We have the facts and figures. Colleagues will give the chamber those facts and figures, which relate to crime, illness, age groups and so on. However, I will talk about the human suffering that is caused by over-indulgence—as I call it—in drink. Most members will have been affected—personally or in their constituency—in one way or another by the consequences of somebody having a drink problem. We must ask why Scotland has this terrible drink problem and this culture of heavy drinking. In pubs, many men—young and not so young, as Malcolm Chisholm mentioned—buy round for round. Is that done to uphold a macho image? Are they too scared to say no to their friends and colleagues? Something must be done about it. Why do women—young and old—drink over the limit? Why do they drink constantly and abuse their health and that of the people around them? Are they trying to hide something? Is it for comfort? Is it to try to emulate men? We must find out the facts and figures. I hope that the information that we get from the strategy will produce answers to those questions. As  colleagues have said, we will never be able to tackle the problem until we get to the root of it, which I sincerely hope we will do. Misuse of alcohol affects not only the person who drinks; it affects those around them, sometimes in terrible ways. Take the example of families who cower in their homes because they are terrified of somebody who misuses drink coming home at night. It could be a parent or even a child. They are terrified and do not know what to expect, but they know for sure that what they are going to get will not be pleasant. Consider the child whose parents have an alcohol problem. That child cannot tell parents, teachers or their friends about what is happening at home. The child might under perform at school. Who can they go to? They cannot cope. They are frightened to bring their friends home because one of their parents might be drunk. What sort of future does that offer young children? We have those problems in Scotland and we must tackle them. Many people lose their jobs through abuse of alcohol. Consider the people who lose their houses through alcohol abuse. It affects not only them, but their families. People lose their jobs, their homes and their self-respect. Unlike Keith Raffan, I welcome the strategy, even if it is 18 months late. If we can get this right in Scotland, Parliament will have something to be proud of. I will endorse the strategy happily and I hope that we can stop this scourge.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is not a prerequisite to put forward what the business will be—it is not necessary. That is a point of order.

Tommy Sheridan talked about our having to listen to his dulcet tones. I never mind doing that, because he usually has something sensible to say. This proposal has been on the line—if members will excuse the pun—since the early 1990s. In my speech in the debate on crossrail and the direct line to Glasgow airport, I said that that proposal had been on the cards for 30 years. Tommy Sheridan is asking not for a light rail scheme to be implemented right away, but for an investigation that should have taken place in 1995-96. That is not too much to ask. If we had a light rail system around the George Square area of Glasgow, it would be absolutely fantastic. Not only would it help people travelling in and out of Glasgow and to peripheral schemes, but it would bring tourism into the area. If members have ever tried driving around George Square and been caught up in the traffic, they will know that it is absolutely unbelievable. A light rail system, coupled with crossrail and a direct rail link to Glasgow airport, would make Glasgow one of the best cities—if not the best city—of the 21 st century. That is what we are looking for from today's debate.  I see that Glasgow MSPs from the Conservative party and the Liberal Democrats, along with Tommy Sheridan and I, are intending to speak in today's debate. Unfortunately, I do not see any Glasgow Labour MSPs present. Given that I sent a letter to every Glasgow constituency and regional MSP asking them to support an integral transport system in Glasgow, I would have thought that they would have come along for this debate. If we support this proposal, along with the other two schemes that I have mentioned, we can put Glasgow on the map. Tommy Sheridan referred to the money that John Prescott has made available. Where is our share of the £CAPut!' billion—£1.9 billion, as Tommy rightly said? Does the minister intend to ask John Prescott for that money to fund a light rail system? Previously I asked the minister about the £1.88 billion that John Prescott had allocated for transport. What representations have been made to him for money to fund crossrail and the airport link? People in Glasgow and Scotland are crying out for this proposal. It would regenerate not only the heart of Glasgow, but areas such as Maryhill and Easterhouse, connecting them to the heart of the city. As we know, not everyone lives in the heart of the city. Glasgow is made up not only of Glaswegians who live in the city centre, but of thousands of people who live further out. They need affordable access to the city, which they are not getting at present. If members go to George Square, they will see that it is chock-a-block with bus lanes. I do not dislike buses, but there are so many of them on the streets of Glasgow that they have started to take precedence over all other forms of transport. I ask the minister seriously to consider investigating this proposal. I hope that she will come up with a workable solution—not just a light rail system, but an integrated transport system for the Glasgow area.

I thank MSPs and members of the public who are staying to contribute and listen to the debate. Although my motion is in two parts, it is about joining those parts together and, by doing so, regenerating vital areas of Glasgow and beyond— [Interruption.]

I will not repeat my comments, other than to thank the MSPs and members of the public who have stayed behind to listen to the debate. As I said, although the motion is in two parts, it is essentially about incorporating those two parts and devising a plan that will regenerate vital areas of Glasgow and beyond, ensuring economic progress for people and for the country. I will begin by talking about the crossrail scheme and explaining what it entails. Crossrail is the collective name that is applied to the north-south rail route across Glasgow, to the Tron line, which is an existing freight line, and to a short section of new track from West Street to link up with the East Kilbride, Barrhead and Cathcart circle lines. The link has been on the drawing board, believe  it or not, since 1968. I shall give members a brief history. In 1968, the greater Glasgow transport study recommended completion of the line, which required 200 yd of new track at High Street-Bell Street, to connect with existing freight lines. In 1974, British Rail, in conjunction with the local authorities, applied to the Scottish Office to proceed with those recommended projects. In 1975, the Scottish Office refused to go ahead with the crossrail. In 1991, the completion of Glasgow's north-south missing link was once again revived by Strathclyde Region, enhanced by an additional link from Paisley at West Street. A new Partick-style interchange was proposed for West Street and for Glasgow Cross. In 1995, a provisional parliamentary order was applied for for the crossrail scheme, indicating the seriousness of plans to proceed with the scheme. All members can count, so they will have worked out that it is more than 30 years since the crossrail was first mooted, yet nothing at all has been done about it. More specific crossrail proposals are on the table, but various transport authorities seem to have put it on the back burner. The shadow strategic rail authority has already offered grant aid towards the £10 million cost. A similar offer has already been accepted for Edinburgh's £9 million crossrail project. Why was Glasgow not considered and why is it being left out? Let us look at what the crossrail proposals would entail. There would be a connection between High Street-Bell Street and the existing freight lines. That could be up and running in 18 months and would allow all north Glasgow suburban electric trains to run directly on to Paisley, Ayr, Largs, Gourock and Wemyss Bay. The estimated cost of such a project is £10 million. That is a very small cost as far as I am concerned. The second phase of the scheme would link up with Cathcart, Neilston, Kings Park, East Kilbride and Barrhead. Those places could also be linked into Glasgow airport, which I shall talk about in more detail later. The airport link could be completed as a third phase of the project. The latest figures for the whole crossrail project estimate the cost at £100 million. Compared with the £2 billion cost of the Jubilee line, I do not think that that is an awful lot of money. What would the crossrail mean for us? Cross-city travel would be enhanced. New interchange stations would be constructed at West Street and High Street, which would increase the number of trips and involve only one simple interchange. It would also provide work for construction workers and help to regenerate the area. City centre access would be enhanced, with new stations providing easy access to High Street, Queen Street and Charing Cross. A new station at  Glasgow Cross would provide enhanced access from the rail network. The Glasgow Cross building, which is very old, was offered to the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive in 1996 for the princely sum of £1 on condition that it be made into a rail station. I have already mentioned social and economic regeneration. Much of the east and south of the city has become run down and neglected. In many areas, the buildings are derelict. I lodged the motion for this debate because many local residents and traders have written to me asking when the scheme is going to get off the ground. A new station at Glasgow Cross would regenerate the whole area, particularly the east end of Glasgow. It would open up the area not only to local travel but to long-distance travel. Having covered the crossrail link, I shall go on to talk about what I call the missing link—the Glasgow airport link—which would complement the crossrail proposal. It would enable services to access the airport from the north and west of Glasgow via Springburn, and would link to Edinburgh, Stirling, Aberdeen and beyond. It is a fantastic project, but I do not understand why it never seems to get off the ground. It was first mooted in 1990, with serious proposals first being submitted in 1995. A site has been identified and Railtrack's 2000 network management statement for Scotland details that a rail link to Glasgow airport would cost around £60 million. Strathclyde Passenger Transport and Railtrack have developed a feasibility study and the Scottish Executive has commissioned consultants to carry out a rail access study. We should favour this proposal. Why do we need the link? It is vital to the economic regeneration not only of Glasgow, but of the surrounding areas and, indeed, of the whole of Scotland. A study carried out in 1997 by the Association of European Airlines indicated that any airport with 2 million passengers should consider a rail link and that any airport with 3 million passengers should have a rail link. Glasgow has 6.4 million passengers, but to date nothing has been done. In 1991, a rail link to Stansted airport was completed. At that time, Stansted had 1 million passengers. Now, it has 11 million. Last year its passenger lists rose by 17 per cent, while Glasgow's increased by just 2 per cent. It is vital that Glasgow is allowed to compete on equal terms. We want Glasgow to flourish. I have put forward my arguments as well and as sincerely as I can. I hope that the Executive will take these plans on board and take all the necessary steps to ensure that they come to fruition. As I have already said, £2 billion was spent on the rail link down south. Why cannot we in Glasgow and Scotland access moneys? Like  everyone else in Britain, we pay taxes. We should be entitled to get that money back. This link is essential, as we do not want to be left behind. I ask the minister to consider the proposal carefully and to give me her answer.

Iain Smith mentions COSLA and local authorities. We know that local authorities have a statutory duty to provide moneys for the cultural strategy. If local authorities cannot provide those moneys, would it not be appropriate for the Scottish Executive to put extra money into local authorities?

I thank  Tricia Marwick for securing the debate, and I welcome the MS sufferers and members of the MS Society who are in the gallery. I have four friends who unfortunately suffer from MS. Two of them are young women, one of whom had a baby two years ago. I was struck by the devastating effect that MS has on those families, and by the speed at which the disease can strike. From being a young and energetic person five or six years ago, my friend is now housebound and her relatives have to look after her and her baby. I am sure that people in the gallery have similar stories. I have some practical points for the minister, which were put to me by the many people I met in the Hub. I spoke to a lady from central area, where 10 sufferers operate a home-based telephone link. It has a freephone number that people can call up—not just sufferers, but experts too—to ask for advice. I would like that service to be extended. That is a worthwhile cause; perhaps the minister can tell us how many such services operate in Scotland. The point came across strongly that GPs do not understand what these people go through and diagnose the wrong conditions. As Donald Gorrie said, many people are told that they are suffering from a form of mental illness and, because of that, there is a catastrophic delay in prescribing drugs and telling them that they have MS. GPs should be made more aware of the condition so that they can make an early diagnosis. I ask the minister to consider those points.

I hear what the minister is saying. Does he mean that when people are unable to drive on roads in winter, he can make the excuse that road gritters—which get rebated fuel—use the roads only occasionally?

We have heard the usual rants from members of the Lib-Lab coalition: it seems that everybody is wrong but them. It has been stated that fuel tax is there to help the environment, but it has nothing to do with the environment. When someone fills their car up with £60-worth of petrol, £45.60 of that is tax. The tax is all about filling up the coffers at Westminster. First, I want to focus on the effect on our public services of the punitive level of fuel duty that members have spoken about, especially its effect on the emergency services, which are already affected by years of underfunding by Governments of various shades. Millions of pounds have drained away through spiralling fuel costs; all that money is siphoned off to line Gordon Brown's war chest. It is estimated that 80 per cent of emergency service funding, for police, fire and ambulance services, goes straight back to the Treasury in fuel duty. That is a ridiculous situation. Money is being given with one hand and taken back with the other. I do not see the sense in that at all. Accountants' figures revealed recently that Scotland's biggest police force, Strathclyde police, had overspent by £500,000 by the end of the financial year as a result of rising fuel costs. Since Labour came to power, the police force has spent £14 million on fuel, £11 million of which has gone straight back to the coffers of the Treasury in London. We can ill afford to lose that money; the situation is crazy. All too recently, we heard about police manpower shortages, but we could afford to employ more police officers if the Executive dealt with the issue of fuel taxation.

No, thank you. Similarly, the fire service has incurred increasing costs. Fire board costs have risen from £4.28 million to £5.07 million and a significant proportion of that increase is due to increased fuel duties. The health service also loses money that it can ill afford to lose. The cost of fuel for ambulances has risen from £2.77 million to £3.2 million—a rise of 16 per cent over the past three years. Of that money, 80 per cent is siphoned off from health service budgets to the Treasury. That is another ridiculous situation.

No, I shall not give way. My second point concerns an issue that I have raised before in the Parliament, and that I shall  probably raise again. Many people in the public sector are pushing to be allowed to use red diesel rebated fuel, which is taxed at only 3p a litre, in contrast to standard diesel, which is taxed at 52p a litre. Red diesel is available to tractors, diggers, road rollers, mobile cranes and even snow ploughs. How can the Executive justify the fact that police cars, fire engines and ambulances must pay 52p a litre in tax when those other vehicles pay only 3p a litre in tax? That situation is a wartime relic—perhaps the Executive is one too—and is no longer justified. It should be stopped now.

I am sorry, but I will not give way. Andy Kerr has had his say, and the minister can deal with my point on red diesel in summing up. If red diesel was made available to public services, millions of pounds could be saved. If the ambulance service had used rebated fuel over the past three years, £7 million could have been saved. That money could also have been used in our hospitals—in the heart transplant unit of the Glasgow royal infirmary, or in the Glasgow western infirmary, which is crying out for radiotherapy machines and for funding for updated cancer research. The money could even have been used to reduce the waiting lists for digital hearing aids. However, the Executive does not seem to see that. Members may laugh, but the people are not laughing; they are crying out for help. This is not funny. As a matter of urgency, the Executive—or the coalition as I prefer to call it—must make representations to end this absurd anomaly. It is in power; let us see it do something about this matter.

I am not a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee but I am a member of the Public  Petitions Committee, which first received the petition from the Carbeth hutters. I would like to thank the Justice and Home Affairs Committee for going all the way with this one and for instigating this debate. We have heard from various parties about the history of the hutters movement, not only in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom; someone mentioned the hutters movements in France as well. We have heard concerns about what happened to hutters after the war. Robin Harper pointed out that the community at Carbeth is the biggest hutter community in Scotland. Those hutters are due a just hearing from this Parliament. I hope that, at the end of our deliberations, the result will also be just. I do not think that the Executive's response to the Carbeth hutters' petition has been mentioned yet, but I have read it. We all know that, as Sylvia Jackson said, new legislation must be compatible with the European convention on human rights. The minister talked about the consultation period, but Sylvia Jackson and Christine Grahame pointed out—although Brian Monteith may not agree with this—that there did not seem to be as much consultation with the hutters as there was with the landlords. That should be clarified in a further report—or just now, if the minister wishes.

I am glad that there will be a meeting with the Carbeth hutters. The minister will note from the figures that there is a big gap between the numbers of landowners and hutters responding to the research. Perhaps as a percentage more hutters than landowners responded. We have heard much of the history of the hutters and what they have been through. As Gordon Jackson and Pauline McNeill said, it is not just the Carbeth hutters who are affected, but I think that the Carbeth hutters are a special case.  The Carbeth site was set up in the 1920s to enable inner-city dwellers who did not have much money to get out of the smoke and grime of Glasgow and into the country. Ever since, the hutters have taken advantage of that opportunity. Brian Monteith might disagree with me, but I think that the circumstances of this case and the suffering of the people who are involved make the Carbeth hutters a special case. Most of these people are working class and come from the cities. Generations have followed a tradition that has continued for more than 50 years. Families have been brought up there and have enjoyed the freedom of spending a weekend or a week there. They have paid for their huts and done an enormous amount of work on them. They own their huts and are very proud of them, but now they are being chased off the ground. The minister has clarified what is happening with the consultation period. He said that, although the consultation document will be produced at Christmas, there will not be time to include measures in the land reform bill, which will be introduced in February. However, we have still not been told when he will comment on the consultation with a view to introducing legislation.

I thank the minister for that intervention, although I do not agree with him. I think that measures on this subject should be introduced into the land reform bill in February. If legislation cannot be drafted, is there anything else that the Parliament can do in the meantime to alleviate the plight of the hutters? Perhaps a moratorium is too much to ask for. The hutters face court injunctions, mass evictions and massive rent increases. Robin Harper mentioned the ECHR. I am almost sure that the hutters have a good case to take to the European Court of Human Rights. I pay tribute to the tenacity of the hutters.

I welcome the minister's U-turn on the completion of the M74. It is not before time. I have concerns, however, about what I would call the downgrading of the project. The minister referred to the Kingston bridge and the M74 as strategic routes, to the fact that they are not yet connected and to there being only three lanes in each direction. How will the east end of Glasgow be affected? The minister was asked about a start date and a completion date. To be perfectly honest, she did not give an answer. Can she give us some indication of when the work will start and when the work will be completed? Can she confirm that the work will not be funded through a private finance initiative or through workplace charging in Glasgow? The M25 was not funded that way and I do not see why the M74 should be.

What about the money?

Will the minister give way?

I do not know whether I should be angry, frustrated or sad—possibly all three—when I listen to Iain Gray and Des McNulty defending the indefensible. I was confused when I listened to the Liberal Democrats'  contribution, as I think most members were. Nora Radcliffe said that our country is rich and that we should look after our old people, but that we must wait for Westminster to give us the green light to do that. That is unbelievable. Part of the Lib-Lab amendment "calls upon the Executive". I remind members on the front bench that they are the Executive. Do they look in a mirror and decide what they will say to one another? Members of the Executive should not have to lodge an amendment to call on the Executive, because they are the Executive and should be doing something about the problem. The amendment calls upon the Executive "to continue, over time, to work towards fulfilling the Royal Commission's objectives". If that is not a cop-out, I do not know what is. There is no mention of time scale and so on. Perhaps the Executive thinks that people will be impressed by its announcements about central heating for the elderly, but I can assure it that those announcements will not wash with the elderly, who have much more intelligence than the Executive gives them credit for. Eighteen months after the publication of the royal commission report, we are still waiting for the Lib-Lab Executive to move on implementation. The Executive's failure to take a bold and decent step to implement the report may be one of the reasons why the people I speak to in the streets are completely disillusioned with the Lib-Lab pact. The Executive has the opportunity to change personal care provision and to help people make their lives real once again, but is failing miserably to use it. The SNP recognises that the present system is completely unfair and unsustainable. The Sutherland report makes that clear. I ask the Executive—and particularly its Liberal cohorts—to think again and to support the Conservatives' motion. There are many cases of people caught in the savings trap, but I highlight one. An elderly woman, whose daughter wrote to me, is paying £290 a week for residential care. Her mental health has deteriorated and she has to move to a more suitable place, which will cost £350 a week. Had she broken her hip she would have been taken into hospital—that would have been paid for. However, because her problem, unfortunately, is a mental health one—dementia—she does not get any help.

Iain Gray tries spin once again. The lady would probably languish in hospital, because there would be no help for her once she was released. That is the big problem. The Executive does not seem to understand that local authorities do not have the moneys at the moment. The Executive could make the moneys available, implement the Sutherland report's recommendations and make life much better for elderly people, but it will not do so. The lady to whom I referred is deemed unfit to live at home with her family. She needs trained staff to change her dressings, to take her to the toilet and to help dress her. The Executive may call it fair to charge for those services, but I do not, and nor do the public. The individual should not be left to bear such costs. It is essential that the Executive takes measures to remove anomalies from the system and to help those who are trapped. It is a disgrace that in a modern, developed and wealthy society, pensioners who have contributed to that society throughout their working lives are forced to pay for long-term care. The Presiding Officer is signalling me to wind up, so I will conclude by telling the Executive that the scandal must end. Ministers have the opportunity to do something about that.

I am confused. Is Nora Radcliffe saying that she will not support the implementation of the Sutherland report in the Scottish Parliament?

rose—

I want to concentrate on three of the Executive's key aims regarding the housing stock transfer. The first is  securing investment in the houses. We all want to secure investment, but the minister's proposal is not the only one that should be on the table. There are other ways of modernising the houses, some of which would keep them under council control. Believe it or not, there would be more investment in the houses—particularly in Glasgow—if the Executive and the housing committee of Glasgow City Council had the will to challenge the existing London Treasury rules. The second aim is stable and affordable rents, which—by the minister's admission—can be guaranteed for only five years. As Margaret Curran pointed out in her opening speech, benefit rules could change. What would happen then? What would happen to affordable guaranteed rents if the lenders and the bankers decided that the houses were no longer a good investment? What if the houses were no longer deemed viable? What if the cost of repairs and building work spiralled?

We are talking about thousands and thousands of homes being transferred in the city of Glasgow. Scottish Homes and small housing associations are an entirely different issue. The report mentions that there is no evidence that the Treasury compels Scotland's Government to control rents. The Executive has the power to make a change, but it does not have the will. The third aim is community ownership. Karen Whitefield mentioned the promotion of community empowerment, community control and community ownership. At the moment, more than 90,000 houses are in council ownership in Glasgow. Some 13,000 of those will be demolished. I want to know where the tenants of those houses will go. Like many Glasgow MSPs, I have been around the country, and Glasgow in particular, to meet tenants and go to public meetings. The tenants are terrified that they will be scattered to the four winds. Cathie Craigie mentioned Queen's Cross Housing Association in the Maryhill area. Tenants in that area would love to go to Queen's Cross. Will the minister give us a guarantee that those communities will not be torn apart and that the residents will be allowed to live in a community with improved houses if the stock transfer goes ahead? The minister is shaking her head at me, but I wish that she or someone else from the Executive had turned up at the public meetings to offer that guarantee. When we talked to housing associations, we were told that they could not take those houses over. Tenants were told that,  because of factors such as residual debt, they could not be sure of being able to stay in their communities. That is a fact. If we get that guarantee today, perhaps some of those tenants will be happier. I want to talk about local councillors' responsibilities. Will there be genuine liaison between councillors and tenants in the huge organisation that is proposed? As members who have been councillors will realise, councillors find it difficult to get anything out of Scottish Homes or housing associations regarding tenancies or anti-social tenants. It was easier when councils controlled the homes. Will the minister assure us that liaison will be guaranteed? The Executive has set up executive councils in other areas to ensure that councillors are not involved in outside bodies, so why will this situation be different? On empowerment, where is the plan B that will come into effect if the tenants vote no? If they vote no, does that mean that there will be no improvements and no partnership? Or are the tenants being told that they have no genuine choice and that they had better vote yes or else?

Will the member give way?

Margaret Curran has frequently mentioned community ownership. Does she agree with George McKie of the Edinburgh Tenants Federation? He said: "My home is in community ownership. It is owned by all the community. That is the true meaning of community ownership."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 24 November 1999; c 363.]

Does Margaret Curran agree with what George McKie said?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received concerning the allocation of social inclusion partnership funds in Glasgow. (S1O-2216)

Is the minister aware—I presume that she is if she has received individual applications—that in some areas, particularly in the north of Glasgow, some groups have waited more than a year for decisions, then have been asked to resubmit their applications? They may eventually not even receive a grant. In Drumchapel, one such group has withdrawn its application. Drumchapel, an area that desperately needs social inclusion partnership funds, is fed up with the way it has been treated. Has the minister heard any other concerns on that matter?

Unlike Karen Whitefield, I cannot say that the Transport (Scotland) Bill will introduce a revolution in transport in Scotland. I remind MSPs and members of the public that this bill is called the Transport (Scotland) Bill—it is not a bill for local bus services. I listened to the minister's speech and to those from the back benches, and, quite honestly, I thought that they were advertisements for buses. There was absolutely no mention of anything else. The minister said in her opening remarks that buses should be people's first choice. Well, bus lanes are fine in appropriate areas and at appropriate times, but they are not the be-all and end-all of Scotland's transport system. We cannot travel everywhere on a bus; subways and trains are involved as well. In case the minister has forgotten, I remind her that buses also cause pollution and congestion. When she sums up, perhaps she can answer a question about the document, "Travel Choices for Scotland", which was endorsed by the First Minister. Why did she not use that document to call for an integrated transport system? She is saying that we should take the cars off the road to get rid of congestion, but we will never do that without a proper integrated transport system. The bill does not address that problem. All it says is  how to get on and off a bus. Sarah Boyack mentioned the possibility of Henry McLeish publishing some sort of document. I will believe it when I see it. There is no mention in the bill of plans to implement schemes that are vital to Scotland's transport system. There is no mention, for example, of the M74 extension, of the Glasgow airport link or of the Glasgow north-south crossrail scheme. Why are those schemes not mentioned? The plans exist, and some of them have been costed. All that is missing is the commitment of ministers. The bill has been published without the Executive involving itself in plans for those important parts of the transport system in Scotland. The crossrail scheme was investigated and talked about away back in the 1960s. It was on the drawing board, it had been costed and people had put in bids for it. In the Westminster Parliament, speeches on the Crossrail Bill indicated that there was a serious intention to proceed with the scheme—but nothing has been done since 1995. Why? The crossrail scheme would get rid of practically all the congestion in Glasgow city centre and would open up deprived areas of the city, north, south and west, to businesses and consumers, making life easier for residents in those areas. The Glasgow airport link is a necessity if we are to compete in the modern world, but nothing has been said about that project. There has been no movement towards implementing those plans. Stansted airport had a direct airport link in 1991. In the past year, its passenger volume has risen by 29.4 per cent, carrying 11 million passengers. At Glasgow airport, passenger volume has risen by just 2.2 per cent. Does not that say it all? It is not just buses we want. Of course we want more buses, but we also want a better transport system. We want a transport bill for Scotland, not a local authority bill. Kenny MacAskill said that we are going to Westminster with a begging bowl, but John Prescott has the money we need. Let us look at what Westminster has spent taxpayers' money on. Billions of pounds have been spent on the Jubilee line in London. We pay for that. We pay for the Thames bridge, and it is not even working properly yet. We also pay for the millennium dome and for Portcullis House. We pay for all that through our taxes, so why is the Executive not demanding some of that money back? Scottish taxpayers have paid for spending down south. Why should we not have some of the money that we have paid to implement the schemes that are important to the transport system in Scotland?

Regarding the karaoke, was one of the songs "Things Can Only Get Better"?

Does the minister agree that such schemes as the Glasgow airport direct link and the north-south crossrail scheme will be a massive boost for the economy of Glasgow and areas further afield? Will she give an assurance that she will meet representatives of transport authorities? She has mentioned that applications should be forthcoming by 7 August—and she may get some answers—but will she assure us that, when she meets the transport authorities, she will obtain the support and investment necessary for those long-term plans to proceed?

Will Robert Brown take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what research it is currently undertaking into levels of crime against elderly people. (S1O-2066)

I thank the minister for his answer. Is the minister aware of the concerns on that issue of groups that represent the elderly? He may mention that document, but the lack of published research is a cause for great concern.

On a point of order. Mr Wilson is filming at the moment and  has tendered his apologies to the chair.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make Glasgow a special case and grant it additional funds to implement the new licensing system for houses in multiple occupancy. (S1O-2017)

I hear what the minister says, but with the massive cuts in local government funding, I cannot see how it is possible for the Glasgow City Council scheme to be self-financing. Surely the minister is aware that more officers are needed to enable that scheme to be implemented, and that that will cost more money. Does he agree with the results of the recent Evening Times poll, in which 93 per cent of readers said that Glasgow should receive extra money and should be a special case?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I know we do not want to usurp local government's powers, but can we not ask councils, through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities or by writing to them, to set up a register of houses that are already adapted? That would save money that is being wasted on removing adaptations and putting homes back into the letting pool. Is there something the Parliament and the Executive can do to encourage councils to keep houses for disabled people?

I take Robert Brown's point about houses that have been converted for disabled people. In my years as a councillor, houses were adapted for disabled people but, when the people moved or died, the adaptations were pulled out. Would it not be possible for local authorities to keep a register of houses that had been adapted for disabled people? Putting in adaptations and then pulling them out is a waste of money, and houses that have been adapted can be taken out of local authority control.

We need to be absolutely clear about what Wendy Alexander is saying today. The press release talks about a £25 million package but, as Fiona Hyslop has pointed out, the amount that is involved is not £25 million. I am glad that the minister has admitted that. Will she further admit that the moneys that she has announced for Glasgow today could have been used six months ago? Why is that money being announced only today? This may sound cynical, but it seems rather strange that the minister makes the announcement on the final day on which the Parliament is in Glasgow. Will she say why the money was announced today and not six months ago?

If I was a minister, I probably could have announced it yesterday—her press release was obviously put out yesterday but was not to be released until today. That does not wash. The SNP—

I did not say that it was released yesterday.

If I was a minister, I would know exactly what was going to be announced today. Margaret Curran can read the transcript—I am glad that I am getting her riled, as it is good to get some reaction.

As I was going to say, the SNP welcomes any initiative, but we want an honest announcement, not a recycled, rehashed announcement, as the minister normally gives us.

I said "normally".

No, I do not want another intervention, thank you very much. I want the minister to look at some facts.

The minister will have time when she sums up. In Glasgow, there are more than 13,000 homeless people, 78 per cent of whom have been victims of crime. I accept what the minister says about hostels, which are not always the best place to put people, particularly the most vulnerable. In his speech, Robert Brown highlighted the fact that people have many differing problems. That is why I welcome, and think that everyone should welcome, the initiative launched today by Strathclyde police to examine different ways in which to handle rough sleepers. Although I welcome the Executive's initiative, I have some concerns, which I hope the minister will answer when she sums up. In particular, I am concerned about the 250,000 furnished flats. It is great to get people out of hostel accommodation into their own homes, but it has been proven that if the Executive goes ahead with the housing stock transfer there will not be enough houses for people who are on the waiting list.

It is proven in certain records that I have. I will get them out and the member can have  a look.

Excuse me, let me answer. If the member looks at the literature on the housing stock transfer, she will see that it says that there are not enough houses. Once the housing stock transfer goes ahead, houses will be demolished. There will not be enough—

The member can look at the leaflet. I will send her one. May I carry on?

Yes, Kenny.

Thank you, Kenny. The difference is that we in the SNP can add and subtract. All Labour can do is spin. [Interruption.] May I carry on?

That was rather—

May I make a point of order?

I will try to come to the point. The problem is further exacerbated, as local government social work departments and agencies, which provide the specialist back-up, find themselves under increasing pressure because this Executive is cutting local authority spending. I ask the minister to address that point when she sums up. The Scottish Executive must recognise that the problems of rough sleepers can be solved only if the agencies that provide the support are properly funded and resourced.

To ask the Scottish Executive which prisons are currently involved in the manufacture of goods for commercial enterprises. (S1O-1839)

Assuming that those ventures are run as a business and therefore generate profit, how much profit is made in each of those prisons, and where does the money go?

rose—

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not make that suggestion in my intervention, as Richard Simpson claimed. I made it in my speech.

I want to put on the record that this situation does not affect only Glasgow, but the whole of Scotland. It is imperative that the heart unit remains in Scotland. Kay Ullrich has asked some searching questions. I hope, for the benefit of those awaiting and receiving treatment in Glasgow or in Newcastle, that we can get the answers to those questions. In a press release, the minister said: "I am pleased that the recent cloud of uncertainty  surrounding the future of the service has now been lifted." Yet in reply to my questions last Thursday, the minister said: "There are issues about the past."— [ Official Report , 18 May 2000; Vol 6, c 841.]  The minister cannot have it both ways. The minister's department is responsible for the funding of this unit. That means that she should know exactly what is going on. It is not good enough for her to come along here today and tell us that she realised the trouble that the unit was in only when the press made her aware of it. She should have known of the problems months, if not years, ago. Why was the situation not picked up on sooner? Why was Mr Pillay, a surgeon who is now in Newcastle, told that there was no chance of a permanent job when he asked to stay in Glasgow? We are now told that a surgeon is being recruited. If the minister had had her finger on the pulse, she would have been able to tell that surgeon that he could have that job. The minister is shaking her head but that is not good enough. We need answers. The trust says that the unit will be operational within a year. Neither I, the public nor the surgeons on the front page of the Evening Times believe that we can wait a year. Patients must be seen before the end of this year. Will the minister give the Parliament, and the people of Glasgow and Scotland a pledge that this unit—

I am sorry, I have only three minutes. Will the minister give a pledge that this unit will be operational by the end of this year and ensure that the facility remains in Glasgow and in Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Throughout Phil Gallie's speech, I have not heard him mention violence against women once.

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will Angus MacKay give way?

I have a simple question for Mr McLetchie: is he or is he not in favour of allowing Mike Tyson to enter this country?

I thank Dorothy-Grace Elder for ensuring that a debate on the matter has taken place. Gordon Jackson said that it is not debated enough and does not get enough publicity because it is not politically correct. In this case, never mind politically correct; it is humanely correct to address the problem. Dorothy-Grace Elder outlined the real problems facing staff and prisoners in Barlinnie and other prisons. Unlike her and Gordon Jackson, I have not visited many prisons, but I have visited Barlinnie in my role as an MSP. I admire and applaud the staff and prisoners there for putting up with terrible conditions. In this day and age, for people in overcrowded jail cells to have to slop out is both inhumane and demeaning, and we must do something about it. Overcrowding is a problem; if we consider that together with slopping out, is it any wonder that sometimes some poor people cannot put up with it any longer and attempt suicide to get out? It is a terrible indictment on our society—particularly in Scotland—that we have the largest prison population in Europe. If we are to put more folk into jail—I would hope that we might try to release people from jail and rehabilitate them—we should at least make the living conditions decent for them. Conditions should be such that prison officers can actually work there. The prison officers are doing a marvellous job. They are doing their best and are trying to rehabilitate people. We all know that people are put in prison as punishment, and everyone outside says that that is what they deserve. Some people fall into the trap through no fault of their own, possibly through their socialisation or the way in which they are brought up. If they are sent to prison, I hope that they can come out rehabilitated so that they can be better citizens. They should not be kept in worse conditions than those for animals. That is not the way in which to make someone more civilised. I applaud Dorothy-Grace Elder for initiating the debate. I ask the minister to consider the suggestions—particularly Phil Gallie's—in regard to the money that could be invested in the Scottish Prison Service. I ask him to do something to end the appalling conditions.

I am sure that the minister was aware that there was only one heart transplant surgeon at Glasgow royal infirmary, so why did she not do anything about that? Why were contingency plans not put in place  years ago, instead of addressing the problem now? Will the minister admit to the chamber that this situation was handled with sheer incompetence? She should do the decent thing and resign.

We do not have a service.

I am pleased that the Executive has chosen my member's motion for the first debate of the  Parliament in Glasgow. I thank it for that. [Interruption.] I am sorry that some members are mumbling, but it was a member's motion—I do not want to quarrel with members. I will concentrate on an area that has been sorely neglected over the years. Pauline McNeill mentioned it; I will expand on it. I refer to the River Clyde, which is the main artery of this great city. Alex Neil talked about employment and transport. Was it not the River Clyde that provided transport and employment for the people of Glasgow and those from outwith its boundaries? Without the Clyde, this great city would not survive, but over the years it has been sorely neglected. The blame for that must be laid, fairly and squarely, on successive Tory and Labour Governments. The Labour council in Glasgow cannot escape blame either, as for many years, through incompetence and sheer neglect, the waterfront was left to rot, and was not developed. I know that we are now talking about development on the Clyde, but I want to expand on this point. Although there have been various developments and plans in recent years, they have been piecemeal and they have done little for local communities. Unfortunately, most of the regeneration in Glasgow has taken place in the city centre and has neglected deprived inner-city areas and the peripheral schemes. For example, the Gorbals regeneration scheme did little for local people; the benefits went to house builders and businesses. Glasgow City Council carried out a plan review in 1998. It noted that the River Clyde corridor is a key development location and that a rejuvenated river is one of the top 10 physical challenges. However, the detail on how to achieve development is very scant in the review. Glasgow needs a clear and coherent plan for regeneration. One of the keys to regeneration must be redevelopment of the riverside. The Clyde waterfront must be opened up and developed for the benefit of all our citizens. It must become an amenity. I welcome the plans of Clyde Port Authority and others. The Clyde must become an amenity that will be treasured by our citizens for generations. Planning must not be driven purely by market forces. Strategic planning in the interests of local communities and the entire city must drive the plans for regeneration. Local communities must be involved and consulted. The key to regeneration is public investment. We need more public investment in this great city. We know that there is money for such investment—Gordon Brown has billions in his war chest, which was recently boosted by the mobile phone franchise windfall. Without a share of that  cash, Glasgow cannot flourish. I ask the Executive to ask Gordon Brown to open his war chest and release money to Glasgow. Glasgow has kept Scotland going for many years and we need and deserve some of that money. To Glasgow City Council and Alex Mosson, the lord provost, I say that they should get it right this time. We must not make a mess of it again. The Clyde is our greatest asset. I ask the council to use it rather than to continue to abuse it.

The minister mentioned modernising the health service. Does that include closing down the heart transplant unit at Glasgow royal infirmary? is that what she calls modernising?

Mr Gorrie is advising the SNP that if it negotiates, it may get a settlement. Perhaps if he advised Jim Wallace and the Executive, he might get an agreement. Mr Gorrie should keep his advisements for his own party and not direct them at us.

I sometimes wonder whether, if talking were a sport, politicians could get sponsorship. I applaud all the organisations and individuals who participate in activities that keep the kids off the streets and give them a decent education and something to look forward to. I welcome the debate because it is the role of Government to achieve equal opportunities for all and to ensure that our people, young and old, benefit from a healthy lifestyle and access to some form of exercise, whether it is organised sport or something else. It is time for me to use the not-so-nice words, minister. The consequences of the real cuts in local government moneys—£255 million to be exact—by the Executive and the school rationalisation programme are that schools are closing down, playing fields are being lost and swimming pools are being shut. As a result, more folk will be socially excluded than will be included. I ask the Executive to think again about giving more money to local government.

I am certainly thinking about it. I support Glasgow City Council's initiative to encourage more women to run in groups, which allows them to feel safe. People can get application forms for the run from any Glasgow City Council library. I would like to draw Johann Lamont's attention  to an aspect of the amendment. Is she aware that by attaching the football academies to association football clubs, girls and women are automatically excluded from participation? [MEMBERS: "No."] Association football has a rule prohibiting mixed football above the age of 13. "Investing in You" says that the Executive will raise the standard of performance of all sports. As Fiona McLeod said, that is supposed to be done with a spend of less than £2 per head, in comparison to Denmark where the spend is £42 per head. I ask the minister whether the Executive is investing enough money in that. Taken together with the cut in moneys to local government, even Houdini could not escape the fact that there might be social exclusion. I would like to concentrate on the situation in Glasgow for a few minutes.

One minute? That certainly will be brief. I want to list the playing fields that have been lost in the Glasgow area because of the school closure programme and Glasgow City Council's policy: Cowlairs, Colston Road, Torr Street, Ellesmere Street, Ruchill park, Springburn park, Balmore Road and Lambhill. More recently, we have lost the playing fields at Chirnside school and St Augustine's school. Patricia Ferguson and I attended a meeting in Glasgow City Council about the closure of those playing fields. The minister may think that it is not about money, yet the planning committee's submission to the council says: "Although there is presumption against redevelopment of sports pitches, account should be taken of the need to create a financial asset to bolster the PFI process to build new schools." That is a terrible indictment of the Executive and what it is doing to local government. Not everyone has a car, not everyone can afford to go to sports centres and not everyone wants to participate in sport in a centre. I urge the minister to ask Gordon Brown for more of his surplus cash to give to local authorities on the proviso that they spend it on saving playing fields for local communities.

Does the minister agree that the Government's voucher system is degrading and dehumanising, that it does not provide a reasonable standard of living and that it is completely alien to the Scottish tradition of hospitality?

Does Patricia Ferguson agree that all that is being asked for to win the contract is fair play and a level playing field? I am sure that enough work has been done to guarantee that Govan should win the contract.

On a point of order. A number of weeks ago Sir David Steel ruled that members must treat each other with respect. Could you please remind members of that ruling? Mr Wallace has treated Roseanna Cunningham disrespectfully by uttering what I consider to be an obscenity during her speech. I would tell you the exact word, but I do not want to repeat it. I could write it down for you.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it proposes to take regarding the planning permission granted by Glasgow City Council in respect of 7 and 8 Alfred Terrace, Hillhead, Glasgow. (S1O-1527)

I cannot say that I thank the minister for her reply. This is a matter for the whole Parliament. Ian Jenkins made a similar point with regard to community councils, and my supplementary will make it clear that the issue that I am raising is a matter for communities and this Parliament. If the minister is not aware of the point that I made in my first question, she will not be aware of the fact that petitions from Hillhead Community Council and Hillhead Primary School board have been lodged— [Interruption.] Please let me finish.

I imagine that Wendy Alexander would be better placed to answer this question. Is the minister aware that petitions on this issue have been lodged with the Parliament, and will she today make a commitment to examine the matter and take appropriate action in response to the serious allegations that have been made about breaches of Glasgow City Council and national planning policies and guidelines? Further to that—

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received concerning the proposal to relocate the royal hospital for sick children, Yorkhill. (S1O-1452)

I thank the minister for that answer. Is she aware of the views of many people who are concerned that the closure of Yorkhill hospital will undermine the state-of-the-art service that is provided? Is she further aware of the views of those who are concerned by the lack of direct transport links to Southern general hospital, which is the proposed site for the relocation?

I congratulate Tommy Sheridan for securing this important debate, which I welcome, and on the hard work that he has obviously put into the debate. The SNP has always advocated fair and progressive taxation. We have also consistently argued for a full review of local government finance, as everyone who has read our leaflets will know. I hope that they support that review, which is also supported by COSLA and by local government. While I admire Tommy Sheridan's stance—I believe that I know where he is coming from—my party and I have some concerns about his proposals. I will not scaremonger in the same way as Labour and Tory speakers have done, but I have two concerns that I ask him to address later. First, the proposal to raise moneys for local services through a business rate puts a heavy burden on local businesses and on small businesses in particular. In my view, there are already enough obstacles facing local businesses and a business rate would be one obstacle too many. We are trying to encourage local businesses, but such a tax would discourage and hinder them. Other speakers, including Andrew Wilson, have mentioned my second important point, which is that the proposals sever the link between the public and local councils and do not provide for accountability. That worries me, as does the embracing of a more centralised form of government, which is non-democratic. I ask Tommy Sheridan to address that point in his closing speech. Local councils must be democratically accountable to local people if they are delivering local services. The way in which local government finance is delivered goes to the very heart of what people expect from local government, and it needs desperately to be reviewed. I think that we all agree on that point. People want and expect good services, but they need to know exactly what services they are paying for and exactly what they will receive from those services. Tommy Sheridan's proposals are commendable and pave the way for future debate on local government finance. I ask him to support, if he is able to, the proposal in the SNP amendment to have a full review of local government finance, which is necessary to return local government to the people of Scotland.

I was pleased to hear what Patricia Ferguson said about the Maryhill corridor. Having seen the example of Maryhill Road, the traders from Shettleston Road and Dumbarton Road have joined together to publicise their view that bus lanes are not always beneficial to an area. I am concerned not only about the shops in an area but about the community as a whole. I worry that, without local shops, local people will not have any services. Also, local people are employed in the shops that are at risk. While I sympathise with the shopkeepers, I also sympathise with the people who use those shops. We must preserve that amenity. Buzzing places such as Dumbarton Road and Byres Road would die without those shops. I have asked the minister many questions on this subject. In all her answers, she talks about consultation. I agree that we need consultation, and it is because of the importance of consultation that the traders from Shettleston Road and Dumbarton Road set up the traders association. They felt that they were not being consulted. I am pleased that Mr McPhie of the traders association, which submitted a petition with more than 17,000 signatures, was one of the first people in Scotland to address the Public Petitions Committee. The committee passed that petition to the Transport and the Environment Committee, which will, I hope, take action. The traders have had a rough time from some Glasgow councillors regarding the meetings that  they have held, most of which I have attended. I have a map with me that shows proposed bus lanes and bus gates and which was produced in August 1999 by Glasgow City Council with no consultation. I have minutes of a council meeting from 29 November. They mention plans for bus lanes going back to April. Again, local people were not consulted on those plans. The council agreed to "enter into a partnership with West Dunbartonshire Council, First Glasgow and Glasgow Wide Taxi Owners Association". There is no mention of the traders or the people who live in the areas that would be affected. We are told that a leaflet was sent to everyone in the areas, but it was sent only to businesses—residents did not receive it. It was sent at the end of November and the beginning of December, and the returns were to be in by 18 January. However, good consultation cannot be carried out over the Christmas and new year period. I have attended several public meetings and I know that residents are concerned about the fact that they know nothing about the plans. I would like the minister to take their concerns on board.

Sometimes I feel that it is my destiny not to be able to raise certain subjects. I have tried since last September to highlight the anomaly between the police forces in Scotland and those down south. Rather cheekily, I am not going to focus on Edinburgh, although I agree with what Kenny has said. I suggest that the minister should consider carefully the difference in funding between Scottish police forces and their southern counterparts. Edinburgh, as a capital city, should have extra funding. Glasgow too, which has three major football stadiums and receives visits from dignitaries, deserves extra funding. The Scottish Police Federation has said that a predominant problem is financing and resourcing, that the police budget is in a dire situation and that if that situation is not greatly improved quickly, it will reach crisis point. The SPF says that for the year 2000-01, the Government has set the police budget at £741.9 million, which represents a significant cut in real terms, the end result being that staff numbers will be cut. A recent Treasury document says that the overall settlement for the Metropolitan police in the year 1999-2000 was £1.774 billion—billions of pounds rather than millions. More interestingly, the document says that included in that settlement is an increase of £25 million to special payments in recognition of the Metropolitan police's distinct national and capital city functions. That payment rose from £151 million to £176 million because the Home Secretary considered that it is particularly important to maintain public confidence in policing the capital city. Is not Edinburgh a capital city? Is not it important enough to deserve the policing that is required to protect people? I ask Angus MacKay to speak to relevant ministers and to point out to them that Edinburgh is Scotland's capital city and deserves extra funding. I can give him a copy of my correspondence if he would like it. I thank Kenny MacAskill for securing the debate.

Although this might not be the most riveting subject for debate—by the number of members of the press  who have been present throughout, it is clear that they do not see it that way—I know that members believe the code of conduct to be necessary and of great importance. It is important because we must have transparency and accountability in the Scottish Parliament. The people of Scotland expect and deserve no less. Furthermore, in the light of recent events in the chamber, it is important that MSPs are seen to treat each other with the utmost respect at all times. If that does not happen, how can we expect the people of Scotland to respect the Scottish Parliament and its members? My experience as a councillor brought home to me the importance of having clear and concise guidelines—I am sure that other former councillors will raise that point. In local government, it was often difficult to ascertain what constituted an interest or a gift. Often there was a lack of clarity in guidelines on declaring such matters. Indeed, for many years, the Scottish National party and other political parties made representations to the Nolan committee about those matters and called for clear guidelines to be put in place. I welcome the guidelines, and in particular those concerning gifts, interests and sponsorships. Compared with council guidelines, they are clear and concise. I will offer the chamber a brief example of the problems that I encountered as a local councillor. I remember that my daughter was once given a box of creme eggs—I will not say who made the creme eggs—which was certainly not worth more than £250, and my spouse was given flowers and so on. Although that may seem trivial to members now, such gifts caused much consternation to me and to council staff. We had to decide whether I had to register the fact that I had received a creme egg, a box of chocolates or whatever. I know that other councillors experienced such difficulties, so I welcome the requirement to declare gifts that are worth more than £250. That clarifies the matter for MSPs and staff; perhaps councils could adopt that requirement, which would remove the absurdity of having to declare such things as flowers and creme eggs. This is a new era for government in Scotland. We must ensure that members as well as the Parliament are protected against allegations of impropriety. I welcome the measures, which will set the Parliament off on the right footing and be a positive step toward openness and transparent government.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the ministerial statement by the Minister for Transport and the Environment on 10 February 2000, whether it is aware of the concerns of local traders in Glasgow regarding the possible loss of business due to the proposed introduction of new bus lanes. (S1O-1209)

I thank the minister for her reply; however, it is not only the Shettleston Road traders who have objected to the proposals. Is the minister aware of a recent survey carried out in the Maryhill and Victoria Road areas of Glasgow in which, respectively, 82 per cent and 75 per cent of traders claimed that bus lanes had a detrimental effect on their trade? Although the minister says that it is a matter for the local authority, she said in her statement that she would consult local government on such issues. Will she meet and consult the traders and residents who are concerned about Maryhill and Victoria Road as well as those who are concerned about the Faifley to Baillieston bus route?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much of the funding package announced on 27 October for women's organisations and refuge places has been released to date. (S1O-1140)

It is all very well for the minister to put the Labour spin on what was announced, but women's organisations— [Interruption.] It is not just me who is saying it; people out in the streets—constituents and members of the public—are too. Is the minister aware of the situation affecting Glasgow Women's Aid? [Interruption.] It is not a laughing matter, Mr Galbraith.

It is no laughing matter when we talk about refuges for women who are trying to get away from violence by men. It is scurrilous, Mr Galbraith.

Is the minister aware of the situation affecting Glasgow Women's Aid, which needs to raise £30,000 by the end of the financial year? The organisation is quoted as being "basically at breaking point and threatened with closure". Does the minister agree that funds must be released now to Glasgow Women's Aid and other women's organisations for refuge places? What steps is the minister taking to ensure that vital funds will be released as soon as possible? Will she give an answer, rather than the spin that we get all the time?

I take this opportunity to thank Winnie Ewing for raising this issue. As far back as August and September last year, she spoke about lodging a motion such as this one, and I am pleased that it is being debated and has all-party support. Last November I attended an all-party meeting in Glasgow—I believe that Robert Brown was also there—at which more than 70 members of the public were present. I took along the text of the motion that Winnie had lodged, which was very warmly received. I found the meeting a complete eye-opener, as I had not had much experience of deaf people and the problems that they face. The meeting was very vibrant, very noisy and very informative. I thank Tony Forry for organising it. I want to give the Parliament a flavour of the meeting and of the interesting and searching questions that were put to the panel, of which I was a member. We were asked whether we thought that the Scottish Parliament should recognise BSL as a language in its own right and whether we believed that a law should be made to protect BSL. It was also made clear to us that there was growing discontent in the deaf community about the services that are available to deaf people—a point that previous speakers have touched on. It is becoming clear not only to me but to other members of the public that the sign language interpreting service that is provided by social work departments varies according to where people live. The people who attended the meeting asked me what I, as a member of the Scottish Parliament, could do to address such problems. By having this debate today, we are addressing them. I am sure that, with all-party support, they can be overcome. Earlier, we had a debate on the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 and whether it should include a question on the Scots language. During the debate, a number of interesting facts emerged. I will cite two points that I picked up on: the recognition by Europe of Scots as a language; and the lack of translators to enable a wider audience  to participate. Are those facts not relevant to the debate that we are having now, and are not deaf people asking for many of the same things? People who are deaf do not want to be treated any differently; they do not want preferential treatment. What they want is recognition of themselves and their language.

I take on board what the minister said, particularly about not legislating to raise tolls on the motorway and trunk road networks—I welcome that U-turn. Will she guarantee that new road infrastructure will not be subject to tolling?

I thank Elaine for introducing this subject for debate. As happened with the member's debate on domestic violence, I hope that this motion will be the subject of a full parliamentary debate and that we will be able to vote on some of the issues that have been raised. I have only a short time, so I will concentrate on one or two matters. The report states: "The Convention is not legally enforceable" but it "obliges countries that ratify it to undertake all appropriate measures for the implementation of the rights" that children should have. I would like the minister to remember that when he considers the following aspects of the report. The first is the part that deals with family environment and alternative care. It states: "The Convention recognises and encourages the supportive role parents, other family members and the community play in raising their children". I would like the minister to address the rights of grandparents who, sometimes, through no fault of their own, lose contact with their grandchildren because of divorce or separation, for example. Jamie McGrigor raised the horrific issue of children in war. The Executive and the Westminster Government—regardless of political party—should not supply arms to countries that use children as soldiers. I watched a television programme about Sierra Leone. Perhaps other members saw it. I was disgusted by the fact that children there, some as young as six or eight, were drugged, dragged away from their parents and used as soldiers to kill. We must not be party to that. I beg the minister, on behalf of everyone in this Parliament, to tell Westminster that we say with one voice that we will not sell arms to countries that use children as soldiers.

We have had a good debate and I take on board what has been said, particularly by Christine Grahame, about alcohol abuse—I hope that the Executive will also take that on board. Members were correct in their comments on the extent of alcohol abuse in Scotland and that is why the SNP amendment is  relevant. I hope that members read the amendment carefully and support it. Although I agree with what was said about the problem of alcohol abuse, I believe that we should be under no illusions about the seriousness of the drug problem that we face in Scotland, particularly in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. Many experts have pointed to the link between deprivation and drug misuse, as Karen Whitefield said. It is evident that many young people from the worst housing schemes in our cities—particularly Glasgow—have no hope and no prospects and eventually turn to drugs. We have all seen the recent reports of the deprivation in Glasgow. I make no apologies for mentioning Glasgow. I go along with Johann Lamont's suggestion that the Glasgow MSPs and the Executive should get together to present Glasgow as a special case. There are compelling reasons to believe that deprivation has contributed to the grim statistics, including the 146 drug-related deaths reported by Strathclyde police. Only yesterday, we saw the problems that drug misuse can cause families: a heroin-addicted couple were convicted at the High Court in Glasgow for the terrible neglect of a young child. That is just one example of the misery that drugs cause, not only for addicts, but for their families. As I said, Glasgow has a major problem with drugs. In 1990, there were an estimated 8,500 drug injectors in greater Glasgow; it is believed that there are now more than that. Research has also found that 40 per cent of 15 to 16-year-olds in greater Glasgow have tried illegal drugs. The majority of addicts are under the age of 30. That is what concerns me most—young people's lives are being snuffed out because of drugs. That is a major problem in Glasgow and we need the facilities to attack it. I hope that the Executive will respond to that. It was also found that those admitted to hospital for drug misuse were 30 times more likely to come from deprived areas of the city, which again demonstrates the link between drug misuse and deprivation. Research has found that drug injectors in Glasgow spend an estimated £160 million annually on drugs. That spending is financed mainly by crime—from the sale of stolen goods and drug dealing. A recent survey of 168 injectors in greater Glasgow found that they committed an average of 26 offences per month each. Strathclyde police have also identified a strong correlation between drugs and house-breaking. The misuse of drugs has a devastating effect. It is a major contributory factor in crime—the front page of The Herald yesterday carried a report on attacks on the elderly. We all suffer, not just the drug abusers and their families. Whole  communities suffer. The cost of keeping the estimated 1,000 drug misusers from the Glasgow area in prison is approximately £26 million a year. It is clear that, as well as causing misery for thousands, drug misuse is a major drain on public resources. The creation of the Scottish drugs enforcement agency and the moves to improve drugs education and awareness are welcomed by everyone, I assume, in the chamber. However, we must create real jobs and real opportunities for young people. It is our duty to restore hope to those communities where all people have is despair. I hope that the Executive will take that on board. As Fiona Hyslop said, providing real jobs and real opportunities is the one way in which we will stop drug misuse in the Glasgow area.

My colleagues and members from all parties have highlighted many of the problems that affect housing in Scotland. Although it is clear that those problems are experienced by all sections of the community, I believe that among our ethnic minority communities housing problems are especially severe. Patricia Ferguson touched on that at the end of her speech. I hope that she and colleagues from all parties will join me in being particularly concerned about the extension of the right to buy in housing associations. That and the massive stock transfer that is proposed for Glasgow are a particular worry of mine. We in Scotland take pride in being an open and inclusive society. Newcomers to Scotland have always been welcomed. However, we must recognise that all too often the experience of people in the ethnic minority community has not been happy. Research has shown that the ethnic minorities suffer disproportionately from gross overcrowding, substandard housing, insecurity because of racial harassment and growing isolation. Their elders, in particular, suffer from alienation because of their culture. Because of discrimination in the public and private rented sectors, owner occupation has often been the only option for black people, although they are often able to afford only the very worst housing. A Commission for Racial Equality survey found that in Glasgow 83 per cent of black households live in owner-occupied accommodation in substantial need of repair. They experience poor living conditions and are unable to finance repairs. Modernisation is an absolute impossibility and  they suffer from severe overcrowding. Research carried out by the University of Stirling, also with Glasgow's ethnic minority community, shows that overcrowding and homelessness among the black and ethnic minority communities is 15 times greater than it was 10 years ago. According to the 1991 census, members of the ethnic minority community were three times more likely to suffer from overcrowding than their white counterparts. I want to give an example of that, although I will try to keep it as short as I can. It will give members an idea of how some people have to live. The example is that of a widow in Glasgow's ethnic minority community. She is on social security. Her 23-year-old daughter is in a wheelchair and her 19-year-old son is crippled. She also has a 16-year-old son. Since 1987, they have lived in a two-up, one-bedroom, private rented insecure tenancy. The oldest son sleeps in the kitchen; the rest of the family shares the bedroom. The woman receives no social services support and is unable to leave her family alone for any time. She rarely leaves the house at all. In May 1992—nearly 8 years ago—she applied for housing association housing. She was told that there was no possibility of the association's being able to rehouse her family in the immediate or short term, and that it would, in fact, be a miracle if a suitable flat became available. What chance do those people have of being rehoused if the right to buy is extended? I ask the minister to consider that. It is vital that the problems of ethnic minorities are properly addressed. A major obstacle to dealing with those problems is the lack of statistics. I have not been told to wind up yet, so I will carry on.

This is a very important subject, and no one has really touched on it.

I will not bother taking the time to answer that question. It is very sad that Johann Lamont feels that she has to intervene to score political points. She should be persuading her party not to extend the right to buy and looking  after people such as the homeless and ethnic minorities. I want to touch very briefly—

I will try to close as quickly as I can. Positive Action in Housing, which I have mentioned before, has for years been calling for the provision of accurate and current figures. I ask the minister to put money into Scottish Homes and I ask Scottish Homes to play an important role in gathering those figures, and to provide adequate funding for research and to train young black people in housing matters so that they, too, can sit on boards. I am sorry that Johann Lamont had to try to score cheap political points in a debate that is about everyone who lives in Scotland regardless of their creed or colour.

Will Mr Martin accept an intervention?

The member mentions homelessness and refers to the minister's remarks about the 18,000 homes that will be built over  three years—6,000 homes a year. A report by the University of Paisley refers to the demolition of 17,000 homes in Glasgow. Where will all those people be put if only 6,000 houses a year are to be built? What is the answer to that?

rose—

If I had a pound for every time that Mr Galbraith or a Labour member of the Executive blamed previous Governments, I would be a millionaire. I have plenty of hair, so Mr Galbraith need not mention that. Is it not time that the Executive stopped tossing about that argument and considered something constructive? Mr Galbraith is constantly saying that he has not heard anything constructive. Perhaps my question will be and he will be able to give me a constructive answer. I have taken on board Mr Galbraith's comments and what he said about the SFA, but I feel that the other members' comments have also been constructive. Does the minister agree that, whatever happens over the next few days, what is required so that the public can be satisfied that their money is being spent wisely is an open and above-board competitive tendering process—something that new Labour is very much in favour of? Does he not think that that would be much fairer than the SFA's being the only organisation involved in the tendering process? Previously I asked the minister about the differences with local government and about how the SFA had managed to get itself into this tendering process. If he agrees with me, can he advise Parliament how that will affect the SFA's ability to compete, given that until now it has been the only organisation to be given access to ministers, co-funders' meetings, the business plan and the consultants' reports—in fact, access to everything to which we in this Parliament have been denied access? That is a constructive question, and I hope that Mr Galbraith will answer it constructively.

Open tendering.

Will Mr Brown give way?

I hope Mr Galbraith will not use the word "nasty" about me. SNP members have not had much luck up to now; every time we have asked a question, he has given a negative answer. I want to reassure Mr Galbraith that the SNP has always been and will always be in favour of Hampden and I look forward to the retraction of his lie that the SNP did not support the project. [MEMBERS: "Ask a question."] I will ask a question in two seconds. As members of a democratic party, we have the right to ask questions about this project.

I will. How will the deal satisfy the strict rules imposed on local authorities by the Accounts Commission, which demands a distinct landlord and tenant? At Hampden, the SFA has been allowed to act as both landlord and tenant. Does the Labour Executive choose to ignore the rules that it imposes on other bodies? I hope that Mr Galbraith will not give me a nasty answer.

Yes, Presiding Officer. Obviously, your microphone was not working, as I could not hear you.

I want to follow up on Mr McLeish's previous answer. I have lodged various written questions about the careers service, particularly in Glasgow, and I welcome the minister's comments about 2001. However, can he give this chamber a guarantee that the future of the careers service will be considered? Perhaps he will take note of the Welsh model, which will come into force in April 2001. The National Assembly for Wales has recommended that the careers service in Wales be funded directly by the National Assembly. Can the minister guarantee that he will consider the possibility of the careers service in Scotland being funded by this Parliament, not just now but after 2001?

For goodness' sake.

rose—

I wondered when the consensus politics was going to end. I think that we just saw a fine example: Johann Lamont, with her socialist background, trying to stick up for new Labour policies—I congratulate her on doing that so well. We have already heard about the problems faced by the elderly because of fuel poverty. It must be recognised that a major contributory  factor to fuel poverty is the imposition of standing charges by the utility companies. The Scottish National party believes that removing standing charges for electricity, gas and telephone bills would enhance pensioners' lives and give them a higher standard of living. It may be that that is a reserved matter, but as members of the Parliament, MSPs take on board everything that our constituents and the pensioners up in the visitors gallery say to us. If we had the will, we could go to Westminster and suggest that the standing charges should be abolished. The plight of the poor was highlighted in a report by the Consumers Association, which said that the poor were suffering from the severe tactics of the gas and electricity companies, with gas suppliers cutting off 30,000 homes last year. For the elderly in Scotland, living on pensions of only £66.25 for a single person or £106.70 for a couple—one of the lowest pensions in Europe—standing charges are a major burden. That is evident from the tragic statistics—there were 2,200 excess deaths of people over the age of 60 in Scotland in the winter of 1997-98. We should not allow that to happen in a civilised society. It is obvious that there is a particular problem in Scotland that must be addressed. There is no reason why Scotland should not follow the example of Ireland, where standing charges for pensioners have been abolished. If Scottish pensioners did not have to pay standing charges, but paid only for the fuel that they had used, it would go some way towards alleviating the problem of fuel poverty in our elderly population. Research reveals that poor pensioners are less likely to own a telephone than better-off pensioners. In 1996-97, 12 per cent of single pensioners and 3 per cent of pensioner couples, who were mainly dependent on state pensions, had no telephone at all. Furthermore, single pensioners who were mainly dependent on state benefits were three times more likely not to have a telephone than single pensioners who had greater access to income, and 10 times more likely not to have a telephone than couples who had greater access to income. It would greatly enhance pensioners' quality of life if standing charges were abolished and they had to pay only for the telephone calls that they actually made. It is clear that the current system of standing charges penalises the poorest and most vulnerable people, and especially the elderly. What is required from the Government is action. If Ireland can abolish standing charges, I do not see why we cannot. We have heard many fine words from those on the Labour benches. We have not heard anything about Gordon Brown sitting on his £12 billion war chest. What about that? Why not release some of  that money for the pensioners? Words from the Executive do not heat homes, and do not buy food to put on the table. What is required is action. Removing standing charges now would be a step in the right direction.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order. Might it be noted when we have important debates such as this in future that ministers should not make statements prior to the debate? People who wanted to be included in this debate have not been. The elderly have not been mentioned and neither have various other aspects of community care.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the current level is of housing debt owed by Glasgow City Council. (S1O-711)

Although the debt seems to differ according to different papers, I accept the minister's answer. Will she confirm that, if the housing stock transfer goes ahead, the debt will be written off? If so, why cannot that debt be written off now to enable the stock to remain under council control and to prevent what is effectively privatisation by the back door? Will she also confirm that the amount that new housing trusts will borrow will be the same as the current level of debt and that no more money will be released for housing from stock transfer?

rose  —

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it intends to take to address the position whereby Scottish police forces have to cover the entire cost of policing visiting dignitaries from existing budgets whilst the Metropolitan police are granted over £150 million extra to cover the policing of visiting dignitaries and other special duties. (S1O-620)

I thank the Lord Advocate for that answer, but it was not the one that I hoped for. The £150 million is extra funding for the Metropolitan police. Is he aware that we do not have extra money in Scotland for policing visiting dignitaries? Is he also aware of the special problems of Glasgow, which has three major football stadiums, and of Edinburgh, which has Murrayfield, Holyrood and the Scottish Parliament to police?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for his contribution, even though he said about a quarter of the things that I wanted to say in my speech. The Scottish National party welcomes the debate. Good, affordable child care has always been a flagship policy of ours. However, no motion or strategy is perfect, even if it comes from this Executive. I firmly believe that our amendment strengthens the motion, and I ask the minister to accept it. It also addresses some of the concerns that have been mentioned during the debate. There should be a seamless approach to child care from the time before the child starts school. In many instances, that is not the case. I will speak about top-slicing, as Brian Monteith did, but I will come at it from a different angle. We know that the Government allocates £1,175 to schools for every school place, but each local authority has a different type of top-slicing. Glasgow City Council top-slices £250 from that figure, leaving £925 per place. City of Edinburgh Council top-slices only £134, leaving £1,041. North Lanarkshire top-slices £242, leaving £933. South Lanarkshire, however, top-slices the same amount as Glasgow does. My point is that that causes confusion for providers that deal with different authorities. I would like the minister to address that and perhaps put a strategy in place to allow all local authorities to work together. Training is a related issue. Top-sliced money goes to training and, while some local authorities with staff who are on placements from other local authorities are flexible and will pay for training in the local authority where the nursery is based, others insist that the teachers are sent to the local authority that they came from. That means that the member of staff is not at work for two or three days and the nursery must pay the travel costs. A further problem is payment. Many providers have come to me to discuss local authorities that make late payments. I hate to say this, but Glasgow is probably one of the worst. At the moment, there are people in the Glasgow area who have not been paid since August. Glasgow City Council received some of the funding from the Scottish Office, but it has not paid it out. That has meant that the nurseries are in debt. People are telling me that they are practically closing down, as they have had to arrange overdrafts with their banks. I would like the Executive to consider that and determine whether something can be done to help those nurseries. It is important to them and to child development that  people use those nurseries. As I said, I hoped that the Executive would take our amendment on board. We need to secure long-term funding. The motion does not address that properly; our amendment enhances the motion. We also need integration of provision, as I have highlighted.

I confess that, when I first heard of the millennium bug, I knew nothing about it and was as confused as Elaine Smith was. As a responsible and also nosy person, I decided to find out as much as possible. The Government leaflet has some astounding things in it—tips such as ensuring rubbish is out on time and taking a torch abroad as some countries do not have lighting at night. One of the most frightening issues, which has not been touched on in this debate, is about Trident, the destructive nuclear missile on Scotland's shores. I tried to find out as much as possible about that and I would like the minister to answer these points. The first is about the technology used in Trident. We know that the problem with nuclear weapons communications systems is made more difficult because it utilises millions of "embedded systems", that is, lots of little microchips and microprocessors that have been recycled. "These embedded chips are a particular problem for the military. In order to keep the costs down the military have used ' commercial-off-the-shelf' chips (COTS) that are generic and may have time and/or date functions embedded within them". That is a particular worry. "In addition there is no general method for assessing Y2K compliance of software, chips or microprocessors therefore every system must be checked line by line and chip by chip in order to ensure compliance". That will be a mammoth task. I again quote from the facts and figures I have gathered.  "As of January this year only ten out of one hundred and twenty-five NATO Mission Critical Systems were thought to be Y2K compliant. Of the rest, 29 were not compliant, 4 were under investigation and of the remaining 82 nothing was known." That is very worrying. I would like answers on that. There is also an issue of staff availability. We know that the programme has slipped from a target date of January 1999 to December 1999. That is worrying. Again I quote: "A ' Deterrent Millennium Task Group ' was established to ensure the British Trident system is Y2K compliant but the MoD are not able to say how many people are working on the issue or how much it will cost because there ' is no separately identifiable central record' . The job of the Deterrent Task Group is to check 'the missile, the warhead, fire control, navigation, targeting' and other 'associated shore based facilities'." In September 1998 the MOD review went on to state that "the MoD might need to delay or stop activities/projects while attention and resources are focussed on Y2K", that "some systems might need to be abandoned in the short term pending resolution of the problem" and that "Shortage of skilled in-house staff is being identified as a potential risk to the programme in some areas". Taskforce 2000 described the Ministry of Defence as being one of nine high-risk departments. The MOD has admitted that the findings of the report are correct. "Taskforce 2000 have correctly recognised the scale of the problem facing the Ministry of Defence and the capability of our programme managers." That refers to staff shortages, and I would like the minister to comment on that matter. Let us look at possible consequences. It is extremely unlikely that a missile will be launched. I am not saying that anything like that could happen, but we could have a situation similar to one that has already arisen, which I will tell members about. In 1993, the North American Aerospace Defence Command—NORAD—simulated a test out of curiosity. Technicians rolled the dates up to 1 January 2000 and the result was a total system blackout. That is a fact. I do not wish to scaremonger, but this is an important debate and that story is relevant. Trident is sitting on our shores, yet neither the minister nor anyone else has commented on the potential effects that the date change could have. I would like some answers from the minister.

I will try to be brief. Previous speakers have mentioned the hard work and dedication of the voluntary sector workers. I echo that. Without them, many people would be worse off. That applies to both the workers and the receivers. I would also like to pay tribute to the many children involved in the  voluntary sector. I congratulate YouthLink Scotland on its excellent work. I would like to share one of my experiences from many years ago, when my children were small. During the school holidays, it was a nightmare to find something for them to do. At that time, there were no activities for children. That is when I first got involved with the voluntary sector. I went to the citizens advice bureau and they told me where to go. Along with several other mothers, I set up a summer play scheme. We ran the play scheme very successfully for many years. I still meet some of the kids who took part—who now have kids of their own—and they say that they enjoyed the many activities that we provided for them. Children are our future and we must provide such facilities. The point that I want to make is that we could not have done anything without the help of the local authorities. They provided us with money, free school lets, free use of playing fields and free janitorial time. I want the Executive to take that on board. Over the past three years, the Labour party has cut local government spending by about £2.4 billion. That is a fact, and I would like Jackie Baillie to take it on board. I want to ensure that local councils receive adequate funding to support local voluntary organisations. Another worry is the advent of the private finance initiative in schools, about which the local press has been vocal. Will voluntary organisations still enjoy the use of schools and playing fields? I hope that the minister will answer that question.

I am  surprised at the number of Labour members who appear to be supporting the SNP amendment and I would like to ask them whether that is in fact their intention. Mr McConnell has already said that he is pleased to announce the programme, but most Labour members who have spoken have asked him to think again about the map. They should, perhaps, think about supporting our amendment, or Mr McConnell could think about taking the SNP amendment on board. I would like to concentrate on the Glasgow area. Mike Watson—or Lord Watson—is not in the chamber at the moment, but I agree with most of what he said. Glasgow City Council carried out a case study that mentioned that 10 of the poorest areas of the city are excluded from the proposed objective 2 areas. Those areas include Pennilee, Castlemilk—which Lord Watson mentioned—Govanhill, Dennistoun North and Dennistoun South, Glasgow West, North Maryhill, Shettleston and Carmyle. Those areas of deprivation have been removed from the objective 2 map but are in the worst 10 per cent of areas in Scotland. The Department of Trade and Industry has said that, based on their need, they should be included. Why have they not been included? I would like to mention joined-up thinking and continuity. Dennistoun, Cardonald and Mount Vernon are areas of opportunity for business parks, for example, and they have been excluded. Why? Broomhill, Summerston, Mount Vernon, Pennilee, Cardonald, Castlemilk and Newlands are included as assisted areas, but will not receive structural funds. There is no joined-up thinking in relation to structural funding in Mr McConnell's programme. We are all supposedly fighting for our areas—as we were elected to do. I am fighting for the Glasgow area, but I would like to point out that the SNP feels that the Scottish people have been hard done by because of the way in which the map has been drawn up and presented. I put it to Mr McConnell and the Executive that they and successive Westminster Governments have pulled the wool over the eyes of the Scottish people, who have been told that they are getting extra money when they are not. We are the only oil-producing nation in Europe and we must go cap in hand to Europe and Westminster to ask for money that is rightfully ours. That is the case that the SNP makes—a case that must be put to the Scottish people. Members can all put forward their individual cases as they were elected to do, but we are also elected to highlight the anomalies that the Executive and Westminster have not addressed for successive years.  We are not here with a begging bowl—we are a country in our own right and we should get the money that we deserve.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to address the potential loss of European regional funding to Glasgow City Council of up to £500,000. (S1O-424)

I thank Mr McConnell. We know that the west of Scotland programme is not likely to be approved by 2000. That means that the current interpretation of the guidelines on Sound and Efficient Financial Management 2000 seems to be the problem. At what level was the decision taken to reinterpret the SEM 2000 guidelines—at the Scottish level, the UK level, or the European level—and what action will the Scottish Executive take to prevent the loss of those vital funds to  Glasgow and the west of Scotland?

Will you take an intervention?

rose—

Hugh Henry mentioned Tony Blair and the UK Government. We cannot get away from the fact that, when a written question on this matter was put to Mr Dewar, he answered: "The UK Government has prepared drafts, which have now been received by the Scottish Executive."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 24 August 1999; Vol 1, p 232.]  Does the First Minister think that the fact that the UK Government prepared and put forward the drafts is fair and democratic? I do not.

Will Mr McAllion give way?

Will Mr McAllion give way?

Will the minister give way?

I realise that time is short, so I will be concise. I welcome the fact that the Executive recognises the important role that the voluntary sector plays in Scotland. Thousands of people give their time year after year. Groups would cease to exist without them. I applaud every one of them. Most people have raised the issue of funding but I will concentrate on the part of the minister's speech in which she stated the Executive's commitment to create a stable—I stress that word—infrastructure. Hugh, like myself, was a councillor in a previous life. He mentioned various groups, but I will not talk about individual groups, as I would be here all day. Some of them were excellent and, unfortunately—Hugh would probably back me up—some of them were not. As a councillor, I dealt daily with voluntary groups. One thing that they had in common was a lack of stable funding. The organisations receive some grants from the lottery and local councils but those are, at best, sporadic. Some groups survive  month to month, dependent on public donations. I recognise what Jackie said and believe that she will try to make progress, but if we are serious about the voluntary sector's role, we must ensure that the Parliament and local councils provide the infrastructure for dialogue, as Hugh said. As well as dialogue, those groups need training and funding to enable them to flourish. As George said, they have great expertise in areas in which the Parliament and local councils do not have it. We should be tapping into those voluntary groups and using their expertise. We should encourage an exchange of knowledge. We should not exclude them. I accept what Jackie said and, when I see the finished product, I am sure that I will be proven right in my belief that she means what she says. I am not saying that we, or local councils, should take over the running of those organisations, as was implied in some speeches. The minister has reiterated that that is not what the compact states. We must co-operate more closely with voluntary groups, to the benefit of both sides. The independent nature of those groups means that they would not want to be tied to officialdom. By creating meaningful dialogue and co-operation among the authorities and in the communities that the voluntary organisations serve, the voluntary organisations will play their part in the regeneration of our communities. Those organisations work on the ground and see what is needed. Voluntary organisations can push forward an agenda that will ensure fairness for all.

To ask the Scottish Executive, if it decides to abolish the Scottish joint negotiating committee, what mechanism it intends to use to achieve the abolition. (S1O-306)

I fully understand about the legislation, but does the minister agree that abolition of the SJNC, which the SNP opposes, will not solve the current crisis in the negotiations over teachers' pay and conditions? It would take several months to get the necessary legislation through Parliament, as the minister said, but in the meantime there would be chaos in our schools. Is the minister happy to preside over that, or will he instead outline to the Parliament a more constructive approach to settling the dispute, such as making more money available to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in order to allow COSLA to return to the negotiating table?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure the retention of the paediatric cardiac surgery service at Yorkhill hospital. (S1O-296)

In the week that Tony Blair visited Hamilton and pledged to pour £21 billion extra—that is on record—into the health service and to give priority to consumers ahead of profits, why should any of the facilities, at Yorkhill or Edinburgh, be closed? Yorkhill carries out 65 per cent of paediatric heart operations in Scotland. It is the only hospital in Scotland with ECMO—extracorporeal membrane oxygenation—life support machines. It has two cardiac surgeons and is respected worldwide for its expertise. Does the minister agree that Yorkhill deserves that respect and must  be retained?

That is the usual Labour-speak. You are the ones who are starting a turf war.

I have been accused of reducing this debate to a turf war. I got my information from a newspaper article, which quotes Tony Blair.

I wish to thank Maureen for initiating this debate, and to thank you, Mr Deputy Presiding Officer, for extending the debate. I realise that, when you were a member of the Westminster Parliament, you introduced a bill on this issue.  This is a very emotive issue, and I do not want to get too emotive about it. Others have described the horrific scenes that they have seen, and the consequences. The majority of incidents of domestic violence involve battered women.  We must take a two-step approach to this issue. First, we need immediate action. The zero tolerance campaign has been mentioned. The campaign raised awareness; the problem was that it gave people hope and aspirations, but we did not follow them up with funding. I hope that we have learned a lesson from that.  Both emotional and financial resources are desperately needed. Local authorities fund women's aid groups; perhaps the Parliament could consider ring-fencing local authority funding for this purpose.  We cannot impose such a change, but we could perhaps recommend to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that the funding could be ring-fenced. That way, women's aid projects could go ahead on a long-term basis, which would give them continuity and security, and women who approach the organisations would have something to hang onto. They would know that the organisations will still be there in two or three years' time.  The second approach is a long-term education strategy, through schools and homes. We must introduce something like a good citizenship scheme into schools, to teach boys and girls to see each other as equal partners. I would like that on the curriculum. It would go a good way towards getting people to treat each other equally. It may take a number of years-women have had to endure violence for centuries-but we must tackle it for this generation and for future generations. I congratulate Maureen on raising this important subject.

Will Nicol Stephen give way?

Nicol Stephen mentioned inward investment and global companies. Does he agree with me-and, I presume, all other members in this chamber-that we do not need companies such as Via Systems, which take our money and run away? Would it not be better to invest our money in indigenous industries?

The word democracy has been much bandied about today, particularly by Labour members. Perhaps Mr Chisholm and Mr McAllion have forgotten about the so-called democracy that was bandied about within the Scottish Labour party-if so, they have very short memories. Mr McAllion's speech seemed to be all about "do as we say or do as we do, or else".  Unfortunately, to me and to perhaps most of the people in the public galleries, democracy seems to have rolled over and died in this chamber since the formation of the Lib-Lab pact. The Labour party and the Liberal party in particular should be ashamed of themselves. They talk about effective opposition, but how can we have effective opposition if only the Liberal Democrat party gets any Short money? Why are the other Opposition parties not allowed to put forward their positions-not only the position of their parties but the position of the Scottish people who voted for them? This Parliament is supposed to be all about the Scottish people-the voters-and not about the Labour and Liberal parties getting together to form a pact so that they can deliver what is best for them.  The people in the gallery today have seen what I would call anti-democracy at work. This is supposed to be a new Parliament, but we are debating the same old things. The Labour party tells us that everything is wonderful for it, but because we-the SNP, the Tories and the three independents-are in opposition, we get nothing while the coalition party gets everything. That is all I have to say.

Will Mr Wallace give way?

Will Mr Wallace give way?