8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in tackling unemployment. (S4O-02894)

I acknowledge the encouraging figures in the latest employment statistics, but does the cabinet secretary agree that, with an independent Scotland, we would have control to implement measures that could further strengthen youth employment, such as the European Union’s youth guarantee?

4. To ask the First Minister what support the Scottish Government is giving to the dotSCOT process. (S4F-01866)

I concur that there are opportunities for industry, not least for companies in the gaming industry, to distinguish themselves as Scottish companies. Will the First Minister say how the .scot domain can be used to engage with the tens of millions of people in the Scottish diaspora?

I thank my colleagues who sit on the Public Petitions Committee for their dedication in bringing this important issue to the chamber. I echo Liam McArthur’s comments: my experience on Education and Culture Committee inquiries informs me that this would have been a hard, uncomfortable and at times harrowing experience for Public Petitions Committee members. I for one am grateful for their efforts during the inquiry and for their speeches this afternoon. That is, of course, as nothing compared with the experience of front-line workers, including those at Barnardo’s and in the various third sector organisations that work in this area, or with that of the people who contributed to the report with reference to their personal experiences. I thank them for their bravery and candour. I believe that everyone in the chamber holds the wellbeing and safety of our young people foremost in their minds in debating the committee report this afternoon. Just yesterday, in the live online edition of the Newcastle Chronicle, there was an article about this very issue. The headline was “West End community’s shock at child sex exploitation allegations”. The report says: “People living in Newcastle’s West End yesterday told of their horror after learning that a number of their neighbours had been arrested by police probing a conspiracy to rape young women and teenage girls.” That was done under operation sanctuary. The article goes on to say: “Today some shocked residents of the West End have told of their disgust at what could have been going on behind closed doors in their community.” The article contains many contributions from local people, but I highlight in particular that of Dr Hari Shukla, a former director of the Tyne & Wear Racial Equality Council, who spoke of his upset that a group of that size had supposedly targeted its criminal activity at young women. The article says: “Dr Shukla is a member of the Newcastle Safeguarding Initiative, founded 10 years ago to make sure schools, young people and families in the city were working together to protect children in the community. He said: ‘We are upset by it and an alleged crime like this is not acceptable. It’s just wrong and I’m certain that all the communities involved feel the same way.’” The shock and horror experienced by that community, and its reaction, are recognisable and understandable. It brings home to us all the fact that that type of child sexual exploitation can be happening. It is incumbent on us all—on all Scotland’s communities—to be aware and vigilant in this regard. I welcome the comments that the Minister for Children and Young People made when she announced the expert group on tackling child sexual exploitation: “Sexual exploitation of children is a reality here in Scotland. Anyone who thinks our nation is immune from this appalling crime is simply wrong. It is a problem we face and a problem we must face up to. Research we published last year makes clear that there is no reason to believe that Scotland is any different from other countries in this. Our aim, therefore, must be to ensure that child sexual exploitation in Scotland can be detected, dealt with and ultimately prevented.” I welcome the Public Petitions Committee’s report. As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I am aware that much of the work that was undertaken for the report sits alongside our deliberations on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which will shortly come before the chamber at stage 3. One area that has proved to be controversial, and which, to my mind, has received a disproportionate amount of attention, is the bill’s proposal for a named person. I note that the Public Petitions Committee’s recommendations include a request for a named person to support victims of CSE through the justice process. Other evidence, which we have also heard about in the chamber today, about the vulnerability of any young person online, using social media or in chatrooms, and about the risks that young people face in other social settings, has confirmed my conviction that the role of a named person, who is an appropriate professional for a young person, whatever their circumstance—be it in the justice system, in the children’s hearings system, in social work or involving additional support needs—is a very important one. As Dave Stewart said, if one child can be saved by the work that the Public Petitions Committee has done, it will have been worth it. I feel the same way about the named person provisions being enshrined in the bill. If there is one less headline about a tragedy involving just one person, it will have been worth the effort of putting that provision in place. I hope that those who are opposed to the named person provisions will reflect on the report, and indeed on this afternoon’s debate, as the measure is supported by children’s charities, including Barnardo’s, which brought its petition to the Public Petitions Committee. The Aberlour Child Care Trust also provided briefings for this afternoon.

I absolutely understand the concerns that have been raised on this issue, but I think the evidence that we took in committee shows that the use of a named person will be measured and appropriate to the particular child. Most children will have no need of a named person, but the fact that that provision is normalised within a universal service means that there will be an opportunity for any child from any background who could be in need to contact someone if they want to do so. That is an important reason why the named person should be included in the bill and it reflects the Public Petitions Committee’s work in this area. I also sit on the European and External Relations Committee. Last year we took evidence from Myria Vasiliadou, the European anti-trafficking commissioner. The work that is being done on trafficking in Europe is very important. She told our committee: “we look at trafficking in human beings as being fundamentally a human rights violation that is a serious form of organised crime. I want to clarify how we understand trafficking human rights. Of course there is a legal framework and legal definition. However, to put it simply, it is about people who live under appalling conditions and work for or provide services to others against their will, with absolutely no choice to escape; whose lives are often in danger and whose families are threatened; and who often disappear.” She went on to say: “There are hundreds of thousands of people in Europe today who are trafficked. Our data suggests that 62 per cent of those who have been identified are women and girls who are trafficked for sexual exploitation.”—[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 12 September 2013; c 1311-12 and 1313.] Scotland does not stand alone in tackling this issue. We could look to the directive on human trafficking to see how we might tackle these issues and how the UK might tackle demand.

6. To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has to increase childcare provision. (S4F-01805)

Does the First Minister agree that, when Save the Children, the Educational Institute of Scotland, Unison, Shelter, the Church of Scotland and the Child Poverty Action Group all say that free school meals are a key measure in tackling child poverty, politicians of all parties should listen?

Does the minister agree that transformational childcare can be achieved only with control over all areas of policy, and by ensuring that the tax that is raised in Scotland stays in Scotland? Members: Hear, hear.

It has been said this afternoon, but it bears constant repetition, that Scotland has the opportunity this year to choose between two futures—two very different directions of travel. On the one hand, we are already the fourth most unequal country in the developed world, and the present Westminster Administration promises to take us further down the road of inequality, under Osborne’s austerity Britain. On the other hand, independence offers us the powers to develop further our steps towards universalism, greater equality and a better future for our children. That future might look like what is enjoyed by children in Holland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark, as has been highlighted by my colleagues Christina McKelvie and Stewart Maxwell. Scotland is a rich country and our children should share in that wealth. It is worth reminding ourselves of what the present inequality levels mean. I thought that Labour members might talk about their successes in tackling child poverty and I have not been disappointed. However, UNICEF produced a report in 2007 that put together 40 indicators of child wellbeing in rich countries and concluded that children in Britain fared less well than those in any other country, although those in the United States hardly did better. Improvements in child wellbeing in rich societies depend more on reductions in inequality than on further economic growth. The 2007 UNICEF report card provided a comprehensive assessment of the lives and wellbeing of children and young people in 21 nations of the industrialised world. It attempted to measure and compare child wellbeing under six headings: material wellbeing, health and safety, education, peer and family relationships, behaviour and risks, and young people’s subjective wellbeing. In all, it drew on 40 indicators of children’s lives. The United Kingdom found itself in the bottom third of the rankings for five of the six dimensions that were reviewed. That is simply not good enough for Scotland’s children. I was perhaps surprised to hear the claim that the SNP has somehow come late to the debate and that the First Minister has not had a handle on it in the past. Maybe that is said because Labour does not want to remember some of the things that it did when it was in government. In March 2007, Gordon Brown delivered one of the harshest blows to the most vulnerable families and to women on low incomes in part-time work when he scrapped the 10p tax rate, which shifted the tax burden to the lower paid. That caused misery for low-paid workers, many of whom are women in part-time jobs. On the day of that budget, Alex Salmond immediately called that a tax con and highlighted how damaging it would be for women and low-paid workers. George Adam asked us to remember when we talk about poverty and inequality that the lives of real children are involved. In 2013, Save the Children produced a briefing on the consequences for children in Scotland of growing up in poverty. It highlighted that they missed out on things that many other children take for granted—it said that they had to cut back on food, that 14 per cent of children who live in poverty said that they lacked a warm winter coat and that 19 per cent of them said that they were missing out on going on school trips. Such children are more than twice as likely as their better-off peers to suffer developmental difficulties as they reach school age and they are less likely to reach their potential at school. By three years old, children from deprived backgrounds are already nine months behind the average development and school readiness. By primary 7, the gap in reading attainment levels between pupils who live in poverty and their peers is 22 per cent, and the attainment gap in mathematics is 15 per cent. Save the Children also talked about health inequalities for children in poor families. Children who live in low-income households are nearly three times more likely to suffer mental health problems, and ill health during childhood has long-term consequences. As we know, a child who is born in Lenzie North, which is a more affluent area of Glasgow, can expect to live 28 years longer than a child who is born in the Calton. Poverty has a lifelong detrimental effect on Scotland’s children.

Not at the moment, sorry. That is why I am delighted that the Government has announced today that children in primary 1 to primary 3 will receive free school meals—a saving of, on average, £330 per child for hard-working Scottish families. That will be welcomed by the Scottish free school meals campaign, which includes organisations such as the EIS, Shelter Scotland and Children 1st. In its briefing for this debate, the campaign talked about the importance of universal benefits and services. The Jimmy Reid Foundation makes the case for universalism when it says: “If all of the available data is pulled together and the conclusions drawn, the historical and contemporary evidence strongly suggests that the appropriate response to austerity is to increase universal provision and so stimulate economic activity, equalise damaging wealth disparity and improve both government and wider economic efficiency”. I wish that the Labour Party was on the same page as the EIS, Children 1st and the Jimmy Reid Foundation in this debate.

The member might be aware that I live in North Lanarkshire, where more than 80 per cent of properties are band D or below, and 64 per cent are band B or below. Does the member consider people in those properties to be rich?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what the benefits will be of Scotland hosting the international culture summit in 2014. (S4O-02722)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the acclaim following the 2012 summit, which resulted in new funding partnerships among 37 of the countries present. How will the Scottish Government work with partners such as the British Council to ensure that 2014 offers similar opportunities?

Recommendation 20 of the report calls for a “balance between generating data and ... the capacity to interpret ... it”. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that any lessons learned from a review of data use and its reporting across the system will be shared across health boards, so that best practice is undertaken across all health boards?

Presiding Officer, thank you for that challenge at the start of my speech. I begin by associating myself with Stewart Maxwell’s comments about the witnesses and contributors who have worked with the committee during the past few months in coming to the conclusions in the report. I listened to Liz Smith talking about her frustration in dealing with this area, but I am also aware that we have done a considerable amount of work across the Parliament on the issues. In December last year, we had a debate in the chamber on permanence and adoption, and at that time Gil Paterson said that it was one of the debates that shows the Parliament in its best light. The report that we are discussing today also has the potential to meet that standard.

I absolutely agree, and I have had the same experience when listening to such comments. However, we must recognise that the committee’s initial inquiry identified that we were letting down our looked-after children. The second inquiry that we have undertaken in that area is a new piece of work, and perhaps enough prominence has not been given in Parliament to some of the issues and problems that existed before. I would like to thank Jayne Baxter, a new member of the committee, and to recognise the hard work of colleagues on her own benches and across the Parliament in bringing together the report that we are discussing and that I am so pleased to be able to speak about this afternoon. When we discussed permanence last year, my colleague Willie Coffey spoke about the scale of the problem. It is worth repeating some of the facts that he mentioned. He said that “there are 16,000 children who are being looked after by Scotland’s local authorities, and that there are possibly up to another 15,000 being cared for by relatives under informal arrangements.”—[Official Report, 6 November 2012; c 13073.] It is vital for families that the Scottish Government works with local authorities and other partner organisations in this area. In December last year, I highlighted a report from Who Cares? Scotland, which has contributed a great deal to the committee report that is before Parliament today, both in its support of young people who wanted to give evidence to the committee and in its briefings. In April last year, Who Cares? Scotland conducted a survey in which it spoke to 116 young people about their experience as care leavers in the system. One young woman said: “It was all too quick and I never got the time to pack my things. I would have liked more time to prepare and also to be told that going into care was an option as it was all a shock to me when it happened. I never got to say goodbye to my friends either which I didn’t like.” That quote sums up a lot of the concerns that were raised by many young people who we spoke to in the course of our deliberations. I want to talk briefly to the four themes in the report. On the early intervention theme, we have made quite a bit of progress with the roll-out of GIRFEC across Scotland, which will be put into statute in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. That goes some way to improving what we mean by early intervention. Ken Macintosh talked about the challenges for social work. Under theme 2, on assessments, we must not underestimate the huge amount of pressure to get it right for social workers to ensure that assessments are at a standard that is acceptable to decision makers about young people. Again, GIRFEC has gone some way to improve interagency and interdepartmental co-operation and to improve confidence that assessments meet requirements. The report also asks the Government to consider the concerns that have been raised and the commitment to GIRFEC that a clear timescale should be given that will demonstrate that integration is working and that we have improved confidence in the decision-making process and assessments. We must not underestimate the importance of the establishment of CELCIS in contributing to the improved confidence in assessments. CELCIS was set up with the aim to “promote effective professional engagement with families, promote the planning for and the management of high quality assessments, reduce unnecessary delays and drift in permanence planning and promote a new ‘whole systems’ approach to permanence planning.” Again in 2012, the early years collaborative, which is looking at evidence-based decision making, was created. Together, the two have the potential to do transformational work in this area. The challenge for the Government and local authorities is to ensure that the sharing of the findings, the adoption of best practice and the research from CELCIS and the early years collaborative can be used to maximum effect across Scotland. Mr Macintosh has already mentioned the importance of training and assessment in these areas. We must not underestimate the concerns that social workers have raised about the demographic challenges in their profession and the claim that post-qualification training and career development have disappeared. In paragraph 63, the report asks the Government to take seriously the concerns raised in that area. The quote from a young person that I used earlier says all that we need to know about hearing all the voices in the decision-making process. That is theme 4 in the report. A lot of good work is going on out there and a lot of progress is being made. I am really glad that this report will play a small part in improving the lives of our looked-after children.

I would not want to misrepresent Mr Findlay any more than he would want to misrepresent me. My understanding is that the committee was concerned about the public record and the impact that that might have on the young people. It was not that we did not want to hear their voices. They were given plenty of opportunities. The concern was about the public record and how that might have been interpreted by some areas of the media. That is where our concern was—it was for the young people.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to speak in this members’ business debate and congratulate James Dornan on securing it. St Andrew’s First Aid’s campaign is really important and, if members do not mind, I will read the entire pledge into the Parliament’s Official Report. It says: “No one should die because they needed First Aid and didn’t get it. I pledge to support St Andrew’s First Aid and the First Aid Count Me In campaign. I am supporting the campaign because I believe in the value of First Aid and acknowledge that it is a vital life-saving skill. It is really important to have champions of First Aid in local communities and by signing this campaign I am demonstrating my support for First Aid. Together we can save lives.” That is such an interesting and indeed beautifully put together pledge that everyone should be willing to support it. I certainly have pledged my support for the campaign. It is worth mentioning that GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, Clyde 1 radio, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and Young Scot are partners in the campaign. I am particularly keen about the involvement of Young Scot because, as James Dornan has made clear, St Andrew’s First Aid is very much about its volunteers, who play a vital role in disseminating information to young people and supporting young volunteers. Both Nanette Milne and David Torrance mentioned the scouts; indeed, I received my first-ever first aid training as a member of one of the uniformed youth organisations, and the young people in the scouts or in voluntary award schemes such as the Duke of Edinburgh award scheme who are getting first aid skills are doing a great service to each other, their friends and our country. Interestingly, the 34,000 target for signatures equates to the number of people who are admitted to hospital as a result of household accidents. Perhaps I can give the chamber a little bit of a breakdown of that 34,000 figure by highlighting the 2011 figures for two ends of the spectrum. In the under-5s group, there were 3,182 admissions to hospital, the majority of which were for accidents that happened in their homes, while in the over-65s, there were 21,196 admissions to hospital, many of which were, again, the result of accidents in their own homes. In the latter group, there were very few admissions as a result of road traffic accidents; most were the result of trips and falls, which we know to be a significant problem in our ageing population. These figures, however, are just the tip of the iceberg, because they show only those who were admitted to hospital. Far more people who are injured have to attend their general practitioner or other types of emergency services and are not admitted to accident and emergency departments. Perhaps their injuries are not as serious, but they will certainly have experienced significant discomfort and upset from them. At lunch time today, I chaired a meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on accident prevention and safety awareness. Obviously, we look at issues relating to preventing accidents, and that is partly about educating people. We know that, when people are educated about the risks and dangers around them, their risk-taking behaviour reduces. If we are undertaking to improve people’s knowledge of first aid and to get them to understand the dangers around them in their homes and as they go about their daily business, that education alone will let us as a society understand better the dangers that we face and, I hope, improve the outcomes for our young and elderly people.

It has been enjoyable and a great honour to be involved in the work of the Education and Culture Committee on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. We took a significant amount of written and oral evidence. Unfortunately, we could not see everybody who wanted to appear at the committee, but we took on board the written evidence that the committee received. The care and attention that had been given to the briefings on the bill that members received are a testament to how much the people and agencies that are involved want the bill to work and to improve outcomes for young people. The policy memorandum sets out that the fundamental reforms of children’s services are in line with the Christie commission report, which highlighted “the importance of early years, prevention and personalised service delivery”. We should remember that the Christie report received significant cross-party support on its publication. It is to be commended that we are moving towards that. We need to take stock of what is happening in Scotland, because we are not starting from zero in respect of children’s services. Colleagues in the national health service, local authorities and education services have all been working hard to take on board the recommendations of the Christie report. They are moving towards more collaborative working practices, not only in the early years and children’s services but in services for elderly people. A great deal of change is already happening in the sector. I want to highlight some of the work that is being done in the area. The committee is on record as commending NHS staff, local authority workers and education staff for their dedication and commitment to their roles. I want to highlight the roots of empathy programme pilot that happened in North Lanarkshire. From the research that underpins the bill, we all know about the importance of early intervention. We know that a child’s emotional development can be badly damaged by poor parenting in the early years and in early schooling. The roots of empathy programme was piloted in the Berryhill primary area in North Lanarkshire. It is a Canadian programme, founded by Mary Gordon, that is designed to improve the emotional capacity of young children and their capacity to empathise with other people. It involves a young baby being brought into a primary classroom, with a structured series of questions and engagement with the baby, such as game playing and song singing. I shall spare members my rendition of the song for baby Ruben that I heard in Berryhill primary, but it was a delight to see the reaction of the young baby on hearing the children in the class welcoming him with that song. The programme is well documented and the research has shown how much it improves the capacity for empathy in young people. Of course, for many young people, that will not be necessary because they are growing up in warm and nurturing homes with good responsible parenting and the opportunity to engage with other people. However, for children who have been denied that upbringing, the results are impressive in relation to anger management issues and reducing the behavioural problems that sometimes result from the complex issues that Jayne Baxter so eloquently described in talking about the damage that poverty can do to young people. Far from starting from new on the issue, there is much good work going on in Scotland. We should acknowledge that and recognise the dedication and commitment of the people who are involved in that work. As the minister said at the launch of the roll-out, the roots of empathy programme shows “our commitment to early intervention and the importance of positive relationships as the cornerstone of a better Scotland.” She continued: “This is an investment in the future; by encouraging empathy and respect in children we are giving them the foundations to be positive, successful adults who will pass those skills onto their own children.” In its support for the principles of the bill, the committee is showing how important that is for moving forward. Putting that in statute will create a marker that sets Scotland out as one of the foremost countries in its support for young people and their development.

Thank you. The report was based mainly on consensus and I do not need to repeat its recommendations or conclusions. The one issue on which committee members differed was the named person. We should therefore consider some of the support for the named person role. The Royal College of Nursing said that the named person role was working well in areas where GIRFEC is being implemented. Children 1st said that it supported “the idea of the named person, as we believe it could offer a way to avoid children ‘slipping through the net’ when they are at their most vulnerable, and a useful point of contact for families so they can access advice and services without having to deal with excessive delay or red tape.” In addition, we should take on the success of Highland Council and North Ayrshire Council and other authorities that are working on and rolling out GIRFEC successfully and implementing the named person role.

I am not a member of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, but I echo the cabinet secretary’s sentiments in drawing to our attention the hard work that all members of that committee have done, under Bruce Crawford’s stewardship. Everyone who has been involved in the process—whether through working on the Edinburgh agreement or through working on scrutiny of the bill in committee—should be congratulated. We owe them a debt of gratitude for allowing us to reach today’s conclusion. I remember that Annabelle Ewing spoke in the stage 1 debate about her great pleasure at being a member of the committee; I think that her mother echoed that pride at being involved in the process. As I have been on the sidelines, I am glad to speak this afternoon. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I was interested in the Electoral Commission’s briefing for the stage 3 debate, which talks about the bill providing “A well-run referendum which has the confidence of voters and campaigners” and “is underpinned by a clear and certain legal framework.” I think that the bill provides a robust legislative framework that everyone can have confidence in, so I was somewhat disappointed to read in the press this week the suggestion from former forces minister Adam Ingram MP that an attempt might be made to reverse the yes decision in the two-year transition period between the vote in September 2014 and independence in 2016. I draw Mr Ingram’s attention to the response in Glasgow this week to the proposal to raise the plinth for the statue of the Duke of Wellington, to prevent cones from being placed on the duke’s head. That demonstrates that once Scottish people have made up their minds on something it is a very brave person indeed who suggests that they cannot have their way. I caution against Mr Ingram’s proposed approach. During the debate on Scotland’s independence, Opposition party members have often said that this 300-year-old union is the most successful partnership of nations in the world. Anne McGuire said something similar on “Scotland Tonight” this week when she was debating the issue. I cannot help but wonder on what basis those members are judging success. We are the most unequal country in Europe and the fourth most unequal country in the developed world. We have the lowest male life expectancy, in parts of the east end of Glasgow. In my home town, after the closure of Ravenscraig, we had the highest male unemployment rate in Europe. We have been drawn into illegal wars. It might have been Anne McGuire’s appearance on television that reminded me that we have recently endured the closure of Remploy factories across our country. I do not regard those as measures of success. Scotland deserves and can afford a fairer society, and with the passing of the bill Scotland has the opportunity to choose a fairer society. The other night on the news, Anne McGuire said that she hopes that the next UK Government will be a Labour Government. My hope for Scotland is that she has a Government that she votes for, which represents the values and choices of the Scottish people, so that we do not have foisted on us a UK Government that does not reflect how we want to be seen as a nation. I will give an example that demonstrates why the issue is so important, from this week’s parliamentary business. On Tuesday, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, updated the Parliament on the European Union common agricultural policy budget. Had Scotland been a member state, as an independent nation in Europe, Scottish farmers and crofters would have received the full benefit of external convergence. It is clear that the UK’s uplift is the direct result of low payments in Scotland. Were it not for Scotland, there would be no uplift for the UK. Therefore, in the interests of justice, 100 per cent of the rebate should have come to Scotland’s farmers. The cabinet secretary said: “During my time in this job, there have been many examples of UK policy undermining Scottish agriculture. I thought that Hilary Benn’s decision a few years ago not to compensate sheep farmers for foot-and-mouth disease was a low point, but this is even worse than that. The decision goes against the intentions of the EU, it defies the wishes of the Scottish Parliament and it takes away from Scottish farmers and crofters resources that should be theirs and on which their livelihoods depend. It is no surprise that Scottish farming and crofting leaders are bitterly disappointed by Mr Paterson’s decision.”—[Official Report, 12 November 2013; c 24261-2.] That is just one reason why I think that this 300-year-old union no longer works in the interests of Scotland. I conclude on a personal note. My son will be 17 at the time of the referendum and he will have an opportunity to vote for the first time. The opportunity to work with young people is one of the greatest privileges for me and for all my politician colleagues. Young people who are tackling sectarianism in our society, fundraising for hospitals and international aid, and advocating and supporting fair trade are more than capable of examining the issues around the referendum. I want all Scotland’s young people to embrace the opportunity to ask the big questions. Where is Scotland’s place in the world? What values do I want my country to have? What are my priorities for my country’s future? I am glad that young people will have that opportunity next year.

In 2007, I was elected as a councillor in Wishaw and was elected on to the Scottish Accident Prevention Council home safety committee. It was on that committee that I learned some of the shocking statistics about accidents among children and young people. I learned that this is really an issue of social justice, because children in socially deprived areas are five times more likely to die in an accident. Not all those accidents will be during play, of course, but we know from the research that has been done by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents that many of the accidents that happen to young people are in a play environment and that we see many more of them in the long summer holidays than we do at other times of the year. James Dornan talked about the issues that can affect a family in relation to play and interacting with their children. ROSPA’s evidence in that area backs up that when the stresses of life are such that families are disengaged or there are drug or alcohol problems, children’s play activity suffers. The ROSPA evidence shows us that that means that those children are far more likely to have accidents in a play environment. Therefore getting this right, working with our partners and making a play strategy that works for Scotland is about social justice. I am very glad that there are some good examples out there of work that is being done to tackle some of these problems. For example, Network Rail, which is in the process of electrifying its lines across Lanarkshire and Falkirk, in my region, is working with the Scottish Youth Theatre on a project called rail respect. The project has been rolled out in North Lanarkshire and Stirling and is about to be delivered in Lambert high school and Carrongrange school in Falkirk. Through a series of workshops, the rail respect project engages young people in their decision-making process about how they play, where they play, their risk taking, their respect for other people and their respect for one another. In so doing, the project gives some of the life experiences that Fiona McLeod alluded to—life skills that give young people the chance to make better decisions about their own safety in their play areas. I am also very glad that the Scottish Government is working in conjunction with ROSPA to provide home safety kits for referred households in poor areas. It is not just about the provision of the kits—they are engaging with the fire service and with other home services in the area to fit the kits into the houses of people who have been recognised to be at risk by the agencies involved with them. That is a great step forward in improving the play environment and the home environment for young people. ROSPA has also engaged the acclaimed children’s author Linda Strachan, who has written a book called “The Birthday Party”, which is for five and six-year-old children. The book makes them aware of the dangers around their own houses and their own areas in the context of a birthday party at a friend’s house. ROSPA has an ambition to make sure that every five-year-old in Scotland has access to a copy of the book. For all the reasons that have been mentioned to do with the emotional wellbeing and development of our children, getting this right absolutely is about social justice. If we want to achieve our ambitions of reducing inequality and improving the welfare of our young children, the play strategy is a great step forward towards meeting those aims in our country. I will give an example from my region. Thornlie primary school sits in a council estate in Wishaw, in North Lanarkshire, that has had its challenges over the years with deprivation. It is a strong community but nonetheless suffers from a lot of the social problems that members would imagine in such an area. Given that the school sits in the centre of the community, prior to 2010 it was often a target for misadventure and vandalism in the evenings. However, in 2010 Thornlie primary school embarked on a project to completely transform the outdoor play area at the school. The project was about active learning in the classroom and beyond and it was all about innovative outdoor learning. The whole project was designed around risk—getting better risk assessment for children—and adventure, so it involved shelter building and the use of natural play materials. The project completely transformed the nature of what had been an urban play area. The approach was not without its challenges, not least having to tackle some complaints from parents about having not only to wash their children more but to wash their clothes when they come home from school. Nonetheless, the school developed a policy and worked with parents in the area to get them to engage in what was an innovative project. There is a fallen tree in the grounds, and there is a fire pit, which the children are allowed to use at the after-school fire club. Jayne Baxter talked about children playing creatively with boxes. Children at Thornlie have a whole load of material for making dens. They have posts, flags, blankets, crates and so on, and hay is delivered to the school once a year, which the children are encouraged to use. Jayne Baxter talked about the need to involve children. The children at Thornlie worked with a local artist. They designed willow tunnels and shapes that they wanted to use in the playground. I was lucky enough to attend the launch of the initiative in 2011 with the minister, Aileen Campbell. It has taken the school from strength to strength. The school went on to have an outdoor conference, to which it invited members of the local community. The conference was a big success. Many children gave up their Saturday to come along and explain what the initiative meant to them. In January this year, the school was awarded a keep Scotland beautiful campaign award for its playground. Not only has the initiative transformed opportunities for children at Thornlie primary school, the pride that the community takes in the school is evident to all. Play has been truly transformational for the community.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made regarding payments to new entrants and others who are currently excluded from the single farm payment scheme. (S4O-02521)

Does the cabinet secretary welcome the improved exchange rate that is to be used for the 2013 single farm payment scheme? What effect will financial discipline activation have on new entrants and on the 16,000 Scottish farmers who receive their single farm payments in sterling?

Last week, the European and External Relations Committee took evidence from the Lithuanian ambassador to the UK, Asta Liauškiene, on Lithuania’s priorities for its presidency of the EU. I was pleased to hear that economic growth and employment were at the core of its priorities, and that youth employment and youth employability were of great concern. We welcomed the ambassador’s acknowledgement of the work that has been done in Scotland to tackle the issue. She recognised the contribution that our Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance, made to work on the issue by taking our case to Europe at committee level. That was welcomed. I am glad to have the opportunity to speak in what is a hugely important debate on the interim report of the commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce. I am glad that the report sets out what we are doing in that area and that it shows that we are by no means standing still. The curriculum for excellence, which is being embedded in and rolled out across our schools, represents an extremely important change to the way in which we educate our young people. The regionalisation of our colleges has provided a focus on the ability to secure better outcomes across regions. The report identifies that the greatest focus is on our modern apprenticeships, which are highly popular and seem to have been extremely successful across a variety of sectors. They are in great demand in our economy. The report also highlights the Government’s opportunities for all commitment to offer a place in learning to all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in employment, education or training. Therefore, we are in a good position to examine the issues. I would like to address all the commission’s recommendations, but I do not think that I will have time to do so. I will jump to an issue that is of particular interest to me, as someone who worked in the information technology industry for 20 years and who has a specific interest in the STEM areas. I was glad to see that recommendation 11 is: “A focus on STEM should sit at the heart of the development of Scotland’s Young Workforce.” That is an extremely important point, but we must recognise that we have issues in that area. The Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report, “Tapping all our Talents”, considered women in STEM subjects and identified that even women who train in those subjects often leave the workplace later on. It is a complex area, in which work still needs to be done. I am glad that STEM ambassadors are being deployed in schools to try to engage young people—especially young women—in careers in that area. At this morning’s meeting of the Education and Culture Committee, the cabinet secretary reminded us that one in five of our higher education places is delivered by our colleges, and that funding for research and development will be key as we move forward. It is welcome that Scotland has four of the top 100 universities in the world and it is interesting that Sweden has the same ranking. While Scotland tends to follow the UK level of spending on research and development—which, at the moment, sits at 1.7 per cent of gross domestic product—as an independent nation, Sweden spends 3.4 per cent of GDP on research and development. In everything that we do, we should consider what opportunities independence could give us. It would enable us to move towards the European target of spending 3 per cent of GDP on research and development. That is certainly an area in which the UK is underperforming. The debate is about the future, but I have a concern about where our colleges are at the moment. In March 2013, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council published “College Performance Indicators 2011-12”. The indicators are highly encouraging in the areas of computing, information and communication technology and engineering, in which the “Completed: successful” level is 75 per cent. However, the indicators are at their lowest level in science, in which the “Completed: successful” level is only 52 per cent, while the “Completed: Partial success” level is only 74 per cent. Science also has one of the lowest rates of uptake when it comes to HMIE subject groupings for courses that last 460 hours or more.

We have discussed that issue at committee. In the current economic climate, I think that the Government’s decision to focus on young people in the age group concerned is absolutely right. I cannot go into all the report’s recommendations, but we are on a very good footing with recommendation 10, which focuses on “Support for young people at risk of disengaging from education”. That is a hugely concerning area because those are the most hard-to-reach young people. I put it on the record how grateful I am that, when we passed the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Act 2013 on college regionalisation, we included a data sharing aspect. That gives us for the first time an opportunity to look at the destinations of our young people and engage with them at an earlier point in their careers to help keep them on the right pathway or to change pathway, whichever would lead to a better outcome for them in the long run. I welcome the report and the Government’s response to it this afternoon.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I was born in the decade of the inception of CAP, which brings to mind the old Benjamin Franklin quotation about there being nothing surer than death and taxes. Perhaps it should be, “There is nothing surer than death, taxes and calls for CAP reform.” I suppose that we should put on record that we are thankful that an agreement on CAP reform was reached in June of this year. However, the question that we should be asking is whether that agreement is the best that we can do for our farmers. Claire Baker was right to commend farmers. To continue the theme of my colleague Mike MacKenzie, I would like to talk about farmers and what they mean to us. Given that the debate is a technical one that relates to an extremely complicated piece of European policy that is full of pillar 1 and pillar 2 jargon, and which alludes to slipper farmers and sofa farmers, it would be easy to become detached from the issue. Therefore, I want to talk about the humanity of farmers, which I have been reminded of twice this week. At a Scots Language Society event, I had the absolute pleasure of hearing a great young folk talent, Kirsty Law, singing one of her own compositions, in which she told the story of the horrendous impact that the winter had on hill farmers, shepherds and crofters. That took me back vividly to the heart-rending news reports of broken-hearted farmers and crofters who were losing their livestock. I fully concur with her message in that song that people like me who live and work in sanitised, centrally heated homes and offices can have no understanding of the hardship and rigour of farming life during weather extremes, floods and disasters. Yesterday evening, I chaired a meeting of the cross-party group on accident prevention and safety awareness. During one of the excellent presentations on accident statistics, Alistair McNab of the Health and Safety Executive highlighted the improving trends in work-related accidents and deaths, but reminded us that the agriculture sector still has the highest incidence of deaths and accidental injuries in Scotland. There are eight deaths per 100,000 workers in that industry, and the sector is proving to be the most difficult in which to deal with the issue. We must improve on that, and make substantial and measurable improvements. That hides the fact that many children of farmers and farm workers live and work in those challenging environments. Those environments are their homes. All too often, we have heard of children’s tragic accidents in farm environments. Farmers and their families pay a huge price for us every day of their lives, so we should hold our farmers who live and work in the sector in our hearts as we ask the question: is this the best we can do for our farmers? In his Royal Highland Show address this year, the cabinet secretary said: “To retain active agriculture, keep our land productive, maintain food production, safeguard our environment, remain competitive and maintain populations living in our rural communities, the settled view of Scotland is that we need ongoing support from Europe.” I absolutely agree with him on that, and it was really good to hear that his priorities of new entrants, stopping the decline, removing red tape from the process and reducing the number of slipper farmers have by and large been achieved in some of the pillar 1 areas. I want to talk about coupled support, which is one of the partial successes. Coupled support will be at 8 per cent for member states with previously low coupled support. In his Royal Highland Show address, the cabinet secretary said: “To reverse the decline in livestock numbers, keep cattle and sheep on our hills, protect our red meat supply chain, and to produce for the domestic and export markets, Scotland wants the option of coupled support.” We should welcome that partial success but, as Alison Johnstone said, it is simply not good enough. Many of my colleagues have talked about the potential of independence and what it could mean if Scotland were a member state. Angus MacDonald listed how badly we have performed compared with some member states. Sixteen other countries—Scotland not included—have managed to negotiate an uplift. Research and development funding in Europe is structural funding. That is another area in respect of which we are constantly told that we are stronger in the UK, but where the UK leads at the moment, Scotland follows, by and large because of the Barnett formula. The UK spends 1.7 per cent of its gross domestic product on research and development. Research and development are crucial in all the areas that Jayne Baxter mentioned. They are crucial in biodiversity, carbon capture and animal husbandry. We could go on and on about how important diversity and innovation are. The European target for research is 3 per cent of GDP. We are hugely underperforming in that area. We often compare ourselves with the Nordic countries, and Sweden spends 3.4 per cent of its GDP on research and development. This is not just a matter of what happens within CAP funding; it is about every area in Europe in which we are underperforming and in which we could do much better as an independent Scotland. Jayne Baxter was living in the real world. I return to the cabinet secretary’s Royal Highland Show address, in which he said: “many businesses tell me that the biggest threat to our food and drink industry is indeed a forthcoming referendum—but not the one in 2014 but the UK’s proposed referendum on EU membership in 2017.” I ask again: is this the best we can do for our farmers? I think not. Independence could do so much more.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what benefit the 2013 summer festivals have brought to the Scottish economy. (S4O-02413)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that that bodes very well for the number of likely visitors to Scotland in the forthcoming year, which will see the staging of the Ryder cup, the Commonwealth games and the homecoming, all of which should have a hugely positive impact on Scotland?

Presiding Officer, “I am not a number, I am a free man.” That quotation will be instantly recognisable to fans of the 1960s science fiction series “The Prisoner”—and perhaps to the odd Iron Maiden fan in the chamber. Of course, the use that is made of numbers to identify individuals in that series serves to heighten the surreal dehumanising nature of the seemingly idyllic village in which the protagonist finds himself. There are many such examples in literature. In Victor Hugo’s “Les Misérables”, Inspector Javert refers to the hero, Jean Valjean, by a prison number only, and in Alex Haley’s semi-autobiographical “Roots”, the name Kunta Kinte is replaced by a slave name. In Margaret Atwood’s “The Handmaid’s Tale”, women’s names are eliminated and diminished to “Offred” or “Ofglen”—of the man who controls them. In mentioning Daniel Pelka, Liz Smith reminded us that the human race can be extremely cruel. To our shame, it has understood the dehumanising effect of the taking of a name, as happened when slaves were branded and victims in Belsen, Auschwitz and other concentration camps were tattooed. Our artists, in seeking to challenge our understanding of humanity, as well as those with the most evil intent in our history, have understood the power of a name and how deep in our psyche as human and social beings a name—or its removal or denial—can be. If we can recognise the power of the denial of a name, we must also recognise how powerful the giving of a name can be. I believe that the proposals for a named person that are included in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill have the power to transform how society, professionals, families, children and young people interact as we move towards the full implementation of GIRFEC. When the Education and Culture Committee took evidence yesterday, Kate Higgins of Children 1st talked about the reluctance of some kinship carers to engage with the system. That is a position of alienation and disengagement. However, Bill Alexander from Highland Council, which has implemented GIRFEC extremely successfully, used the phrase, “That was the power of the named person.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 24 September 2013; c 2862.] I believe that the named person is a powerful development as we move towards the implementation of GIRFEC, which Labour introduced and Scottish National Party Governments have carried forward. Bill Alexander explained that, by and large, the policy represents the formalisation of what professionals have been doing for the majority of families. The change will be seamless, as most families’ engagement and interaction with professionals will be no different. However, it will make a difference when a family needs help or advice. Instead of being referred to a school building, a helpline or a job title, they will have a named person to contact—someone who knows them and who has had that most fundamental exchange of an introduction and an exchange of names. The named person will be someone who is known to them, someone who is in their community and someone whom they know will have their wellbeing, under the SHANARRI principles, at the heart of everything they do in their engagement with them. I look forward to the move towards a named person, which is a powerful development.

That is because of the union.

I am delighted to speak in this debate on Scotland’s historic environment: the way forward. We are debating the first historic environment strategy, and it has been arrived at through consultation with the historic environment sector, our charitable bodies and local government. Further consultation will see the strategy complete its vision to deliver the best outcomes for Scotland’s unique historic environment and maximise its potential to enrich our communities, towns and cities and bolster our local economies. Part of that environment is the memorials that commemorate so much of our history as a nation, whether they be memorials to great battles such as Loudon Hill, Sheriffmuir and Bannockburn or the cenotaphs in our town centres that mark the more recent wars, which are all the more poignant given that we will mark the 100-year anniversary of the start of the first world war next year. In Hamilton, we have a beautiful archway where the 14 men of Lanarkshire who were decorated with the Victoria Cross are remembered. We also have the Auchengeich mining disaster memorial, which is a beautifully reinstated monument to remember those miners. The memorials are all the more remarkable because many of them are the work of local communities—people who are passionate about the contribution to Scotland’s history that their area has made and who want to commemorate that for future generations. I was honoured to attend the opening of the national mining memorial centre at Lady Victoria colliery in Newtongrange last weekend. Over three floors, the centre remembers all those whose lives were lost or who were injured in the mining industry. It was a poignant day, as it was the anniversary of the Knockshinnoch mining disaster, and the centre is all the more impressive because it has been achieved through public donation, through the support of the local community and local authorities and through the camaraderie of mining areas across Scotland, which all contributed in some way. The centre has a beautiful table that was donated from Ayrshire. The memorial centre resonates with me, as a Lanarkshire lass, because there are many collieries in my area and we have the fantastic industrial heritage museum at Summerlee. In Motherwell, we once had some of the most iconic steel factories in the world in the Ravenscraig towers. Although those were demolished many years ago, the industrial history has still shaped the landscape in our area, much as have the bings from the coal industry. I hope that the steelworkers memorial fund will soon achieve the goal of erecting a new memorial to the steelworkers who lost their lives in that industry—a memorial that will add to our historic environment and be enjoyed by Scots who visit the area to trace their Lanarkshire heritage as well as by those who live in the area. It is the potential for visitors to Lanarkshire that inspires me most about this first national strategy. One has only to look to the great tapestry of Scotland, which has been mentioned by many members, to see how important our history is. The great tapestry was the brainchild of one of Scotland’s most loved writers, Alexander McCall Smith. The historian Alistair Moffat, the artist Andrew Crummy and thousands of stitchers from all over Scotland have taken Alexander McCall Smith’s vision and have produced one of the longest tapestries in the world in one of the biggest community arts projects ever to take place in Scotland. Alexander McCall Smith said: “I salute the visionary artist, Andrew Crummy, and his team of hundreds, led by Dorie Wilkie. I salute their magnificent artistry. I salute their generosity. I salute their good humour. This tapestry is their creation, given to the people of Scotland and to those who will come to Scotland to see it.” Much of my region is represented in that tapestry. Ravenscraig, the miners, the Falkirk wheel, the Antonine wall and Cumbernauld all feature on a fantastic artwork that will enthral and entertain everyone who is lucky enough to see it. In my region, we also have Bothwell castle and the national museum of rural life in East Kilbride. All of those would be worthy of a single debate in the chamber. As we approach next year’s Commonwealth games, I hope that those people who attend events at Strathclyde loch will have an opportunity to learn about the Roman remains in Strathclyde park and be able to visit the Duke of Hamilton’s mausoleum and Chatelherault park, which is visible from the loch. When they venture outside my region, I hope that they will also take in the greatest place-making project in the world in the village of New Lanark. The brainchild of David Dale and Robert Owen, New Lanark saw the birth of the co-operative movement, and the world heritage site is an incredible example of the preservation of our industrial heritage that teaches and inspires today. Nestling beneath Cora Lynn—the Falls of Clyde—it is one of our most beautiful environmental sites, and I hope that everyone who has an opportunity to visit it during the Commonwealth games will be able to do so.

13. To ask the Scottish Government how planning and regeneration can help achieve sustainable economic growth. (S4O-02334)

Will the minister set out the timescales in which national planning framework 3 and the new Scottish planning policy will come into effect?

I lodged amendment 80 to address a critical issue that the committee considered during its evidence gathering. A recurring theme was the lack of diversity, particularly in relation to gender, on university governing bodies. Although that is clearly an issue in universities, my further research has shown that the situation in colleges is not much better. In both sectors, only about 30 per cent of board members are women. That situation is absolutely unacceptable, so I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has given his explicit support to addressing that inequality. Although I support the intention behind Jenny Marra’s amendments, I accept the cabinet secretary’s view that they are not within the Parliament’s legislative competence. I look forward to making “bold” decisions for the women of Scotland.

No, thank you.

The bold decision would be to vote next year for the powers that would bring such amendments within the Parliament’s legislative competence. I accepted the cabinet secretary’s generous offer to work with those who had wanted to lodge amendments on the subject and with the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport to draft amendment 80, which signals our desire to see meaningful progress being made, and which will enable that to happen in a way that is within the Parliament’s current competence.

I speak in support of amendment 79, which, as the cabinet secretary has said, concerns a very important matter for the further education system. We must understand that the reason why we have lost collective bargaining in the system is the Tory-designed incorporation of the colleges. I fully support the cabinet secretary in his aim of addressing that problem.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement, especially in relation to the commission’s recommendations about financial arguments being based on clear and accurate data. Having just gone through school closures in my region, I know how important it is to parents that they have transparent financial information when a school closure is considered. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that recommendations 21 and 22 are being accepted? Does he agree with the commission chairman, Sheriff David Sutherland, that the more information we give parents, the more balanced, reasonable and open the discussion that can take place will be?

I am very glad to speak in the debate on the draft national planning framework and the draft Scottish planning policy document. I grew up in Lanarkshire. Of course, New Lanark is one of the most famous successes of place making in not only Scotland but, possibly, the world. It was Robert Owen’s vision and included a factory, workers’ housing, schools, a place of worship, shops—which were at the forefront of the co-operative movement—and the very first workplace nursery in the world. Today, New Lanark is acclaimed as a world heritage site and Lanarkshire is proud of its heritage and of New Lanark’s place in our industrial history. Everyone in the chamber would recognise that it is highly unlikely that an enterprise such as that could get planning permission in Scotland today, as it was built on an undeveloped and unspoilt site, but it is right that that is so. National planning framework 3 should give us the balance of needs in our country, and I do not have a problem with the phrase “balanced growth” in the motion. I do not have a problem with balance at all. If planning is about anything, it is about balancing our economic and environmental needs and the future of our country. I welcome the themes in the policy document, which focuses on sustainable economic growth, with more emphasis on economic benefits. The proposed planning system will support well-designed, successful, sustainable places where people want to live, visit and invest. The national planning policy and framework will support ambitions for a low-carbon economy, which is crucial for our country’s future, and the planning system will support ambitions to respect, enhance and make responsible use of our natural and cultural assets. The policy should be one that continues to focus on sustainable economic growth, but with more emphasis on economic benefits. That is key. I do not have a problem with the wording around this issue; it is clear that both draft documents give us the opportunity to achieve the right balance for our country’s future. The Government has mentioned taking a holistic approach to considering the relationship between buildings, natural resources, movement and utilities, all of which are key to getting the balance right. The focus should be on positive place making, of which New Lanark is one of the most famous and most successful examples. The approach is based on six qualities: distinctive, welcoming, adaptable, resource efficient, safe and pleasant, and easy to move around and beyond. I look forward to the forthcoming policy on architecture and place, which will also show how we can encourage good design and create the kind of places that we would all like to visit and to live and work in. As a member for Central Scotland, I echo Margaret Mitchell’s comments about what the policy will mean for Central Scotland as a region. I welcome the Grangemouth and Peterhead carbon capture and storage schemes, the central Scotland green network, and the national cycling and walking network, which will cover all three local authorities in Central Scotland. I hope that members will not mind if, as someone who was born and brought up in Motherwell, I also focus on something that has already been mentioned quite a bit this afternoon—the Ravenscraig site. It is not the white canvas that Robert Owen had in New Lanark, but it is perhaps the nearest thing that we have to that in Scotland. It is the biggest brownfield site in Europe, and the development of Ravenscraig will give us a great opportunity to get the balance right in our community—a balance that will meet the needs of the existing towns of Motherwell and Wishaw, and provide economic opportunities. It is 30 years since Ravenscraig closed, and the initial plans for the site included a new town centre, major leisure facilities, housing, business, industry, hotels and a railway station, as John Pentland mentioned—the whole package of new town community facilities and road improvements. It is a hugely ambitious project, but something that is desperately needed in Lanarkshire. When we consider what businesses and industries might come back to Lanarkshire, I hope that we will be able to build on the history of technology and engineering in the area, perhaps looking to opportunities in the oil and gas sector and in new technologies. The site is not empty at the moment. Motherwell College has developed its residential unit as a circle, alluding to the Ravenscraig towers. The regional sports centre has already been used for the international children’s games, and is a possible training centre for the 2014 Commonwealth games. It is interesting that the shape of the steel coming out of the manufacturing process has been captured in the design of those buildings at Ravenscraig. Sarah Boyack mentioned innovation. The most exciting thing at Ravenscraig at the moment is the Building Research Establishment innovation park, where six sustainable and carbon-efficient houses are going to be built. BRE is working closely with the college to ensure that the skills to build sustainable housing developments will be acquired by people in the area. I welcome the policy as a great opportunity. If we get the balance right, it will be wonderful for Scotland. I finish with a note of optimism from Robert Owen. In 1816, he said that “no obstacle whatsoever intervenes at this moment except ignorance to prevent such a state of society from becoming universal”. I believe that that is the case, and that we can achieve it.

First, I will put on the record what the minimum income guarantee will mean for Scottish students. It will mean an annual income of £7,250, through a combination of bursaries and loans, for students from families that are on incomes of less than £17,000. All students, regardless of their circumstances, will be eligible for a student loan of £4,500 per year, as requested by NUS Scotland, which wants to see more cash in students’ pockets. Part-time students whose personal income is less than £25,000 will now receive full support for tuition fees as a proportion of the full-time fee equivalent. Increased support is being provided for part-time students from the lowest-income households, who will now be able to have the full cost of their tuition fees, up to the equivalent rate of fee support for full-time courses, met by the Scottish Government. That brings the arrangements for them into line with those for full-time students. In addition, dental and medical students will receive support for the duration of their courses when, previously, they received less support in their final year. Robin Parker of NUS Scotland has been quoted a lot. In today’s Scotsman, he said: “Our research shows that student hardship, and not having enough money to live on, is one of the largest deterrents to starting and staying at college or university. That’s why it’s so important to see the huge investment being made into financial support from this summer, worth an additional £140m per year in the money students receive in their pockets, with increases for the poorest students worth almost £1,000 a year each.” It is extremely important that we acknowledge that we are looking after our students. The widening access agenda has been mentioned. I will address Mr Findlay’s assertion that we had somehow voted against further participation in widening access. In committee, we democratically gave the cabinet secretary the flexibility to identify groups that would be affected by the widening access agenda. The Labour proposition was based on protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010, despite the fact that they are already protected in the process. The example that I gave in committee, which I give again, is the Gypsy Traveller community, which does not have a protected characteristic but might well be supported by what we voted for, which means that the cabinet secretary could identify such a group for support in widening access. The principal of the University of Edinburgh, Sir Timothy O’Shea, said: “We support the bill’s intentions with regard to widening participation and having greater efficiency in the sector and greater accountability.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 22 January 2013; c 1838.] Robin Parker said that, rather than having an obsession with tuition fees, Scottish Labour’s obsession should be with promoting fairer access to higher education, which he said that the NUS would be very willing to work on with it. Where is all this coming from? It is coming from the blue Labour agenda, which is why Labour down south is not proposing to reverse the child benefit cuts and is proposing the introduction of means testing for fuel payments. [Interruption.]

Labour members would lead us to believe that they are looking after poor people, but that is not what is happening in reality. In the London borough of Newham, the long-standing Labour mayor, Robin Wales, has overseen fast-tracking of people who are in employment on to the housing waiting list. What Labour members say here does not reflect what Labour is doing down south. We must remember that the recently appointed Labour peer Lord Maurice Glasman—Baron Glasman—is at the forefront of this agenda. He advocates removing absolute entitlement to welfare in favour of rewards that are based on financial and social contributions. The Labour Party is not protecting the poor, or anyone else, in Scotland.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to promote hydrogen as a means of storing and distributing energy. (S4O-02173)

As far back as 2006, the hydrogen energy group produced the report “Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Opportunities for Scotland”, which concluded that hydrogen and fuel cell technology has the potential for “10,000 jobs and GVA to Scotland’s economy of £500 million per annum ... In order for Scotland to achieve its ... renewable target ... it will almost certainly require hydrogen and fuel cell systems to balance and integrate many diverse ... sources of energy.” How far have we gone in maximising the potential of that technology?

Can the cabinet secretary outline how the recently launched certificate of work readiness will help more young people into employment?

Does Iain Gray recognise that part of the reason for teaching two foreign languages to pupils between primary 1 and primary 6 is that the changes that it makes to the neural connections in their brains improve academic outcomes at all levels for those young people?

I will endeavour to speak “To infinity and beyond!”, Presiding Officer. I start by taking issue with my colleague, Mr Stevenson. I feel compelled, in the interests of truth, to clarify that Richard Feynman used iced water to demonstrate that the O-rings had failed at the time of the Challenger disaster, thereby making the point that atmospheric conditions led to the failure. Although he revealed to the world what had happened, it is now commonly known that he was tipped off by the female astronaut Sally Ride as to the cause of the disaster. Many of my colleagues in the chamber enjoy the Blipfoto phenomenon and go round taking photographs of things that they see in their daily lives—the flowers, fauna and landscapes of Scotland. I follow Chris Hadfield, the recently returned Canadian National Aeronautics and Space Administration astronaut, who also took photographs daily on his mission, and shared them with the world via Twitter. Having inspired Mr Macintosh to fly to his computer last week to view the horse head nebula, I hope to inspire members today to seek out some of Chris Hadfield’s photographs. They include “Hot smokestack exhaust streams in the harsh wind across a central Asian winter landscape”, “Clouds swoop in on Crimea, a white bird on the Black Sea”, and my favourite, which is an absolutely spectacular view simply entitled “Canada rocks.” There is no doubt that astronauts such as Chris Hadfield, who has captured the imagination of the world, can inspire and enthral our young people. I was delighted to attend a recent event at the Royal Society of Edinburgh that featured Nagin Cox of NASA’s jet propulsion laboratory—which has recently been made famous among young people by “The Big Bang Theory”—who has undertaken a series of talks around the world about her involvement in NASA, and specifically her part in the mission that operated and flew the rover to Mars. On her trip to Scotland, Nagin Cox also visited primary 7 audiences from Bellsbank, Littlemill, Dalmellington and Patna primary schools, and pupils from Doon academy’s astronomy master class. The P7 pupils have been attending the academy as part of their transition project, which has focused on astronomy and the local dark sky observatory. I am pleased that we in Scotland also have world-class academics and scientists who are prepared to do all that they can to inspire our young people. We have a wonderful role model in Anne Glover, who is the first-ever scientific adviser to the European Commission. Scotland’s budding scientists—whether they are young women or young men—have a great opportunity to look to such role models in our society. As I mentioned earlier, Chris Hadfield says that “Canada rocks”, but we all know that it is Scotland that rocks. James Hutton was a pioneer in geology during the enlightenment, and he was also a physician, chemical manufacturer, naturalist and experimental agriculturist. He is known as “the father of geology”. We also have Maria Gordon, who was born in Monymusk and was the first woman to gain a PhD from the University of Munich. She published more than 30 papers on the geology of the South Tyrol region of Italy, and was the first geologist to show that limestone peaks were formed by the movement in the earth’s crust. It was with great delight last week that I attended the event in the Parliament that Liz Smith mentioned. Students from Perth high school, professors and a teacher were there, and the students spoke about their experiences of studying higher geology. It was exactly the type of round-table event that Hugh Henry is looking for, so it is a pity that he missed it. I will quote some of the comments from the young people of Perth high school on their experiences. They said that they “were given a ... stunning tour of Dynamic Earth with its friendly Scientific Director, Prof. Stuart Munro” and that they “flew to distant planets in search of alien life, and ... over all the beautiful biomes on Earth” looking at “the tundra, deserts, and tropical rainforests.” I did not see all of their presentation, but I know that it was very well received by those who were there. They also said that Fraser, from Our Dynamic Earth, brought along “a range of rock samples, including obsidian, pumice and, sandstone. He explained the stories rocks can tell us about past climates and environments that existed in Scotland on our journey north from the equator over millions of years. Craig, Brooke, and Fraser then spoke about the wide variety of topics that are covered in Geology, and enthused about the ‘Scotland Rocks’ conference that they organised for Higher Geology pupils from all over Scotland in March. They even included a personal message from Prof. Iain Stewart.” Of course, Professor Stewart is one of Scotland’s foremost scientists, and a great inspiration to young people. I share some of the concerns that Liz Smith has eloquently raised today, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary and the minister will take those on board.

I agree with Annabelle Ewing; geology has been highlighted as being hugely important to oil and gas and to renewables technology, as we investigate those areas in Scotland. The Scotland rocks event that Perth high school organised was an excellent example of engagement with the community. It involved a large number of people from across Scotland who have an interest in geology, including 35 students from Bannockburn high, Fortrose academy, George Heriot’s school and West Calder high. The event was held to celebrate and raise awareness of the profile of geology in Scottish schools. It was an excellent event, and an excellent example of engagement with the community.

Obviously, the “Tapping all our Talents” report concurs with the member on that point, but does he agree that some great work is being done in Scotland? For example, girl geek Scotland, which is a network for women involved in computing that is run from the University of Edinburgh, encourages and supports women at all stages of their careers, including when young women are starting out in a career in computing.

When I was first elected to North Lanarkshire Council, I was nominated to be on the Scottish Accident Prevention Council’s home safety committee. I did not have any expertise in or knowledge of the area at all, but I soon engaged with people who were expert in it. I engaged with home safety officers from across Scotland, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, home safety Scotland and the Electrical Safety Council in Scotland, and I soon learned about the many dangers that exist for people in their own homes. Obviously, the issue has become of particular concern as we move towards many people renting privately. I vividly remember visiting an event that was hosted by Fife Fire and Rescue Service, which was then actively engaging with the Polish community in its area and offering fire safety visits. In many cases, when it visited private rented properties it became aware of poor maintenance and innovative methods of getting the electricity supply to work. Not the right plugs were used, as the people came from a different part of Europe. The service worked very hard on engaging with the community on the right of people as tenants to expect the properties in which they live to be of a reasonable and safe standard. Recently, I hosted a round-table event in the Parliament, which was attended by fire and rescue services, the Electrical Safety Council, Select—which is the corporate organisation for electricians in the country and which accredits them—estate agents, private landlords and the City of Edinburgh Council’s housing department. All of them shared their concerns about issues to do with privately rented properties. There is no electrical safety standard for privately rented properties, other than the expectation that good landlords should be looking after their tenants. There is a particular issue with residual current devices—or RSDs, as they are known—that can be fitted to a fuse box. That device is not available in a lot of council and other homes. It prevents an electric shock in the case of standard problems that we might imagine, such as a child putting something into a socket or an electricity surge. The device cuts off the electricity supply and prevents serious harm under those circumstances. The Electrical Safety Council has been active in promoting the fitting of the devices in all our homes, and I believe that they are available in new-build properties. Fire safety is a huge problem in Scotland. We have one of the worst fire incident records in the European Union. The Government has tackled some of the issues. Considering the major causes of fire, we understand that alcohol and drug addiction can cause problems. A serious problem also exists from electricity fires through poor maintenance. I commend the work that is being done on the issue across Scotland. For example, when North Lanarkshire Council trading standards looked at the statistics for people who have been burned by electricity blankets that developed faults, it offered a facility for people to bring in their blankets and have them electrically tested, free of charge, at local libraries to ensure that they were not dangerous. People were then given a chance to purchase new blankets and to replace ones that were potentially harmful. Our private tenants are in a difficult situation. It became apparent from the round-table discussion that many landlords are not registering with their local authorities. Although the good landlords are probably the ones that are registered and have bought in to the idea of ensuring the safety of tenants, we must recognise that there is an element who are not participating or conforming to what is expected of them under the legislation as good landlords. I am pleased to bring the motion to the chamber because electrical safety in our homes is a huge issue for us all. We have benefited from the installation of smoke alarms and detectors, which have been effective in preventing house fires. However, in the private rented sector, some people—not all of them, but some of the poorer landlords—are not taking into consideration what is required. The Electrical Safety Council has produced a leaflet for potential tenants explaining what their rights are as tenants and what is expected of them when they are looking into what is available in properties. It has brought to the fore the importance of electrical safety—from checking white goods that are in the property to looking for the RSD that would prevent a dangerous electrocution. It has also helped to raise awareness about how important electrical safety is in properties and how vulnerable some people can be. I commend it for its work on the matter.

Does Iain Gray recognise that part of the reason for teaching two foreign languages to pupils between primary 1 and primary 6 is that the changes that it makes to the neural connections in their brains improve academic outcomes at all levels for those young people?

I will endeavour to speak “To infinity and beyond!”, Presiding Officer. I start by taking issue with my colleague, Mr Stevenson. I feel compelled, in the interests of truth, to clarify that Richard Feynman used iced water to demonstrate that the O-rings had failed at the time of the Challenger disaster, thereby making the point that atmospheric conditions led to the failure. Although he revealed to the world what had happened, it is now commonly known that he was tipped off by the female astronaut Sally Ride as to the cause of the disaster. Many of my colleagues in the chamber enjoy the Blipfoto phenomenon and go round taking photographs of things that they see in their daily lives—the flowers, fauna and landscapes of Scotland. I follow Chris Hadfield, the recently returned Canadian National Aeronautics and Space Administration astronaut, who also took photographs daily on his mission, and shared them with the world via Twitter. Having inspired Mr Macintosh to fly to his computer last week to view the horse head nebula, I hope to inspire members today to seek out some of Chris Hadfield’s photographs. They include “Hot smokestack exhaust streams in the harsh wind across a central Asian winter landscape”, “Clouds swoop in on Crimea, a white bird on the Black Sea”, and my favourite, which is an absolutely spectacular view simply entitled “Canada rocks.” There is no doubt that astronauts such as Chris Hadfield, who has captured the imagination of the world, can inspire and enthral our young people. I was delighted to attend a recent event at the Royal Society of Edinburgh that featured Nagin Cox of NASA’s jet propulsion laboratory—which has recently been made famous among young people by “The Big Bang Theory”—who has undertaken a series of talks around the world about her involvement in NASA, and specifically her part in the mission that operated and flew the rover to Mars. On her trip to Scotland, Nagin Cox also visited primary 7 audiences from Bellsbank, Littlemill, Dalmellington and Patna primary schools, and pupils from Doon academy’s astronomy master class. The P7 pupils have been attending the academy as part of their transition project, which has focused on astronomy and the local dark sky observatory. I am pleased that we in Scotland also have world-class academics and scientists who are prepared to do all that they can to inspire our young people. We have a wonderful role model in Anne Glover, who is the first-ever scientific adviser to the European Commission. Scotland’s budding scientists—whether they are young women or young men—have a great opportunity to look to such role models in our society. As I mentioned earlier, Chris Hadfield says that “Canada rocks”, but we all know that it is Scotland that rocks. James Hutton was a pioneer in geology during the enlightenment, and he was also a physician, chemical manufacturer, naturalist and experimental agriculturist. He is known as “the father of geology”. We also have Maria Gordon, who was born in Monymusk and was the first woman to gain a PhD from the University of Munich. She published more than 30 papers on the geology of the South Tyrol region of Italy, and was the first geologist to show that limestone peaks were formed by the movement in the earth’s crust. It was with great delight last week that I attended the event in the Parliament that Liz Smith mentioned. Students from Perth high school, professors and a teacher were there, and the students spoke about their experiences of studying higher geology. It was exactly the type of round-table event that Hugh Henry is looking for, so it is a pity that he missed it. I will quote some of the comments from the young people of Perth high school on their experiences. They said that they “were given a ... stunning tour of Dynamic Earth with its friendly Scientific Director, Prof. Stuart Munro” and that they “flew to distant planets in search of alien life, and ... over all the beautiful biomes on Earth” looking at “the tundra, deserts, and tropical rainforests.” I did not see all of their presentation, but I know that it was very well received by those who were there. They also said that Fraser, from Our Dynamic Earth, brought along “a range of rock samples, including obsidian, pumice and, sandstone. He explained the stories rocks can tell us about past climates and environments that existed in Scotland on our journey north from the equator over millions of years. Craig, Brooke, and Fraser then spoke about the wide variety of topics that are covered in Geology, and enthused about the ‘Scotland Rocks’ conference that they organised for Higher Geology pupils from all over Scotland in March. They even included a personal message from Prof. Iain Stewart.” Of course, Professor Stewart is one of Scotland’s foremost scientists, and a great inspiration to young people. I share some of the concerns that Liz Smith has eloquently raised today, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary and the minister will take those on board.

I agree with Annabelle Ewing; geology has been highlighted as being hugely important to oil and gas and to renewables technology, as we investigate those areas in Scotland. The Scotland rocks event that Perth high school organised was an excellent example of engagement with the community. It involved a large number of people from across Scotland who have an interest in geology, including 35 students from Bannockburn high, Fortrose academy, George Heriot’s school and West Calder high. The event was held to celebrate and raise awareness of the profile of geology in Scottish schools. It was an excellent event, and an excellent example of engagement with the community.

Obviously, the “Tapping all our Talents” report concurs with the member on that point, but does he agree that some great work is being done in Scotland? For example, girl geek Scotland, which is a network for women involved in computing that is run from the University of Edinburgh, encourages and supports women at all stages of their careers, including when young women are starting out in a career in computing.

When I was first elected to North Lanarkshire Council, I was nominated to be on the Scottish Accident Prevention Council’s home safety committee. I did not have any expertise in or knowledge of the area at all, but I soon engaged with people who were expert in it. I engaged with home safety officers from across Scotland, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, home safety Scotland and the Electrical Safety Council in Scotland, and I soon learned about the many dangers that exist for people in their own homes. Obviously, the issue has become of particular concern as we move towards many people renting privately. I vividly remember visiting an event that was hosted by Fife Fire and Rescue Service, which was then actively engaging with the Polish community in its area and offering fire safety visits. In many cases, when it visited private rented properties it became aware of poor maintenance and innovative methods of getting the electricity supply to work. Not the right plugs were used, as the people came from a different part of Europe. The service worked very hard on engaging with the community on the right of people as tenants to expect the properties in which they live to be of a reasonable and safe standard. Recently, I hosted a round-table event in the Parliament, which was attended by fire and rescue services, the Electrical Safety Council, Select—which is the corporate organisation for electricians in the country and which accredits them—estate agents, private landlords and the City of Edinburgh Council’s housing department. All of them shared their concerns about issues to do with privately rented properties. There is no electrical safety standard for privately rented properties, other than the expectation that good landlords should be looking after their tenants. There is a particular issue with residual current devices—or RSDs, as they are known—that can be fitted to a fuse box. That device is not available in a lot of council and other homes. It prevents an electric shock in the case of standard problems that we might imagine, such as a child putting something into a socket or an electricity surge. The device cuts off the electricity supply and prevents serious harm under those circumstances. The Electrical Safety Council has been active in promoting the fitting of the devices in all our homes, and I believe that they are available in new-build properties. Fire safety is a huge problem in Scotland. We have one of the worst fire incident records in the European Union. The Government has tackled some of the issues. Considering the major causes of fire, we understand that alcohol and drug addiction can cause problems. A serious problem also exists from electricity fires through poor maintenance. I commend the work that is being done on the issue across Scotland. For example, when North Lanarkshire Council trading standards looked at the statistics for people who have been burned by electric blankets that developed faults, it offered a facility for people to bring in their blankets and have them electrically tested, free of charge, at local libraries to ensure that they were not dangerous. People were then given a chance to purchase new blankets and to replace ones that were potentially harmful. Our private tenants are in a difficult situation. It became apparent from the round-table discussion that many landlords are not registering with their local authorities. Although the good landlords are probably the ones that are registered and have bought in to the idea of ensuring the safety of tenants, we must recognise that there is an element who are not participating or conforming to what is expected of them under the legislation as good landlords. I am pleased to bring the motion to the chamber because electrical safety in our homes is a huge issue for us all. We have benefited from the installation of smoke alarms and detectors, which have been effective in preventing house fires. However, in the private rented sector, some people—not all of them, but some of the poorer landlords—are not taking into consideration what is required. The Electrical Safety Council has produced a leaflet for potential tenants explaining what their rights are as tenants and what is expected of them when they are looking into what is available in properties. It has brought to the fore the importance of electrical safety—from checking white goods that are in the property to looking for the RSD that would prevent a dangerous electrocution. It has also helped to raise awareness about how important electrical safety is in properties and how vulnerable some people can be. I commend it for its work on the matter.

I share with the Parliament the fact that my family is a bit stressed at the moment. If I say that that is due to the fact that my son is sitting his standard grades, members will understand that he is one of the teenagers who will benefit from the extension of the franchise and who will be able to vote in 2014. I asked him and, more important, he gave me his permission to share with members what the opportunity to vote means to him. He said: “I’m pleased, really pleased, that people trust us enough to let us take part.” Trust is key to this decision. It is about trusting our young people to take part in the decisions that will affect them. My son is very much in my thoughts at the moment, for obvious reasons, and I have been thinking about a visit that we had to the Houses of Parliament a few years ago, when he was a bit younger. We went into St Stephen’s hall and saw the damage that had been done to the Falkland statue by one of the suffragettes, who chained herself to it when fighting for votes for women. It was very emotional for me, and more so because I was able to share the experience with my son and explain to him what the suffragette movement was about. He recently took me aback when he asked whether I would have been a suffragist or a suffragette. That gave me pause to think, but I will keep my counsel on that. We should not lose sight of the importance of the right to vote that we are extending to young people, and of how hard fought for it was, at incredible cost to many people over the centuries. It is held dear by so many and, unfortunately, is denied to so many others. It was recently exercised by the citizens of Pakistan. I am very proud to be serving as an elected member of this Parliament as we extend the voting franchise to our young people. In his speech, Tavish Scott admitted to being a confused Liberal Democrat—although that did not seem much of a surprise to me. He said that he does not know where we are. I will not lose sleep over that, as the Scottish people know where the SNP is, and that is why they delivered the overwhelming majority that we have in the Parliament—it is why they gave us their support. I suspect, however, that Mr Scott is losing sleep over his party’s performance in the local elections last week, after the Liberal Democrats shackled themselves to the most right-wing, socially divisive party in recent history. When Mr Cameron comes forward with his referendum on Europe, which has been driven by the UK Independence Party, the same rules will apply to that referendum as to the one that we are discussing now. Mark Harper has said: “The right to vote will be restricted to UK Westminster Parliamentary and European Parliament elections only, and not in other elections or referendums.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 20 December 2010; Vol 520, c 151WS.] I hosted an event in the Parliament last year for the awards network, which brings together many voluntary youth organisations, uniformed organisations and charities in celebrating the non-academic achievements of young people. It included Duke of Edinburgh award participants, the John Muir Trust, scouts and guiding associations, sports associations and charity fundraisers. It included hundreds of the children from North Lanarkshire who participate in the St Andrew’s hospice climb of Ben Nevis every year. Our young people are conscientious contributors and responsible citizens. They are tackling some of the most serious issues that affect our society. That includes the stand up to sectarianism project and the Machan Trust in Larkhall in my region. Those who are participating in the Mark Scott leadership awards are tackling and challenging the blight of sectarianism in our communities. I trust those young people to take a full part in the referendum. Our 14-year-olds who will have the vote have spent their entire school lives studying under curriculum for excellence, which is underpinned by the four capacities of being successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. I can think of no better reinforcement for our young responsible citizens than extending the voting franchise to them. It is my ambition that all our young people will be informed and fully engaged in the referendum process. I hope that they will vote. As some members have said already this afternoon, a good turnout in the referendum is to the benefit of all of us. I have some sympathy—I stress a personal sympathy—with the Australian system of compulsory voting, but I recognise that no system is perfect and that we are all responsible for ensuring the turnout at the referendum. I will finish by mentioning Abraham Lincoln’s views on the subject. He said: “Elections belong to the people. It’s their decision. If they decide to turn their back on the fire and burn their behinds, then they will just have to sit on their blisters.” I hope that, on 19 September 2014, however our people decide to vote, we will wake up to few blisters and a confident and socially just Scotland, looking forward to our future.

We are asked in this debate to consider the issue of young people supporting Scotland’s economy today and tomorrow, but I hope that members will indulge me as I turn first to the past. I recently attended an exhibition at the National Library of Scotland on 11 notable women scientists. The curator, Catherine Booth, said of the event: “Most of these women are virtually unknown today, but their work is still influencing a new generation of scientists. They are representative of a much bigger group of female Scottish scientists whose achievements we are proud to celebrate.” I will mention just two of the 11 women: Mary Fairfax Somerville—one of our committee rooms is named after her—who was a notable mathematician and astronomer and the first woman elected to the Royal Astronomical Society; and Williamina Fleming, an astronomer who discovered what I believe is one of the most beautiful visions in our heavens—the horse head nebula—as well as many other stars. I refer to those women of the past to show that Scotland’s traditions and reputation in the area of science and technology belong as much to our young women as to our young men. Today, we have notable trailblazers in the same area, including Scotland’s Anne Glover, chief scientific adviser to the European Commission. I turn now to the future of our young people, who are choosing their careers. It is important that our young women are as informed about the skills gaps—especially in our technology markets—that many of my colleagues have identified and discussed in the debate and are as able to take advantage of the opportunities as our young men are. The Royal Academy of Engineering forecasts that the UK will need 104,000 science, technology, engineering and mathematics graduates between now and 2020 to meet demand. A recent article in The Daily Telegraph on the EEF report stated: “One in five young people will need to become an engineer”. The article quotes Terry Scuoler of the EEF saying: “There is no getting away from the fact that women are substantially under-represented in manufacturing at a time when industry needs to be tapping into every potential talent pool to access the skills it needs”. He went on: “We need a huge national effort to make this happen and government, education, and industry itself all have a major role to play.” On that note, I commend to the Parliament the work of the Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology, based at Napier University, which supports young women who are studying in those areas. There is no doubt that we need young women to recognise the potential of the STEM subjects. However, the system has been described as a broken plumbing system, in that, although we are creating many talented women graduates, they are not staying in their professions. We cannot continue to feed that system without fixing the leaks. The Royal Society of Edinburgh’s “Tapping all our Talents” report explores in some detail the reasons why women are not staying in the science professions. If we are going to address the barriers that exist for women, we must get very serious about the pay differential. Women are underpaid in many of these areas. There must be a fundamental change, in industry and in academia, to ensure that remuneration and career progression are fair for women, while the overwhelming evidence continues to point to persistent discrimination in that regard. We have received a great number of briefings for this afternoon’s debate, and they are very welcome. Liam McArthur mentioned a few of them in his speech. I draw members’ attention to the Universities Scotland report, “Taking Pride in the Job: University action on graduate employability”. Mr Macintosh mentioned that he likes to see Scotland outperforming the other parts of the UK, and this is another area where we are doing so. The report says: “93 per cent of graduates from Scotland’s universities are in the positive destinations”, which is “the highest rate of positive destinations in the UK”. The report is not complacent, however, and it goes on to recommend areas of good practice including work placements—which we have discussed in some detail as being so important—career services and global skills. Opportunities in science and engineering are open to all young people, whatever stage of their education or training they are at. Modern apprenticeships offer a great opportunity, especially when it comes to the energy skills academy. That is a welcome package, which delivers new employer recruitment initiatives and which will create more than 10,000 opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises, the importance of which Gordon MacDonald highlighted earlier. Small and medium enterprises can recruit young people, and there will be 290 modern apprenticeships there alone. There is a lot to be very thankful for in Scotland, although we cannot be complacent. Our modern apprenticeships show that we are delivering for Scotland’s young people, and I am very happy with the movement in Scotland at this time. There has been a lot of criticism that the data in this area are not giving us all the information that we need. I highlight the “Report of the NEET Workstream”, published in 2005 by the Scottish Executive, which stated, in paragraph 11: “Overall, a much better understanding of these NEET ‘flow’ issues is essential. Only through this is it possible to develop a truly sophisticated and targeted policy response. But the NEET work-stream has encountered significant limitations with the current information on these issues. As a result, action on improving intelligence about the group is itself one of our key recommendations.” Despite that being a key recommendation, it has taken the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill to bring in the data sharing that will allow us to have a full understanding of what is happening in this area. I am disappointed that the Opposition parties did not support that measure when the Government introduced it.

I congratulate George Adam on securing this debate to highlight MS week and some of the great work that is done by the MS Society, which is a UK charity, across the country in dealing with that terrible disease. I have no great knowledge of MS—I am not an activist like George who campaigns for MS—but, like many families in Scotland, I have a close family member who suffers from MS. Therefore, my main reason for speaking is to show solidarity with other families and carers who deal day in, day out with the sometimes devastating effects of multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis is a complex disease, as George Adam has highlighted. What we know is that it is the most common disabling neurological disease among young adults. It affects nearly 100,000 people in the UK. MS is most often diagnosed in people between the ages of 20 and 40 so, at the age of 16, Stacey was diagnosed even younger than is the norm. Research suggests that a combination of genetic and environmental factors may play a role in the development of MS, which is why it is such a complex disease that involves not only biomedical science research but genetic research. There are many contributing factors, so we simply do not know what may cause MS, which makes the disease difficult to treat. As George Adam has also mentioned, every single patient’s experience of MS is different. There is also around a 2 per cent chance of a child developing MS when a parent is affected, which is higher than might be expected in the general population. Although it is not considered an inherited genetic disease, there may be genetic factors that we simply do not understand. MS is almost unknown in places such as Malaysia or Ecuador, but it is very common in the UK—and particularly in Scotland—North America, Canada, Scandinavia, southern Australia and New Zealand. I want to highlight some of the great work that the MS Society has done. It has produced the wonderful “My MS, My Needs” report, which gives us a picture of what is happening around the country and gives us cause for concern and food for thought. The survey would not have been possible without the groundbreaking work in setting up a database of those who have been diagnosed with MS. That project throughout the country has been groundbreaking because it provides the MS Society with a source of patients for such surveys, for example, and it is invaluable to researchers who might want to contact people to inform them of some of the groundbreaking treatments that are available for MS. It would be remiss of me, as a politician, not to mention the devastating impact that the welfare reforms are having on some people who suffer from MS, simply as a result of the lack of knowledge about what the disease does, how it can affect people and how their condition can vary from day to day. Cases have been highlighted to us in which people have been very badly treated when their ability to work has been assessed by people who have not understood their condition. That is extremely worrying, and it applies to the assessment of people with other neurological conditions, such as motor neurone disease, who have faced some of the same complications. We should put that right. One of the first questions that I asked as an MSP was about the guidelines for general practitioners on vitamin D. Although we still do not have a firm consensus on the view that vitamin D could play an important role in preventing the development of MS, there is no doubt that the health benefits of vitamin D are well documented. It is important that, as people who live in a country in the northern hemisphere, we all ensure that our dietary requirements as regards vitamin D are met.

As the member who asked, during topical question time on 19 March, whether the Scottish Government would welcome a parliamentary committee considering the proposed royal charter on regulation of the press and looking at what checks and balances could be achieved using Scots law, I am very grateful to be called to speak today. Despite the very challenging timescales, which were not of our or the Scottish Government’s making, the Education and Culture committee has held two public evidence sessions; I will cover some of that evidence. The first witness panel included members of the expert panel that was convened by Lord McCluskey. The whole Parliament would welcome the expert panel’s contribution, as it would the McCluskey report, which captured the Scottish context of Leveson and has given us much food for thought on how Leveson might have been applied in Scotland, given that the underpinning of exemplary damages is not available here. In his opening remarks to the committee, Lord McCluskey stated: “We accepted the need for statutory underpinning and the essential principle that there should be a regulatory body fashioned by the industry and independent of the press and of politicians and Government in general, and that there should be a second body—a recognition body, as it was called—to ensure that the regulatory body was up to speed and Leveson compliant ... The first version of the royal charter was produced on 12 February, by which time we were well into our thinking. We had on our committee a number of people of different political perspectives and none who had views about the royal charter, and we felt that we could not properly pronounce on it without extending our period of examination considerably and, indeed, obtaining evidence on it, because a royal charter is a very unfamiliar animal.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 16 April 2013; c 2182-3.] In that context we find ourselves on the almost daily shifting sands of our position with the proposed Westminster royal charter. I am very pleased that party consensus on the royal charter has been achieved at Westminster and today in this Parliament. Although there is much in the McCluskey report that makes the Scottish case, we must also recognise that the evidence from editors and representatives of the press stated their preference for a UK-wide solution. When the convener asked Andrew Harries what difficulty there would be in operating across two regulatory regimes, he said: “I can see inherent complications in it ... There would be inherent difficulties in running two systems, not least their funding, as has already been pointed out.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 23 April 2013; c 2237.] The press does not fully sign up to Westminster’s proposed royal charter. Alan Cochrane of The Daily Telegraph said: “Although we want a UK system, the Telegraph Media Group does not want anything that is set up by royal charter”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 23 April 2013; c 2238.] The definite consensus of that panel was for a UK-wide system. I am therefore pleased that we have cross-party support in the Scottish Parliament for a royal charter in a Scottish context. I am extremely pleased that the cabinet secretary proposed amendments to the charter, particularly in respect of the code, which has been discussed in some detail with regard to the Watson case. The cabinet secretary used the words: “ensuring appropriate respect in dealing with those who are recently deceased, where the only public interest in them is because of the circumstances of their death, and their near relations.” That is a very important principle. It clearly defines interest in someone who has passed away as something that the press should specifically not pick on. No one who heard Mrs Watson’s evidence at the Leveson inquiry or to the committee on the treatment of her daughter and son could fail to have been moved by the impact that it has had on her and her family. Although, as has been alluded to by other members and in evidence to the committee, the excesses of the press south of the border have not been seen to the same extent in Scotland, the Watsons were resident in Scotland and the initial hurt to them was at the hands of a Scottish publication. If a way can be found to amend the code in a Scottish context to take cognisance of that—careful wording of the proposed amendment could achieve that—it would be a positive amendment for Scotland. Graeme Dey mentioned the royal charter and the offer of support to journalists. Under paragraph 8D of schedule 3 on recognition criteria, “A self-regulatory body should establish a whistleblowing hotline for those who feel that they are being asked to do things which are contrary to the standards code.” I return to the evidence to the committee. Professor Eammon O’Neill from the University of Strathclyde said: “Journalists often consider that they undertake what is as much a vocation as a job. In the workplace, they are often put under the most extraordinary pressure—especially, I am sorry to say, in the tabloids—to do things that they would not normally do. Over the 25 years in which I have been in the business, I have heard innumerable examples, including of young journalists being told to pretend that they are policemen to get photographs of the deceased after an accident.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 16 April 2013; c 2207.] Given that compelling evidence, I, too, welcome the charter’s paragraph 8D proposals. In his opening remarks, Dr O’Neill mentioned Lord Leveson’s report: “Some interesting, innovative and clever ideas have come out of the Leveson report. The notion of arbitration and shared costs and the idea of using a carrot-and-stick approach are innovative and could be taken forward.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 16 April 2013; c 2202.] That uplifting notion about what has happened with Leveson can take us forward. What has been described as a “carrot-and-stick approach” could make the royal charter appropriate and workable in the Scottish context. It remains to be seen how that might be applied—it may be through the use of police information notices or arbitration—but it is certainly an opportunity to ensure that Leveson is applied in Scotland, and that we have in place an appropriate system that seeks a press that benefits Scotland.

The Education and Culture Committee has considered a number of reports, such as the Donaldson report, the McCormac report and the McCluskey report. Does the member agree that reports can inform the debate but should not tie anyone’s hands and that it is reasonable for a committee member, the committee as a whole and the cabinet secretary to have an opinion on a report?

Will the member give way?

An old Chinese proverb says that, if someone gets to the end of their life without having made an enemy, they have not lived. Margaret Thatcher lived. That being said, I associate myself with the condolences to Margaret Thatcher’s family and friends. As a humanitarian to whom all life is precious, I take no pleasure in her passing. However, I will celebrate and take pleasure on the day that my nation is raised from the shadow of Thatcherism by becoming independent and able to elect a Government that reflects my nation’s values and my society’s values of egalitarianism and social justice. I am a child of Thatcher’s era. When I reflect on growing up in Lanarkshire, it is the slogans of the time that still resonate with me. The first political slogan that I was aware of was, “Thatcher Thatcher, milk snatcher.” It was dispiriting to learn the meaning of the word “scab”, as my immediate society at that time was made up of my friends and my comrades in the community, and when I sat in classes with compatriots whose fathers were miners, steelworkers and policemen, our friendship and camaraderie were strained by the knowledge that picket lines outside Ravenscraig were battle zones, where workers were pitted against one another and against the police. That is when I began to ask myself, “Is this the society that I want?” I was also aware of the playground banter and of the phrase, “Gizza job,” which was on the lips of many of my friends. There has been much comment about the country’s response to Thatcherism. My conviction is that our writers and artists hold the social conscience of our nation in the way that—as Alison McInnes has said—Alan Bleasdale’s “Boys from the Blackstuff” did. I vividly remember Bernard Hill’s portrayal of a man driven to the edge by poverty and unemployment. “Brassed Off” represented the plight of former mining communities in a similar manner. Alison McInnes referred to Mrs Thatcher being a scientist. The editorial in this month’s New Scientist gives a not-too-favourable view of what she did for science. It says: “Thatcher’s hard-nosed policies on privatisation and manufacturing led to a dramatic reduction in research activity in the UK ... In general, however, Thatcher’s policies were driven by free-market ideology, not science. Spending on R&amp;D has never fully recovered; meaningful action on climate change was long deferred.” Another slogan of the time was, “Can’t pay, won’t pay.” That was a cry from Scotland that fell on deaf ears. It took riots in London to reverse the perverse and socially unfair poll tax, which had been imposed on the Scottish people. I respect the view of people who have said that Margaret Thatcher put the great in Great Britain. However, for me, she is the person who put the con in Conservative. She perpetrated the con of selling the assets of our country back to the people who already owned them. The selling-off of our utilities has created crippling fuel poverty. If I am ever going to quote the Daily Mail in the chamber, today is the day to do it. In 2012, Alex Brummer said in that paper that “with so much of our vital utility companies in foreign hands, we are now at the mercy of conglomerates that could bring Britain Plc to a shuddering halt.” In an article in Utility Week entitled, “Does it matter who owns the UK’s utilities?”, Roger Barnard, a barrister who was head of regulatory law at EDF Energy, says: “We urgently need a robust process with more appropriate assessment criteria for ensuring that any government is able to safeguard the nation’s energy security interests against the potential for political intervention under a commercial guise”. If we were to call Sid today, we would need an international dialling code.

No, I do not have time. Much has been made of the supposed success of the right-to-buy policy, which, again, sold what was already ours. Shamefully—and unforgivably—it broke the social housing contract in doing so. By preventing the revenue from council house sales from being reinvested, it led to the housing crisis today, to which the new Thatcherite solution is the pernicious bedroom tax. Despite the opportunity that Labour had, it took an SNP cabinet secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, to reforge that social contract when she exempted new-build housing from the right to buy. Thatcherism brought me to my belief that the only protection from Thatcherite right-wing ideology is an independent Scotland. I despair that Labour reversed none of the anti-trade union laws imposed by Thatcher in the six bills that were passed. I also regret that it sold what remained of our assets in the gold reserves at rock-bottom prices, at an estimated cost of £7 billion to the taxpayer. I cannot laud any ideology when I measure its success against Gowkthrapple in Wishaw, in my constituency. Following the closure of Ravenscraig, Gowkthrapple had the highest male unemployment rate in Europe. Despite a period of Labour control at all levels of government, it remains one of the poorest places in Britain. We have another choice in Scotland. We have the choice to reject right-wing Governments, whether they be Tory, Labour or UKIP, for a choice of social justice and universal services. We have the opportunity to choose education over nuclear weapons. We have the opportunity that independence gives us.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with college regionalisation. (S4O-01990)

The minister will know that both Motherwell College and Cumbernauld College have held public consultations on their proposed mergers. I congratulate both colleges on their efforts to ensure that all interested parties are fully engaged in the consultation. Does the minister agree that it is vital to underpin the efforts of all our colleges with timely legislation that supports our colleges’ ambitions for further education in Scotland?

This debate is about what kind of society we want to have, what our values are and where we want our welfare system to be. There is no doubt that Scotland wants a welfare system that is built on the principle of universalism: from each according to their ability and to each according to their need, and from the cradle to the grave. Scotland has consistently voted for that. I have spoken before in this chamber about universalism and I make no apologies for returning to some of the points I raised then. In response to Johann Lamont’s speech in which she introduced the concept of the something-for-nothing society, the Jimmy Reid Foundation published a report on the case for universalism. On 4 December I lodged a motion, in the hope of a debate at that time. Not surprisingly, members of the parties that lodged amendments to John Swinney’s motion today did not sign up to my motion, so we were unable to have that debate. My motion noted that the Jimmy Reid Foundation report looked at the evidence of the impact of universal public services and that its overriding conclusion was that the group that will be most affected if universalism is rolled back is poor people. The report also stated that the move from universal to targeted services creates “stigma, reduces take-up rates”— we can see that in the case of the elderly— “causes enormous increases in administrative costs and ... leads to less public support for those services”— in terms of their quality and the need for them in society— “which in turn leads to significant decline in the quality of those services”. It is a really important report on the case for universalism. I remind members of Scotland’s Futures Forum event that was held in this chamber on 29 May 2009. It looked at reducing inequality in our society. One of its key conclusions was: “Inequalities of income and wealth have changed little in recent decades with a corrosive effect on all sections of society. It is therefore vital that we tackle inequality as much as poverty.” Whether we look to books such as “The Spirit Level” or other evidence, there is absolutely no doubt that societies that are less unequal—not forgetting that we are the most unequal society in Europe and the fourth most unequal in the world—fare far better. We often make comparisons with the Nordic countries, and there is no doubt that individually and collectively they occupy the highest ranks and indices of income, wealth, happiness, life satisfaction and equality, with the lowest levels of poverty and inequality. Those societies are based on the fundamental principles of universal welfare, which are hugely important. I will develop that argument a little by quoting from this month’s New Scientist, the editorial of which talks about the true cost of cuts. Gavin Brown asked John Swinney for a 10-year projection of the cost of universal benefits. As a member of the Conservative Party—the party that is introducing austerity—he might want to consider when it will give us figures on the true cost of austerity. The editorial says: “the immediate consequences of austerity may give way to more enduring and insidious effects on health. It is plausible that protracted economic hardship will lead to increases in heart attacks, strokes and depression. Stress hormones are known to trigger or exacerbate these conditions, and it is hard to argue that those worrying about the security of their jobs, homes, families and finances are not experiencing high levels of stress.” The New Scientist goes on to say that the “effects on health, on the other hand, have gone largely undiscussed”. The assumption is that when austerity ends and the belt tightening goes away those health problems will not still exist, but people affected by those problems will undergo a genetic transformation. Sometimes there is even a genetic influence on babies before they are born, while they are in the womb, because of stress hormones in their mothers at times of austerity. Another article in New Scientist, “Austerity’s toxic genetic legacy”, refers to The Lancet. It says: “The more immediate health impacts of economic cuts were documented last month in The Lancet ... revealing that suicides in Europe have soared since the financial crash in 2008, with 1000 extra deaths in England along by 2010. Likewise, the incidence of mental health disorders has increased in countries worst hit by debt crises, such as Greece and Spain.” The article also has a quote from David Stuckler from the University of Oxford—I bring in the Nordic comparison again. He says: “the paths chosen by Iceland, Finland and Sweden may demonstrate a healthier way of dealing with an economic crisis. Unlike many other countries, their governments decided to let the banks fail, post-2008, rather than bailing them out. They then nationalised all of them, restricting the banks’ risky investment activities. They also retained all health and welfare budgets, as opposed to cutting them back, and introduced schemes to retrain and redeploy sacked workers. Those measures insulated the population from many of the stresses of austerity, possibly explaining why rates of suicide and mental health problems have not risen.” There is absolutely no doubt that this debate is about choices—but the choices can be made better for Scotland.

I welcome the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. The areas that it addresses are key to ensuring that our higher and further education sectors can meet the economic challenges ahead.

Sorry. The bill is about better support for jobs and economic growth and about improving life chances, especially for our young people. It is about fundamentally changing the provision as regards skills and other forms of post-16 education by aligning learning to the labour market, and about ensuring the Scottish Government’s aspirations to improve economic participation and productivity and, ultimately, to increase the economic prosperity of our country. It is important to remember why the reforms are necessary. The 1990s Tory model of incorporated colleges led to competition and duplication in the sector. Variations and questionable policies on college reserves resulted in £200 million being tied up and not being used for the benefit of the students and there was industrial unrest. I will quote from the EIS in that respect: “The EIS believes that this poor financial situation stems from the funding basis of incorporation, which promoted deficit management as the norm and allowed deficits to grow ... It is a matter of record that the further education sector has among the worst record of industrial relations and industrial unrest in the public sector in Scotland. While accepting that this situation relates in part to problems arising from historical funding deficits, the EIS believes it also clearly indicates poor personnel and financial management on the part of those Principals and Board members charged with those very important functions.” That is a quote from 2004—it is from the EIS’s further education lecturers association’s response to the Scottish Executive’s consultation paper on the implementation of measures resulting from the review of governance and accountability in the FE sector. I suggest that the Labour Party had a chance to address some of those issues and do away with that Tory model and its resulting problems, but failed to do so. I know that members from the opposite benches have raised some concerns about where we are with regard to the bill and the matter of the governance guidance not being available. However, the committee knows that, when the guidance is published, it will be taking further evidence on it, and it will be scrutinised prior to stage 2. There were questions about widening access agreements and what implications there were for ensuring that access is widened. However, the outcome agreements have been largely ignored by those on the Opposition benches. I suggest that the outcome agreements are key to ensuring—

Labour members would not take an intervention from Margo MacDonald, so I am not prepared to take one now. Many questions were raised about the reduction in part-time places—I think that Mr Findlay quoted Unison claims in that regard. We have to examine the issue in more detail. Mr Findlay has been on record claiming that time reductions in modern apprenticeships have somehow made them less valuable. However, in 2008-09, colleges enrolled 79,588 students in programmes that were designed to be completed in under 10 hours. Those programmes averaged five hours each, while a full-time further education student was required to study for at least 720 hours. I note that full-time student numbers increased by 22 per cent from 2005-06 to 2011-12, and that we now have 119,448 full-time-equivalent students in Scotland—the highest level that there has ever been. Those figures come from Scotland’s Colleges’ baseline report for the academic year 2011-12. I will say a little bit about widening access. I have spoken in the chamber before about how important education was to my family—to my father, who went back to university as a mature learner after losing his job, to my siblings and to me. Today, I was at the launch of the roll-out of the routes to empathy initiative, which encourages young children to empathise in relationships and understand others’ emotions, with the aim of reducing violence and aggression. The launch took place in Berryhill primary school in Craigneuk, which, following Thatcher’s closure of Ravenscraig, remains one of the poorest and most socially deprived areas in Scotland. I want those children to know that higher and further education are available to them and that they have a right to them, in a Scottish climate. Johann Lamont comes to this chamber claiming that the SNP’s constitutional agenda and the referendum in 2014 has put Scotland on hold. I regret that the better together parties also call for a delay in the implementation of the bill. As a former project manager, I know that delay costs. It creates uncertainty and leaves people in a bad place. The Opposition parties were wrong when they called for a further delay in the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, and they are wrong to call for a delay in this bill. It is the better together parties that are putting Scotland on hold and preventing the progress of our nation.

As the mother of a 15-year-old who, following the passing of the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill, will be able to take part in this momentous election and choose the future of his country, I welcome the statement. Whichever way my son chooses to vote, my ambition for him and for all Scotland’s young people is that they are fully informed and confident in their choice. How will the Scottish Government engage with schools and colleges and ensure that our young people are informed, registered to vote and fully engaged in the decision that will decide the future of their nation?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what analysis it has made of the health benefits of access to green space. (S4O-01928)

I draw the minister’s attention to the pioneering work in Forth Valley royal hospital, which is in my region. A local partnership that works in the surrounding woodlands there has created a green oasis for patients, which aids their recuperation and levels of stress. That oasis is available for staff, visitors and the local community. Will the minister ensure that that good practice is shared across the national health service estate?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that an appropriate committee of the Scottish Parliament should take evidence on the proposed royal charter and its implications for Scotland?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what difference being named a Fairtrade nation will make to the people of Scotland. (S4O-01883)

I recently visited St Elizabeth’s school in Hamilton on a committee visit with the European and External Relations Committee and found it to be a vibrant and innovative school. It was no surprise to find that, on 26 May, all the pupils were invited to bring in Fairtrade wrappers to stick on to the school astronaut. Far from taking an additional step, they intended to launch into infinity and beyond. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is one of the many exciting and diverse examples of Fairtrade celebration in 2013?

I will start uncharacteristically, by quoting Jim Murphy, because I have no doubt that the Labour motion is simply a “flirtation with surrealism”. The motion bears no relation to the excellent work and achievements of the NHS throughout the country. The SNP abolished Labour and the Lib Dems’ hidden waiting lists. It is meeting the cancer care target and, as Bob Doris said, it is achieving a target of more than 90 per cent for patient treatment, even if we include social unavailability figures. Jim Hume mentioned—I was listening to his speech intently—how waiting time targets are not the only targets in the NHS. I agree that there are other statistics that we should take cognisance of. For example, 10 years ago in 2003, under the Labour and Liberal Administration, 1,670 patients were parked in delayed discharge positions for more than six weeks. In January 2003, under the SNP, the figure was 57 patients. That is because, under the SNP Administration, the NHS has transformed how we are delivering services, especially for elderly patients. The demographic places huge challenges on the NHS. However, I want to highlight some of the good practice that is happening. When I was a councillor in North Lanarkshire, we had the living well project, which is a cross-partnership group that encourages the wellbeing of elderly patients. Its quality of life strategy is a commitment to improving their lives. It brought together the whole community in recognising the pressures that the demographic changes in our society bring on our services. North Lanarkshire Council, the Voice of Experience Forum, North Lanarkshire Carers Together, Cumbernauld Action on Care of the Elderly and Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia were all involved in the project. North Lanarkshire Council has also been recognised for its good work with NHS partners in the re-ablement project for older people. The project is designed to increase confidence, capacity, mobility, health and the long-term prospects for elderly patients through intensive work when they present to social services or the NHS. The project is changing how we deal with patients. I am also glad to highlight the intermediate care beds system in North Lanarkshire, which is on the Scottish Government’s website as an example of best practice. North Lanarkshire Council and NHS Lanarkshire have piloted intermediate care beds in two care homes, Belhaven—I am glad that it has been saved and not cut, as North Lanarkshire Council proposed at one point—and Leslie house in Wishaw. The pilot has led to two adapted care homes being developed at Muirpark and Monklands house, to provide respite care and to ensure that elderly patients are not held in hospitals when they have presented in A and E, but get the appropriate care and re-ablement procedures. When I was a councillor, I also did a lot of work with the Scottish Accident Prevention Council. The pressures in A and E very much come from the numbers of trips and falls that elderly people have. The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents highlights the problems for an ageing population: “The risk of falling at home increases with age. A substantial number of falls are due to unspecified reasons ... The cause of a fall is ... multi-factorial, involving both environmental hazards and underlying medical conditions.” Strength, balance and gait, decline in vision and mental health problems all contribute to problems that elderly patients present with at A and E. RoSPA also tells us that children who live in highly deprived postcode areas are more likely to attend A and E than those who live in other parts of the country. Indeed, mortality rates for boys under 12 are much higher in that demographic. As someone who lives in and represents a region with pockets of high deprivation, I find it incredible that a Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration chose to close Monklands hospital A and E and, as a result, put pressure on Wishaw general hospital A and E. Both hospitals are in areas in which there is significant poverty. Nicola Sturgeon, then Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, reversed that decision. She said: “Let me be clear from the outset. The Government’s view is that the decisions to close the A and E departments at Monklands hospital and Ayr hospital were wrong ... We must never forget that the NHS is a public service—a service that is used and paid for by the public. It is the duty of health boards and of responsible Government to take full account of particular local views and circumstances. It is my view and the Government’s view that, given the circumstances that are involved in these cases—the geography and demographics, the high levels of deprivation and ill health, and the concerns about access and public transport—A and E services at Ayr and Monklands should be maintained.—[Official Report, 6 June 2007; c 390-1.] Our position has not changed. I will quote some of the figures for presentation at A and E in Wishaw and Monklands. Since 2007, when the SNP reversed that decision, 54,918 patients have attended Monklands A and E and, in December last year, 5,551 patients attended. In the same period the figure at Wishaw was 5,207. It beggars belief that there are complaints about A and E targets being missed when we consider how much worse it would have been had Labour been able to close the A and E departments in those areas.

The recent budget announcement awarding an additional £61 million to colleges was warmly welcomed by John Henderson, the chief executive of Colleges Scotland, who said that the funding would give colleges stability over the next two years as they complete the reform process. Does the cabinet secretary agree with those comments, and does he feel that they show the sector’s enthusiasm for the reforms?

I am glad to be speaking in this debate, albeit only as a member of the European and External Relations Committee and not as a reporter on Europe or a member of one of the other committees. The cabinet secretary mentioned the important relationship that Scotland has with Europe and how key it is to our country moving forward in science and research. The importance of that is evidenced by the visit today of the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to Europe to talk not just about her concerns about the EU structural funds settlement, but about the possibilities for Scotland in Europe following a “yes” vote. We are discussing the committee’s report, but we cannot talk about it in isolation from the referendum and the constitutional issues that face Scotland, or indeed from the wider UK referendum on an exit from Europe, because those are key factors when we are talking about priorities. The cabinet secretary talked about the importance of science and research, which are also included in the European and External Relations Committee’s priorities for Europe, with regard to the horizon 2020 funding for research. On her appointment as the first adviser on science issues to the President of the European Commission, Anne Glover said: “It is an enormous pleasure for me to be the first Chief Scientific Adviser to the President of the European Commission and to be in a position to talk about the excellence in science, engineering and technology that is generated across member states. Our big challenge in Europe is translating that knowledge into better environments, better health, more rewarding lifestyles and a sustainable future”. She is also on record as talking about the big global scientific challenges being in the areas of “climate change, food security and water security.” Earlier in the year, Humza Yousaf noted that Scotland has already taken a global lead on climate justice. He said: “The Scottish Government’s ‘climate justice fund’ is the first of its kind in the world. In December, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change, Paul Wheelhouse, announced that Scotland would host an international conference on the subject. Much of the international development funding is already dedicated to projects relating to sustainability, food security and climate impact.” Therefore, I welcome the fact that the themes of climate change, food security and water security run through the priorities that have been set by some of the committees. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has highlighted energy technology and innovation, and future European energy policy. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has highlighted safeguarding Europe’s water resources and the EU water blueprint. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has talked about the common agricultural policy, fisheries policies, the invasion of alien species, the safeguarding of Europe’s water resources, the EU strategy on adapting to climate change and the EU strategy on the energy framework. We cannot consider any of those issues in isolation, because everything that we do in Europe affects the wider world, and having those priorities reflected in the committee’s work is welcome. I am also a member of the Education and Culture Committee. Although that committee has not made a submission to the report, the European and External Relations Committee has done a great deal of work on the one-plus-two language model that the Scottish Government is piloting, which should ensure that we have a healthy future in Europe.

I want to revisit some of what has been said about the place that education holds in the psyche of the Scottish people. Scotland was the first country in the world to introduce universal education. The National Archives of Scotland website states: “Education has always been considered very important by Scots: indeed, Scotland’s first Education Act was passed as far back as 1496, when James IV ordered that the eldest sons of barons and free-holders should study Latin, arts and law, in order to ensure that local government lay in knowledgeable hands. Two hundred years later a further education act ordered that a school be established in every parish, to be provided by the local ... landowners ... Such schools were established slowly, but by the end of the 18th century most parishes in Scotland had at least one school.” Not one to miss an opportunity to talk about Lanarkshire, I suggest that we should also remember that New Lanark was well known not only for its decent homes, fair wages, free healthcare and new education system but for being the place that introduced the world’s first workplace nursery school.

As the Labour administration on North Lanarkshire Council has just decided to close two schools in the area, I think that the member would be wise not to go over what happened during that budget. Since the member has mentioned North Lanarkshire, let us look at the educational attainment league tables for North Lanarkshire that were published in December last year. At the top—as has consistently been the case—appears Dalziel high school, where less than 10 per cent of the pupils claim free school meals. That success should be welcomed. However, the third-top school in the league table is Taylor high school, where 14 per cent of pupils achieved five or more highers and 26 per cent achieved three or more highers—those are potential higher education students—but 17.9 per cent of the pupils receive free school meals. The member is saying to the pupils of Taylor high school, “You’re too poor for free education.” That is a disgusting position.

That is what you are saying. [Interruption.]

The member is saying that free higher education should not be available to school pupils from poor areas but with high achievement. That is what those on the Labour benches are saying. Education has always been key to the Scottish psyche, and the level of education and literacy in our country is what brought about the Scottish renaissance. We have all been brought up on stories about our great scientists and inventors, such as James Clerk Maxwell, and great thinkers, such as Adam Smith and James Hutton, who came from that renaissance. That has led to the great education system that we still have in Scotland today. We have the highest concentration of universities in Europe, the newest being the University of the Highlands and Islands, which was granted full university status in 2011. We have 16 universities, three specialist institutions and more than 40 colleges welcoming more than 40,000 international students every year from more than 180 countries. We have always had pioneering institutes in the fields of medicine, energy research and scientific breakthroughs. It is a great testament to Scotland that we continue to excel in those areas. Scotland’s education institutes produce more citations per head of population than do those in any other country in the world and Scotland produces 1 per cent of the world’s published research with only 0.1 per cent of the world’s population. That leads me on to universality, which I have spoken about recently in the chamber but to which I want to return. Free education should be a universal benefit, and universal benefits are important because they reduce social and economic inequality and enhance rather than diminish the status of the poor. Selectivity and means testing require processes, procedures and administration that make them simply not worth while and they lead to stigmatisation and an inequality of service. We should welcome a move towards a more equal society. I, too, will quote from a blog by a Robin responding to Anas Sarwar’s speech yesterday, but this is from Robin McAlpine rather than Robin Parker. Mr McAlpine says: “And this is where the biggest problem for Labour lies; it has not yet accepted the real legacy of its years in power. The outcomes of Labour rule were much like the outcomes of Tory rule—increasing economic inequality, the whole-sale privatisation and commercialisation of government, a blind eye to corporate corruption and tax avoidance and cheap populism that got us into wars and legitimised the anti-immigration movement.” It is an irony that those on the Labour benches are standing with the Tories in the debate and saying that free education should not be available for Scotland’s population. I will finish with a quote from Anne Glover, the chief scientific adviser to the European Commission, who has said: “Science isn’t bothered about your sex, your accent, your social position; all science is interested in is do you have an inquiring mind”. An inquiring mind should not come with a price tag.

When the cabinet secretary last spoke to the chief executive of NHS Lanarkshire, did they discuss progress towards single-room provision in hospitals in Lanarkshire?

I begin with a Burns quote that is heard frequently in January and which is apt for the debate; it is about the type of Scotland that we want to live in and our values and choices. It goes: “Auld Scotland wants nae skinking ware That jaups in luggies”. Scotland does not want a watered-down welfare system that does nothing to fill the bowls of our citizens. Time and again, Scotland has shown that she wants the bowls filled with haggis, the full bhuna or whatever. We want a welfare system that is built on the principles of universalism: from each according to their ability and to each according to need, and from the cradle to the grave. We know that Scotland wants that from the overwhelming vote in the 2011 elections for the policies of universalism in the SNP manifesto, such as free education, free prescriptions and free personal care. Those are now described as a something-for-nothing society, but I say to those on the Labour benches that, as soon as we ask why the middle or upper classes should benefit from universal services, we have lost the principle that they are about: the normalisation of welfare.

We have been accused of not walking the walk, but the Scottish people have shown that they support our record on universal services. There is more evidence that Scotland wants that. On 29 May 2009, Scotland’s Futures Forum and Glasgow Caledonian University’s poverty information unit co-hosted a conference in this chamber to explore the extent to which the Scottish Parliament in its first decade had reduced poverty and inequalities and to consider what the Parliament should be doing in the next 10 years. I cannot mention all the key conclusions today, but one of them was: “Inequalities of income and wealth have changed little in recent decades with a corrosive effect on all sections of society. It is therefore vital that we tackle inequality as much as poverty.” Another was: “High quality public services that are accessible to all but meet the needs of the most vulnerable are crucial to ensuring a more equal society.” One of the contributors looked to “The Spirit Level: Why more equal societies almost always do better” to show that an equal society benefits all sections of society, including the richest, who benefit from lower mortality rates and mental health. That benefit from an equal society is also evidenced in the Jimmy Reid Foundation report, “The Case for Universalism”, which examines the debate in Scotland today. Mr Smith said that he wanted this debate, but I was very disappointed that a debate in the Parliament on that very report was stopped from happening, because not one member of the Labour Party felt that they could support the principles on which all the welfare benefits that they brought in were based. In its section on international comparisons and contrasts, the report examines the Nordic model of a truly “universal welfare state”. It says: “Such an approach to organising society and the economy has been described as: ‘a broad range of social services and benefits that are intended to cover the entire population throughout the different stages of life, and ... the benefits are delivered on the basis of uniform rules for eligibility. A typical example would be universal childcare or universal child allowances that are distributed without any form of means-testing’ ... Such an inclusive welfare state inevitably has consequences for the whole of the community: the welfare system is not just for ‘the poor’ but for all, building social cohesion, solidarity and inclusion”. By any comparison, the Nordic countries, individually—as evidenced by Kevin Stewart—and collectively, occupy the highest ranks and indices of income, wealth, happiness, life satisfaction and equality, with the lowest levels of poverty and inequality in the world. Our economic and fiscal choices should be about the society that we aspire to. The recognition that stigmatisation, alienation and poverty traps simply impede economic and social cohesiveness must take centre stage. It is about philosophy; it is not about fiscal decisions. Scotland’s Futures Forum also came up with aspirations for Scotland. It sought “A more progressive tax system ... Reduction in educational inequalities ... A reduction in inequality of wealth as well as income ... High quality public services accessible to all”. Those are very welcome aspirations. This debate has been to the fore recently in Scotland. I saw Douglas Alexander on “The Politics Show” trying to defend the indefensible—the Labour Party’s lurch to the right. In doing so, he quoted Bevan: “The language of priorities is the religion of Socialism.” He coined that phrase in 1949. Perhaps Mr Alexander and other Labour politicians should read his 1959 speech, 10 years later, following Labour’s defeat, long after Bevan had parted company from the Labour front benches over the introduction of prescription charges, which he saw as an abandonment of the founding principles of the NHS. He said: “I once said ... that the language of priorities was the religion of Socialism, and there is nothing wrong with that statement ... but you can only get your priorities right if you have the power to put them right ... The argument is about power and only about power, because only by the possession of power can you get the priorities correct.” I look forward to the day when the power is in the hands of a Scottish Government in an independent Scotland.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made towards implementing the shovel-ready projects announced in December 2012. (S4O-01723)

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on securing £205 million-worth of additional Scottish construction projects, albeit in the context of an initial 33 per cent cut in the capital budget. How will the Central Scotland region benefit from the funding announcement and how might Scotland have proceeded differently with the full fiscal powers of independence?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the recent CNN poll that places Scotland as the number 1 tourist destination for 2013. (S4F-01104)

The First Minister will be aware that North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council have come together for this year to celebrate Lanarkshire 2013, which will include events surrounding the bicentenary of David Livingstone’s birth. What boost to that campaign does the First Minister expect will result from the CNN poll rating?

I, too, congratulate Jayne Baxter on making her maiden speech, which was reflective, poignant and relevant to what I was thinking about when I was considering what I would say today. I was one of the original lost generation—the YOPper or youth opportunities programme generation—of the late 1970s and early 1980s. Many of my school colleagues went on to the youth opportunities programme, which offered a small payment for work experience. When I was thinking about that time, I noticed a lot of similarities with the position that we are in today in Scotland. We had a Labour Administration in Westminster followed by a Tory Administration, and we were moving into a period of severe austerity and recession. Many of the criticisms of the youth opportunities programme—that it was cheap labour and it exploited young people—are being laid at some of the proposals from Westminster to tackle unemployment. After that period, the Ravenscraig steelworks in Lanarkshire closed. Many people who I grew up with and went to school with did not have the education opportunities that I had. They suffered from the lifetime scarring that Ken Macintosh spoke about. Indeed, there are many pockets in Lanarkshire that have not recovered from that recession, nor are they prepared to deal with the current one. It is all the more sad that many of those people will be most hit by Westminster’s welfare reforms. Nearly 30 years later, and as the mother of a teenage son, I think that it is sad that we face similar challenges for the young people in Scotland. However, I am confident in the work of the Scottish Government; it is doing everything that it can to address the challenges that we face due to the economic circumstances. Mr Brodie mentioned how important it was that we, as representatives, act on the problems. That point is referred to in Labour’s amendment, too. I also want to mention Linda Fabiani, who cannot be in the chamber today. She is organising an event this Friday with local businesses, many of which are SMEs in the area, in conjunction with JobCentre Plus, to highlight some of the additional funding and opportunities that businesses can give young people. That includes voluntary work experience, sector-based work academies and work trials. She is encouraging the SMEs and other businesses in the area to take on some of those opportunities. That goes hand in hand with some of the work across the country that the minister has mentioned, such as the job summits that have taken place. I am a member of Motherwell College’s KT hub—the knowledge transfer hub—which is an organisation that brings together local small businesses and interested parties. It meets once a month for a breakfast meeting, usually with a business or a motivational speaker. The KT hub has been instrumental in highlighting what opportunities there are for local small businesses to work with young people and improving youth employment in the area. It is hard not to think of Labour always being negative. Ken Macintosh used the word “complacent” in relation to what the Government is doing, but it is difficult to see any complacency when members consider the success of the modern apprenticeship programme. Not only is it increasing—we have more than 26,000 young apprentices this year—but there is a great increase in the number of women undertaking modern apprenticeships, which must be welcomed. As if that is not enough, the survey that Gordon MacDonald mentioned shows that the modern apprenticeship programme in Scotland is the best recognised one in the UK. The UK statistics reveal that 56 per cent of businesses are aware of the programme in Scotland. That compares with 28 per cent in Northern Ireland and 25 per cent in Wales. The scheme also exists throughout England, but no region has an awareness level of more than 23 per cent. The level of recognition in Scotland is fantastic.

I say to Mr Findlay that knowledge is power and knowledge is welcome. I do not know what he does with the knowledge that he has in his working life. Scotland’s modern apprenticeship scheme is the most recognised in the UK, which is a glowing testament to the hard work of those who are involved in the programme. Getting young people into employment or training is a priority for the Government. That is why it has delivered 26,427 modern apprenticeships and will deliver 25,000 more every year in this session of Parliament. The business community has recognised how those opportunities benefit the whole economy. Far more companies recognise the Scottish system than recognise the system anywhere else in the UK. The report also showed that establishments in Scotland were more likely than those in the rest of the UK to have taken on an under-25-year-old in the year before the survey. The latest employment figures show that youth unemployment in Scotland has fallen by 4.3 per cent. It is clear that the modern apprenticeship programme is an important scheme in supporting our young people. The Scottish Government’s paid placements are different from the modern-day serfdom that the Westminster system would seemingly implement. That shows why it would be far better for all such decisions to be taken in Scotland.

Will Neil Findlay take an intervention?

Will the Scottish Government provide extra support to NHS Lanarkshire to cope during the winter months, given that we know that they bring additional pressures to the NHS?

Given that I live in and represent landlocked Central Scotland, I confess that fishing is not something with which I have been familiar. Indeed, I say to Mr Stevenson that I am in danger of being the Franz Fischler of the debate in that respect. However, since I recently joined the European and External Relations Committee, I am becoming aware of the importance of the fishing industry to Scotland’s economy and the communities that host our fishing fleet. Yesterday, I took part in the debate on the important role that scientific evidence plays in informing decision making and the contribution made by scientists and engineers in the Scottish Government, its agencies and delivery partners to the international reputation of Scotland through the provision of evidence and advice. It is, therefore, timely that we are having this discussion about fishing today, as we must recognise the scientific advice as we move forward in the negotiations. I acknowledge the cabinet secretary’s comments about his frustration that the current structures in the European Union and within the policy make it difficult to have recognition of that. In yesterday’s debate, there were many accolades for Scottish scientists both past and present, and the achievement of Anne Glover in her appointment as the first chief scientific adviser to the President of the European Commission was noted. In a recent issue of The Biologist magazine, Professor Glover was asked to name the most important science issues that politicians need to tackle today. In her answer, she said that the most important issues are: understanding climate change; ensuring that, as we look to alternative forms of energy generation such as biofuels, we do not displace crop growth and damage food security, which is also important; water security; and the challenges of sustainable economic growth. Our fishing industry is affected by all those issues. I would like to highlight examples of them, although given the time constraints I may not get through them all. I will start with food security. Being part of a modern and responsible nation means taking our responsibilities as good global citizens very seriously indeed. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is an example of Scotland’s commitment. However, I am old enough to remember the problems of the common agricultural policy, the initial principles of which have not changed since 1958. The unintentional consequence was the scandal in the 1980s of the wine lakes and butter mountains that were caused by complex systems of quotas and support prices. I hope that we have learned from that experience. I agree with my colleagues who have already mentioned that, when the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reports that 870 million world citizens are chronically undernourished and that death from hunger is still the biggest health risk in the world, a policy that includes discards is nothing less than an obscenity. I support every effort of the cabinet secretary to negotiate an end to that wasteful practice. I note that the practice is equally distasteful to the fishermen as to members of the public, and I commend the Scottish fleet for the work that it has done in reducing discards from 43 per cent to 25 per cent. I turn to Anne Glover’s comments about sustainable growth and the challenge of delivering jobs and economic sustainability. Scotland’s seas are economically productive. Although the fishing industry contributes £0.5 billion a year to the economy, it is estimated that the marine areas generate more than £3.5 billion. Nearly 40,000 people are employed in the marine sector, representing 1.6 per cent of Scottish employment. Fishing takes place in all our waters, and aquaculture—in both fin fish and shellfish—takes place on our west and east coasts. The challenges in those sectors have been well highlighted in the debate. Our marine activity also includes the abstraction of cooling water for power stations and the treatment of waste water and dredge spoil, and our sea bed has cables in it that contribute to our communications. Our seas are also used for leisure activities and are a major tourist draw because of our natural and cultural heritage. Perhaps the greatest untapped opportunity is the enormous potential of marine renewable energy generation from offshore wind, waves and tides, although that is starting to be harnessed. There is also potential for the storage of carbon dioxide under the sea bed through carbon capture and storage. All those technologies have the potential to tackle climate change, which is also vital to our fishing communities. We have to ensure that the pressure exerted by human activity on our marine environment is done so with due consideration to the delicate ecosystems. Our policy making and our position in the negotiations should be looking towards enhancing the economic potential of all our marine environments. I say to my Labour colleagues that I do not want our minister to go cap in hand asking for permission to speak and lead on negotiations on Scotland’s vital industries. I want Richard Lochhead to be at the top table. Those Labour politicians who say that population size and the numbers of MEPs are key to influence in Europe do a great disservice to Europe’s smaller nations; that view also flies in the face of the principles of the European Union.

I am pleased to speak in the debate not only as a member of the Scottish Parliament, but as a member of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on science and technology and of the British Computer Society. I put on record my thanks to the partners in the cross-party group who have contributed to the debate by providing helpful briefings. I am a bit perturbed by the direction in which the debate has gone and by the Labour amendment. Like Patrick Harvie, I thought that we would focus on scientific evidence, but the Labour amendment raises the issue of funding in an independent Scotland. That is concerning because, of course, Scotland contributes to the UK research fund. The approach seems to be that if a fund has the term “UK” attached, somehow Scotland has not contributed to it. If we look on a population basis, as the Labour Party has done, we find that Scotland contributes more to the UK economy than it gets back. Figures from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development show that Scotland, as an independent nation, would be sixth in terms of wealth. Therefore, the idea that scientific funding would be reduced or threatened in an independent Scotland is, to my mind, just absurd.

No. I am sorry, but I am very tight for time, as I am the final speaker in the open debate. Concerns have been raised about women in science. It is somewhat ironic for me to talk about that, as I am one of the women who has left the scientific professions to pursue a different career. However, I believe that the problem is societal. The issue is endemic in society, and the gender pay gap plays a large part. If we are to tackle gender inequality in the STEM professions, we must tackle gender inequality, pay differentials and established working practices that impinge on family life, for men and women and for carers throughout society. The problems are not unique to the STEM professions. In my profession, the British Computer Society has said that there is a significant pay gap between male and female computing graduates within only 15 months of graduation. That is untenable. Many members have talked about the report, “Tapping all our Talents”. The issues that the report raises when it considers what the Scottish Government can do are mainly ones that we are trying to tackle, such as childcare provision, procurement policy and the gender pay gap. Measures are being taken that seek to improve the situation. Anne Glover, in a recent article in The Biologist, spoke about the issue, but pointed out that there is also an issue for men in science to do with the traditional way in which the scientific research community has developed. The working practices are hard on all in family life, not just on women. Anne Glover also makes the point—in the same article on politics and evidence-based science that Fiona McLeod quoted—that “Politicians can’t interfere with the evidence, but they can decide not to use it.” That has aye been the case. When Galileo proved Copernicus’s theory that the earth is not the centre of the universe, he paid a high price for going against the perceived wisdom of the time: at first he was condemned to death, but then he was exiled for the remainder of his life. As a librarian, Fiona McLeod will be interested to know that I attended the National Library of Scotland exhibition on banned books last year. In one of those banned books, Darwin’s grandfather had first put down the initial stages of what would become evolution theory, which was later taken up by his grandson and published in “On the Origin of Species”. That perhaps shows that the perceived scientific wisdom and where we actually are do not always go together. Part of the issue is that we have a long way to go on how the language of science is used. We certainly need to build more confidence in and a better understanding of that. In this chamber—although not today, I have to say—I have heard people say that Alexander Fleming invented penicillin, whereas of course he only discovered it. Those small things about the understanding of science are really important. To pick up the point that Murdo Fraser made, simply calling something a theory does not make it a scientific theory of merit. That is a particularly important point as regards eugenics. I am a bit younger than some of those who might be inspired today by Anne Glover or Brian Cox, but one of my inspirations in science was the physics Nobel prize winner Richard Feynman, who was a theoretical physicist. He said: “the idea is to try to give all of the information to help others to judge the value of your contribution; not just the information that leads to judgment in one particular direction or another.” I would say that eugenics far from matches that standard, which Richard Feynman set. Let me finish by pointing out that Richard Feynman also said that, in his area of science, “If you have a theory, you must try to explain what's good and what’s bad about it equally. In science, you learn a kind of standard integrity and honesty.” I hope that we will take away from today’s debate confidence in the standard integrity and honesty of the scientists who advise our Government and policy.

I begin by sending my condolences to the families and friends of the disabled workers who were killed this week in a tragic fire at their Christmas workshop in the Black Forest. That tragic industrial accident, which was caused by a heater igniting gas and which is being investigated by the authorities, reminds us that disabled workers are just like everyone else in the workplace and face the same opportunities, challenges and dangers as other workers throughout the world. I am sure that the condolences of the whole Parliament go out to the town of Titisee-Neustadt and to the Catholic charity Caritas, which runs the facility. Supported workplaces throughout Europe and the world provide opportunity and employment for disabled workers but, more than that, they give dignity to workers who just want to be like everyone else. They want to work, earn and be self-sufficient and self-reliant and support their families. The supported workplace model works across Europe. That is why I welcomed the announcement that Netherton was to have a Remploy factory. When it was opened in 2003 by then First Minister, Jack McConnell, there was great hope that it would be the start of an endeavour that would expand on the initial 70 supported places. Certainly, the site had potential for expansion. Initially, the factory carried out high-end technical work that involved reconditioning white goods for resale. However, the Remploy factory received its first blow from the Labour UK Government when, within five short years, Anne McGuire, the then Minister for Disabled People, stood in full support behind the Remploy restructuring plans that led to where we are today. That action led to a steady decline in the factory, with worker numbers reducing and the gradual deskilling of the workforce.

I do not want to politicise the issue. I think that we can all come together in the debate. When I visited the factory before the closure, there were 29 workers. There was no manufacturing at the plant and workers were simply doing order fulfilment for publishing companies and gift-box packing. Mr Roy, the MP for Motherwell and Wishaw, worked hard on the issue and said, at the time of the reprieve: “I am delighted Remploy have accepted my proposal to keep the Wishaw factory open by partially turning the Netherton site into a training centre to help people throughout Lanarkshire get back to work.” The GMB was a bit more circumspect, realising that if the plant could not prove itself within five years, it might face closure. Indeed, that is what happened. I visited the factory shortly after I was elected. There was no evidence that Remploy had carried through the business plan that Mr Roy had proposed. The area that had been identified for use for training was ill equipped, with a few desks and chairs. There was no information technology equipment and the area had never been used for training. The staff canteen had been closed and decommissioned. The enterprise looked like it had been starved of investment and innovation. I was shocked to discover that, despite the reprieve having been based on a training centre business model, there had been no budget to market Remploy Netherton as such or take the proposal forward. At the start of 2007, Remploy at Netherton had more than 70 supported disabled workers. At the time of the reprieve, a few months later, there were 53. When it closed last month, it had just 20 workers. I consider that to be a failure of Remploy. Remploy failed to control costs, especially the extortionate management and administration overheads that were attributed to supported places, and it failed to market its factories’ services and products. Can anyone explain to me why Remploy Wishaw could not operate profitably, when there is an excellent example of a supported workplace down the road? Beltane Products has been operating for more than 40 years, giving gainful employment to people with disabilities. It is highly commended in its area, which includes upholstery refurbishment, leisure seating, healthcare seating, office interiors, curtains, bedding, beds and bedroom furniture. Currently it supports 23 people in its factory. As I said, I am not politicising the debate. I know that Mr Roy has been working with Jim McCabe from North Lanarkshire Council to try to ensure that as many as possible of the redundant Remploy Wishaw workers are accommodated in the Beltane Products factory. I am interested in other models. I have a background in IT, so I am interested in the Danish company Specialisterne, which gives high-end IT opportunities to people with autism, in the field of IT testing. It is unfortunate that the office in Glasgow closed, not because of a failure of the model but because of a global downturn in the industry. The Danish model has been successful in giving welcome opportunities to people to take on highly paid work in supported workplaces.

Okay. I note that the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities has welcomed the national framework contract, which will make it easier for Scottish public bodies to buy from supported workplaces.

Can the cabinet secretary give a breakdown of the numbers by gender of those taking part in the modern apprenticeship scheme?

I congratulate Iain Gray on bringing this very important debate to Parliament. His passion was evident in his speech. I will open my speech by almost overtaking George Adam on the number of mentions a member can give of their hometown. I must mention that I am from Lanarkshire and am Motherwell born. While I was growing up in the area and taking my first steps as a budding clarinettist I was very aware of the renowned musician and conductor, Sir Alexander Gibson. My ambition was very much an endeavour of enthusiasm over talent, so I am unlike my colleague Stuart McMillan, who is a very talented piper, and Nigel Don, who is a brass instrumentalist. He is very disappointed that he is unable to speak in the debate. Earlier this year, I was lucky enough to attend a concert in Glasgow to celebrate Scottish Opera’s 50th anniversary. Sir Alexander Gibson founded Scottish Opera in 1962 and was its music director until 1986. He opened up the world of opera for Scotland. I particularly remember the “Opera go Round” programme, which gave me my lifetime love of the genre when I saw “Madama Butterfly”. Scottish Opera is truly an opera company for the nation and Alexander Gibson enriched our lives and the art form itself with what were often world-acclaimed productions. Of course, Alexander Gibson was also a native of Motherwell, so it is no surprise that North Lanarkshire Council has continued the tradition that nurtured his talent at Dalziel high school. Many have benefited from the wonderful legacy and there is excellent music provision in North Lanarkshire’s schools. Every Friday evening, pupils who participate in North Lanarkshire schools’ music groups are given the opportunity to attend Coatbridge high school where an incredible array of talent is brought together in their wind ensemble, chorus, symphony orchestra, junior and senior string orchestras, jazz orchestra, wind band, prep band, pipe band and traditional music group. I have no doubt that pupils are benefiting from music tuition and opportunities to participate in ensembles and music groups. Iain Gray mentioned charging, which is a very complicated area with many variations across Scotland. Perhaps we could address that with COSLA and look into the variations. North Lanarkshire Council does not charge SQA students or those whose families or carers are in receipt of benefits, but it is a complicated situation across the country. From my research, I believe that only five councils charge for SQA activity. That must be looked at. As we move forward with curriculum for excellence, we must consider the possible impacts of the two plus two plus two and three plus three models of teaching in schools. The point at which a student chooses music must be considered, because if that happens later in their progression through school, it could lead to a year’s extra cost in the three plus three model. We must consider access to the whole area of music. The issue is much more complicated than being just about charging for tuition; we must also consider access to instruments. They may have to be sourced privately by parents, which adds to costs and could disenfranchise some pupils. I note that Sistema Scotland provides instruments in the Raploch.

There is much that we can do, but what the Scottish Government does in its youth music initiative is possibly the most important thing, because it is there to ignite the fire in our young people, and to inspire them to participate in music throughout their school careers.

The Government’s initiative should not be conflated with curricular delivery, which is the responsibility of local authorities and something that COSLA and local authorities have to resolve.

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate. This afternoon, in our debate on St Andrew’s day, we talked about the many celebrations that are taking place in Scotland, including Glasgow loves St Andrew’s day, which is a three-day event in George Square, packed with dance, family entertainment, food, hot toddies and ale—a uniquely Scottish celebration in the heart of the city, to which all Scotland is invited. It occurred to me that without the attendance of volunteer first-aiders such as those from St Andrew’s First Aid, the event would not be possible, nor would the many other winter festivals that are planned. That made me think about how much poorer our country would be without the volunteers from St Andrew’s First Aid. There would be no gala days, no community fun days or school fundraisers, no mini-rugby tournaments or sports events and no music festivals—nae T in the Park. Organisations such as the Boys Brigade, Girlguiding UK and the Scout Association, and the people who organise and supervise Duke of Edinburgh’s Award challenges, could not function without the training that St Andrew’s First Aid provides to them. The 1,600 athletes from around the world who took part in the international children’s games in Lanarkshire would not have had the opportunity to do so without such support. Volunteers throughout Scotland should be recognised and celebrated, and volunteers at St Andrew’s First Aid are to be highly commended for their professionalism, high standard of training and expertise in first aid. In particular I acknowledge the organisation’s work with young people. In July this year, St Andrew’s First Aid organised heartstart training for young people who use Action for Children Scotland’s young carers service in North Lanarkshire. Fifty young people aged between nine and 18 signed up to take part in an intensive two-week course in the summer holidays, to learn skills that will be vital to them in their caring roles as well as equip them to deal with issues in wider society. That is just one example of the courses that uniformed organisations deliver to young people. The Young Scot programme and the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award raise awareness of the importance of first aid and support the aims of Scottish first aid week. Together, we can save lives. One would have thought that involvement in the organisation might make one a bit risk averse. That does not seem to be the case for Georgette Fulton who, along with 11 daredevil volunteers, will take part in a 165ft SAS-style free-fall abseil from the Forth rail bridge on behalf of St Andrew’s First Aid. The abseil is not just to raise essential funds for St Andrew’s First Aid; Georgette Fulton is taking part for another reason, which is to mark her 72nd birthday. She is a commandant of the Cumnock and district volunteers group and has been a volunteer with St Andrew’s First Aid for more than 19 years. That is a great example of how St Andrew’s First Aid works with all of our community and how one is never too old to volunteer, take part and train in such an important role. We heard some new terminology in relation to the Olympic games this year—games makers. The term could never encapsulate what St Andrew’s First Aid brings to Scottish life. Its first-aiders are not just games makers; they are more akin to our Scottish makars. Their skill, expertise and wisdom underpin the cultural, sporting and leisure life of our country, in the way in which our poets define us as a nation. Like our poetic makars, they are ever present and, while we might not refer to them every day, at times of crisis or need we turn to them for comfort and help. Our country would be all the poorer without them.

How will Creative Scotland engage with the year of natural Scotland?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s remarks, following those of the First Minister on Thursday, apologising for the inaccurate figure presented to Parliament. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the corrected figure for 2011-12 shows that the Scottish Government actually spent more on colleges in 2011-12 than was indicated by the uncorrected figure?

It is useful for us to not forget that the college reforms were intended to put learners at the centre. The college regionalisation model is about improving outcomes for our young people. With the implementation of outcome agreements with the regions, we will be able to monitor and take a view of progress for the first time. The regionalisation model is also about widening access, which has already been discussed, improved articulation from further to higher education, and our guarantee to young people of a place in training, education or employment. That is why the modern apprenticeship scheme has been expanded to more than 25,000 modern apprentices, and we are also looking towards an advanced apprenticeship framework to help employers to develop staff all the way through to degree level. Liz Smith and Anne McTaggart have mentioned the drop in female participation in colleges. It is relevant to mention that the number of females who are undertaking modern apprenticeships has increased by 16 per cent. The debate is all about the Government’s priorities, at the heart of which is improved student support. In response to the spending review, Robin Parker of the NUS said: “At the last election the Scottish Government committed to increase student support, protect places at college and university, and to rule out tuition fees. This budget confirms that the Scottish Government have listened to students in Scotland, with proposals for a £7000 minimum income for the poorest students, the protection of the EMA for young students and pupils, and the confirmation of plans to keep education free of tuition fees and to increase funds for universities to match funding with ... England. Taken together these proposals are a major step in the right direction towards making access to education in Scotland fairer.”

That figure is widely disputed, but I am happy to take the quote from Robin Parker, who fully supports the proposals. Robin Parker mentioned the vital EMA, to which Stewart Maxwell referred. Of course, the EMA has been cut south of the border, along with a 32 per cent cut in college budgets there, so it is somewhat ironic that the Conservatives have chosen to bring their motion to this chamber. If the debate is about priorities, one of the Scottish Government’s priorities has been to give all Scotland-domiciled undergraduates a minimum income guarantee of £7,250 for the first time.

The minimum income guarantee has been welcomed by the NUS and it is certainly more welcome than the back-door tuition fees that Hugh Henry’s party introduced. The Conservative motion “calls on the Scottish Government to refocus its budget priorities”, but which budgets do the Conservatives suggest that we should “refocus” money from? It is not principled to demand spending without recognising that the Conservative-Lib Dem Government has inflicted cumulative cuts in Scotland’s budget of £10.4 billion in real terms over four years—£6.7 billion in cuts to the revenue budget and £3.7 billion in cuts to the capital budget. To maintain support for students, the SNP Government has increased baseline college support by 25 per cent since 2007, up to £84.2 million. In 2013-14, the Government is allocating an additional £11.4 million to ensure that college student bursary budgets are maintained at more than £95 million. That represents over 40 per cent more than was provided when Johann Lamont was a Scottish Executive minister. Central Scotland has many outstanding colleges and learning environments of the highest quality, thanks to the investment that has been made in our colleges in recent years. Coatbridge College is about to open a brand-new spectacular business and conference centre and, at its summer celebration, it welcomed staff and families to its newly refurbished campus. I will finish with a quote from the David Hume Institute’s report “Further Education, the Scottish Labour Market and the Wider Economy”. It said: “The key conclusion ... is that Further Education Colleges contain a broader mix of students in terms of age, they have a higher proportion of disabled” students “and students from poorer backgrounds than at HE and a more flexible learning route for their students suggesting that” our further education colleges “play an important role in promoting social inclusion.”

The member mentioned “unprecedented cuts”. Is the 32 per cent cut south of the border not a precedent?

Mr Findlay talked about the modern apprenticeship figures. What message does it send to a young person who is undertaking an apprenticeship when they hear that they somehow stole a job from someone who was in the job when they undertook their apprenticeship?

I, too, welcome Mr Yousaf to his new role and congratulate him on his first speech as a minister. Unlike some of my colleagues speaking this afternoon, I have not visited Malawi, but it has been very moving to hear the testimonies of those who have been to the country and have experienced things at first hand. However, coming from Lanarkshire—which I think I have mentioned once or twice in the chamber—I am very familiar with the work of David Livingstone. Indeed, I first visited the David Livingstone centre as a primary school pupil. However, I recently—and very unexpectedly—found myself having a conversation about David Livingstone during a cross-party group visit to Taiwan that I was lucky enough to be part of. We visited the Changhua Christian hospital, which was founded in 1896 by Dr David Landsborough, who was born in Kilmarnock. A Church of Scotland missionary, Dr Landsborough founded both the church and medical centre on the island of Formosa, beginning two generations of dedicated service by the Landsborough family to the Taiwanese people’s medical needs. When we talk of the selfless help and dedication of aid workers and missionaries, I think that few can match the incredible efforts of Mrs Landsborough who donated skin grafts to save a seriously ill child. That act of kindness and love is remembered to this day by the people of Taiwan. On the visit, we also heard how Changhua Christian hospital is one of Taiwan’s largest and foremost medical centres, providing medical services, outreach patient work, telesystems and research facilities. Indeed, a large proportion of the country’s medical services funded through the insurance system are provided at the hospital. I mention the hospital because it also provides an overseas medical mission, delivering long and short-term medical services in the Congo and Kenya and covering Swaziland, as well as south Pacific and Caribbean regions, including Papua New Guinea and Tuvalu. Not only is it interested in delivering general surgical and medical services in developing countries, but it encourages medical personnel to volunteer abroad and to deliver clinical services and public health education programmes as well as free medical services in rural areas. It wants to strengthen the technologies and share new knowledge of healthcare in those areas, and has hosted in Taiwan trainees from developing countries on short-term courses in, for example, emergency paediatrics, nursing and biomedical engineering. That kind of modern capacity-building approach to aid and helping developing countries sparked the conversation about David Livingstone, because it was very similar to some of the work that we in Scotland are doing. I was very proud to see this work being carried out and, frankly, was in awe of the status that Scotland and the Landsborough family in particular had among the people of Taiwan and the medical community. The Landsboroughs are perhaps not greatly known in Scotland, but the similarities with David Livingstone were poignant and prompted the conversation about Scotland’s relationship with Malawi, which is so firm today, having been built on those early Christian missionary endeavours. I believe that Scotland should be very proud of that and was glad that the Taiwanese people had taken on those initial acts of international aid and propagated a commitment to international aid and development throughout the world. It was good to see modern nations taking on the Scottish tradition of helping those less able than ourselves and that such a prominent commitment to international aid had Scottish roots. When I saw some of the medical work being carried out at Changhua Christian hospital, I was very struck by similarities with the approach taken at the Hamilton campus of the University of the West of Scotland, where I have seen Malawian midwives being trained and gaining qualifications through telelearning and distance learning. Our shared history with Malawi is what makes the partnership work so well. That partnership has been built not on the old style of giving aid, but on a prevalent modern approach that is based on capacity building and a focus on education systems and which I think is working very well in our partnerships with Malawi. I was delighted last week to attend, along with Christina McKelvie, the opening of the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland exhibition on Scotland and poverty, which was held at the GLO centre in Motherwell. The exhibition highlights the work that is being undertaken by some of the NIDOS members and Scottish charities in the area of international aid. Of course, Malawi featured on the boards more than once. The exhibition was wonderful, and I hope that it will come to the Parliament at some point next year. I was particularly interested to see a demonstration of a water filter by Jim Rae of Waterforall Africa. I saw dirty water going through a filter, and was presented with a glass of it at the end and asked if I wanted to taste it, having been assured that the filter removed E coli, cryptosporidium and all those other nasty diseases that people can get from water. The very fact that I paused brought home to me the importance of water security, which we take for granted. I hope that the exhibition will inspire other people, as it inspired me, to understand those issues.

I am honoured to speak in the debate. As Gil Paterson said, this is one of those debates that shows Parliament in its best light. I particularly commend Neil Bibby and Liam McArthur for how they moved their respective amendments. As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I also welcome Stewart Maxwell’s comprehensive summary of the work that the committee has been doing on the subject. It seems only a short time since we last debated adoption and permanence. I remember hearing the speeches of Gil Paterson and Richard Lyle then. Also today, we heard from Nanette Milne. If anyone is looking for examples of positive outcomes from the adoption process, they need look no further than this chamber. It has been moving to hear those members talk about their personal experiences. The stated aim of the Scottish Government is for Scotland to be the best place in the world to grow up. That is a bold and ambitious statement—rightly so. There is no doubt that in the past we have, despite our understanding of the poor education and life outcomes for looked-after children, failed despite our efforts and the best will of the professionals involved. As Liam McArthur mentioned, this is just a nut that we have not been able to crack; we have not been able to get to the nub of the problem and to start to make a real difference for our looked-after children. The cabinet secretary has mentioned the many projects that are now on the way and the organisations that have been galvanised into tackling the problem, including CELSIS, LACSIG and many of the third sector organisations in the field such as the Aberlour Trust, Children 1st and Barnardo’s. There have been so many excellent speeches with useful information that it is difficult to find a new slant on the discussion, but I want to highlight a recent report from Who Cares? Scotland. It has conducted a survey of young people that aims to provide supporting information from children in care and care leavers for the proposed children and young people bill. It covers young people’s experience of being in care in Scotland. We have talked a lot about the professionals, but it is interesting to hear the voices of the young people this afternoon. Who Cares? Scotland offers independent advocacy for children and young adults. It conducted a survey of 116 young people in care and care leavers to gather their views on the children and young people bill. It wants the voices of children and young people to be heard in the consultation and the deliberation processes that aim to deliver better outcomes for them, and it has commented on a number of areas that are relevant to today’s debate on permanence. Young people were asked what they thought would have made their lives better before going into care; 13 per cent mentioned communication and preparation. Many felt that they had no idea what going into care would mean for them and their families, and 16 per cent mentioned that support before going into care would have been of great help. In addition, the young people said that they would have benefited from “more support to prevent having to go into care”. There is a feeling among those young people that they should have been given support a bit earlier. The young people want to be communicated with and to have a better understanding of what to expect in the future. The report quotes one young person who said: “It was all too quick and I never got the time to pack my things. I would have liked more time to prepare and also to be told that going into care was an option as it was all a shock to me when it happened. I never got to say goodbye to my friends either which I didn’t like.” Who Cares? Scotland also asked the young people what they thought would have made their lives better while they were in care. Twenty-eight per cent of them mentioned the care environment and 11 per cent mentioned being listened to. As a word of caution to the Scottish Government, the minister and all the professionals who are involved, I note that only 1 per cent of the young people mentioned early intervention. Although I absolutely agree with early intervention and think that it is the right way forward, perhaps we need to communicate the message better to our young people. It is interesting that the care environment was of such importance to the young people. They mentioned things as simple as the fact that they were not allowed to charge their mobile phones in their bedrooms because of health and safety concerns. As a mother of a teenage son, I can imagine what stresses that must have caused for the young people involved. The importance of the care environment became evident to the Education and Culture Committee when we visited a children’s unit in Glasgow. We were concerned that the young residents whose permanent home it had been for a number of years, and whose permanent home it was likely to remain until they left care, could still be subjected to disruption and upset from emergency admissions to that home. The young people were asked who had had most influence on their lives. Neil Bibby mentioned that the work of social workers is key, and it is interesting that the young people cited social workers as providing the most important relationship outside their families. They also mentioned the roles of advocates and care workers. They felt that advocates had more time in which to get to know them to spend with them. It is evident that all the professionals who are involved with the young people have key roles to play, and we need to get that right if we are to get it right for young people.

In 2007, I was nominated on to the Scottish Accident Prevention Council executive. The council has committees that cover road safety, home safety and water safety. My involvement gave me an opportunity to work with professionals in the area, such as road safety officers, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents and the blue-light services, and while I remain no expert in the area, it has given me a personal commitment to accident prevention. Members have touched on some of the costs of accidents. David Stewart gave a good example of the personal costs of a fatal accident, but I would like to say a little about the financial costs and the costs to society. The Baker Tilley report for the Institute of Advanced Motorists and the 2009 RoSPA report both sought to estimate the total cost of a fatal accident, including the burden on society from lost production, healthcare costs, social benefits costs and the cost of the blue-light services. The cost to society is estimated to be £1.8 million per accidental death. That is interesting in the context of preventative spend. However, no figure can represent the personal cost to the families and friends either of the drink-impaired drivers, who damage their own families’ security, or of the innocent victims who are affected by the reckless behaviour of such drivers. I use the term “drink-impaired drivers” carefully, because it takes so little alcohol consumption for impairment to be present in a driver. That is detailed in road safety Scotland’s report on drink-driving and drug-driving. It states: “There is no failsafe guide as to how much you can drink and stay under the limit. Any alcohol, even a small drink will impair driving ability and the only safe course is not to drink any alcohol prior to driving.” It lists the following effects of alcohol on driving ability: “Impaired judgement of distances. Impaired adaptability of eyes to changing light conditions. Impaired sensitivity to red lights. Severe impairment of ability to react and of concentration.” Those effects exist at the current blood alcohol limit. Even with the proposed limit, there are the following effects: “Inability to see or locate moving lights correctly. Problems in judging distances. Tendency to take risks.” We have had some discussion about attitudes to sobering up and what represents safe drinking for people who will be driving the next morning. Road safety Scotland has also done some research on that. It states: “After four drinks during an evening, most motorists who drive the next morning will be over the limit. It can take up to 12 hours to be safe to drive after drinking one bottle of wine. It can take up to 12 hours to be safe to drive after drinking four pints of continental lager or ale.” It has also done research on who is drink-driving the morning after, and it states: “One in three motorists has driven ‘the morning after’ whilst over the limit. Half of all young drivers admit to driving in the morning despite excessive drinking the night before. Half of all male drivers in the UK admit to driving in the last year within two hours of having a drink.” I understand the point that Alex Johnstone was making and I understand that there is an education issue. Although ignorance is no excuse for driving while over the limit, the more positive message that we can send is that there is no excuse for ignorance. We need to move the debate away from our focus on what the legal limits should be to focus instead on personal responsibility and societal change in our attitudes to alcohol. ROSPA, which I mentioned earlier, has a long-standing campaign in the area. It seeks the following measures: “Lowering the maximum blood alcohol limit from 80mg/100ml to 50mg/100ml. Evidential roadside breath testing. Wider powers for the police to breath test drivers to enable targeted, evidence led, and high profile random breath testing to increase drivers’ perception of the risk of being caught without necessarily placing additional demands upon police resources. Wider user of drink drive rehabilitation courses. Encouragement for employers to set zero limits for staff who drive for work” and “Improved public education, in particular to raise awareness of how easy it is to be above the limit, how difficult it is to know exactly how many units of alcohol have been consumed”. I welcome the fact that the Government has brought forward proposals to lower the limit within the current constitutional arrangement, but we would be able to do much more with further powers in Scotland. I was questioned earlier in the week by school pupils who were visiting the Parliament. One primary 6 pupil asked me, “What difference have you made as a politician?” It was quite a daunting and difficult question and I probably should not admit to having had to think about it for quite a while. However, I have no doubt that if we support the Government on its motion today, we will be saving lives on Scotland’s roads.

It is interesting that the member feels a personal responsibility as a politician because of the stigma attached to drink-driving. Does he not think that we need to get to a position whereby the whole of society regards drink-driving as totally unacceptable and attaches a stigma to anyone who is convicted?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, thank Roderick Campbell for bringing the debate to the chamber this evening and highlighting the work of the Vivarium Trust. As someone born and raised in Lanarkshire and living close to New Lanark, it is no surprise that I have some interest in place making founded on the principles of the co-operative movement. Yet we still have such a long way to go, despite New Lanark’s beginnings in 1784. I hope that members will indulge me when I talk about that a bit. When he founded the mills in New Lanark, David Dale was already a successful businessman, who had benefited from the surge of trade from tobacco and textiles in Glasgow in the late 1700s. He was considered an ethical employer by the standard of the day, but it was the succession of his son-in-law, Robert Owen, to control of the business that was truly transformational. New Lanark was not about workers’ houses but about establishing a community—place making in the true sense of the process and philosophy. New Lanark gained an international reputation for social and educational reform and—another first for Scotland—it had the world’s first infant school. It also had a crèche, free medical care, a comprehensive education system for its children and lifelong learning opportunities, with evening classes for adults. We hold many of those values dear today, and we debate many of them in this chamber to this day. New Lanark also offered leisure and recreation opportunities. They were integral to the design of the place, with opportunities to attend concerts and go to the dancing. All of that was set in the tranquil and beautiful landscape of Lanarkshire, nestled at Corra Linn in the Falls of Clyde. On new year’s day 1816, Robert Owen delivered an address to his workers. He said: “I know that society may be formed so as to exist without crime, without poverty, with health greatly improved, with little, if any misery, and with intelligence and happiness increased a hundredfold: and no obstacle whatsoever intervenes at this moment except ignorance to prevent such a state of society from becoming universal”. Unfortunately, our society has been ignorant for too long. That is why I welcome the enlightenment of the Vivarium Trust and its pilot programme for Scotland. It is a co-operative movement that, by appropriate place making, seeks a better way of living for older people, who will be able to access affordable, self-managed living and accommodation that is appropriate to their needs. It will be a supportive environment and community offering recreational facilities and social inclusion. It will also be built on the principle of participation, with residents involved in the design stages. It will be built on ethical standards and to ecological efficiency standards, and the build quality will ensure that there are affordable homes with low heating overheads. However, should that not be the blueprint for all our housing? There are fantastic examples of housing, some of which Elaine Murray detailed. In that list, I would include the Grödians development in Lerwick in Shetland and the Blackwood homes at Cala Sona in my home town of Wishaw, which support disabled residents. Is it not incumbent on all housing associations and local government to build and design our homes and living communities with the idea of community cohesion at their core? If we did, perhaps we could then truly aspire to the example, the co-operative ideals and the utopian dreams of Robert Owen, nearly 200 years ago.

What steps will be taken to ensure that the wording of the question on the ballot paper will be fair, will be easy to understand, will gain the Scottish people’s confidence and will produce a result that is beyond challenge?

I thank David Torrance for taking an intervention. I was lucky enough to attend the 33rd Blair Atholl jamborette this year, as my son is an explorer scout. Does David Torrance agree that the efforts of the Fife scouts in raising more than £10,000 to ensure that a Japanese troop that had been devastated by the tsunami could come to Blair Atholl this year is another example of the outstanding work of our young people in Scotland?

The minister will be aware that the Netherton factory in the Central Scotland region was given a reprieve in 2007, having previously been earmarked for closure by the Labour Government. It is now marked for closure with the loss of 24 jobs, 20 of which are held by disabled workers. Given that the most recent figures show that North Lanarkshire’s unemployment rate is above the national average and that Jobcentre Plus reports that 14 people are chasing every vacancy in the area, what support will the Government give to those who are facing unemployment following the closure of the factory?

12. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that older people receiving support in their own homes have regular access to community medical services. (S4O-01317)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is vital that the elderly and housebound have full and continued access not only to assessment and clinical medical services but to dental services, podiatry and a full range of routine checks and screening services? Such services ensure that appropriate prevention and early intervention can be planned for that group of patients. What is the cabinet secretary doing to ensure that appropriate transport arrangements and information about the arrangements are in place for that group of patients?

I am not a member of the Justice Committee, but I have listened to the debate with interest. Traditionally, the operational practices of the police have been based on corroboration, and we are used to seeing our police officers operating in pairs. Can the cabinet secretary reassure us that, if the need for corroboration is removed, the single deployment of policemen would not be adopted without the risks being fully assessed?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Falkirk Council and other agencies regarding the fly infestation at Abbotsinch, Grangemouth. (S4O-01297)

I thank the minister for that very detailed response. There is no doubt that this matter is of some concern to the local residents whose enjoyment of their houses and gardens has been blighted by the infestation. I commend the work of my colleague, Angus MacDonald, the constituency MSP, who has established a problem-solving partnership with local residents and stakeholders. Will the minister undertake to keep the partnership fully informed of developments regarding this infestation?

I am a Lanarkshire lass, born in Motherwell, and so the motion is close to my heart. My grandfather worked at David Colville and Sons, and many of my close family and friends have connections to the steel industry, so I give great thanks to members from across the chamber who supported the motion and have given Parliament an opportunity to recognise the centuries of Scottish steel-making history that contributed much—literally in blood, sweat and tears—to the building of industrial Scotland. In the debate, we also recognise the brave workers who were injured and maimed, and those who sadly lost their lives in a dangerous and physically demanding role. I commend the work of the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund to construct and install a steelworkers memorial on the Ravenscraig site. There has been a great deal of interest in the debate. In the public gallery we have Terry Currie, who is chair of the memorial fund; Tommy Brennan, who is its secretary; and John Scott, who is a trustee of the fund. Mr Scott has a deeply personal reason for his commitment to the fund, as his uncle tragically lost his life while working in Ravenscraig. Also in the gallery to witness the debate are members of the trade union movement throughout Scotland, which supports the campaign. We have Jim Baxter and Hugh Gaffney from North Lanarkshire trades union council, and we have Stephen Boyd, who is the assistant secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress. There are also steelworkers who are interested in the debate, including Jim Fraser and Stevie Jeffrey, who marked the 20th anniversary of the Ravenscraig plant’s closure with a reunion of former ironworks, engineering and production staff. We also have Pat Donnelly from the union Community, which has generously donated £20,000 to the steelworkers memorial fund, on condition that the materials be sourced in Britain and manufactured in Scotland. I will leave procurement aside, for the moment. It is hard to encapsulate the influence that steel making had on my life and my family’s life. Steel is so ingrained in our psyche that the nickname of Motherwell Football Club is the Steelmen. Only yesterday evening, I attended an awards ceremony at St Aidan’s high school where, as in so many Lanarkshire schools, the award for academic excellence is the David Colville dux medal. The Dalzell steel and iron works in Motherwell was founded by David Colville in 1871. It was nationalised in 1976 and is now operated by Tata Steel. Ravenscraig dominated my childhood skyline. Often, it had a none-too-pleasant effect on the olfactory system, and I can still remember the noise and the night sky being illuminated like fire as the slag was released from the furnaces. However, the sensory effects that I remember from childhood are nothing compared to the hardship that the workers endured. In his history of the steel-making industry, “Sons of Vulcan: Ironworkers and Steelmen in Scotland”, Robert Duncan states: “The making of molten steel in open hearthed furnaces depended on hard manual labour, dexterity and considerable powers of mental and physical endurance.” Workers were exposed to extreme levels of heat and were often exposed to noxious and toxic fumes. One can only imagine that the stamina that was required by workers who were tasked with hand stripping and clearing the slag from the chamber beneath the furnaces, in cramped and hazardous conditions with only hammers to assist them. That was only one of the many dangerous jobs that were undertaken by steelworkers and contractors. The stresses, strains, injuries, occasional fatal accidents and constant danger were obvious features of steel making in this period. As in many of the industries that are associated with the industrial revolution, the labour force was the steel industry’s least valued asset, so no records exist that quantify the levels of injury and death that occurred in it. Robert Duncan also references the Royal Commission on Labour from 1892, in which John Hodge, who was leader of the steel melters union in Scotland, stated that although fatal accidents were few and unusual, there were many small accidents, such as men losing a toe or a finger, or getting burnt. The truth is that we will never know the full extent of the fatalities and accidents over the centuries. Anecdotally, I know that barely any family in a steel-making community has not been touched by the tragedy that is associated with our industrial heritage.

I could not agree more with Elaine Smith. The sacrifice of Ravenscraig and the Scottish steel industry set me on the road to politics and brought me here today. Scotland’s steel industry is still very important today. Vallourec Mannesmann’s plant in Mossend and Tata Steel’s Dalzell and Clydebridge plants are important to Scottish industry. Anne Glover, the European Commission’s first-ever chief scientific adviser, sang the praises of Scottish steel industry in this building last week, when she described the use of our steel at European Transonic Windtunnel, which uses liquid nitrogen to freeze its chamber to subzero temperatures and in doing so uses half the power grid of the city of Cologne. It required the highest quality steel, which was delivered from Scotland. We have a strong tradition in Lanarkshire of recognising the sacrifices that were made by workers and their families in building this nation. I count my colleague, Elaine Smith, as one of the many inspiring speakers who I have listened to at workers memorial day, which is remembered at Summerlee heritage museum. We show solidarity with workers from around the world who have lost their lives or been injured, and we highlight the preventable nature of most workplace accidents and associated ill health. We seek to promote campaigns and union organisations in the fight to improve workplace safety. Earlier in the summer at the festival of politics, I witnessed a discussion about the great tapestry of Scotland, which will depict our history as a nation from neolithic times. The discussion of who should appear in the tapestry was quickly overshadowed by the discussion of what should appear. Crofters, jute workers, rent strikers, miners, shipbuilders and, of course, steelworkers were considered as important as individual heroes such as Adam, Maxwell, Wallace and Lanarkshire’s own David Livingstone. I thank members for the opportunity to bring this motion to Parliament, which is very important to me. I commend it to Parliament.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits it considers the international culture summit 2012 has brought to Scotland. (S4O-01221)

Certainly, people were brought together under the theme of culture as international dialogue from as far afield as Nigeria, New Zealand, Japan and Brazil. As one who attended the conference, I was moved by the hard-hitting contributions from those in poverty and those from theatres of conflict, such as Haris Pašovic, who talked about the efforts to bring theatre and film to Sarajevo during its siege. Given the success of the culture summit and the fact that it showcased Scotland as a vibrant centre for international cultural exchange, are there any plans to hold another summit in the future?

The last speakers in a debate are always worried that some of their speech might already have been covered by other members. However, this afternoon’s debate has been very interesting. I was particularly taken with Jackson Carlaw’s Scolympia and Mount Scolympus. At first, I thought that he was moving a bit far from the Government’s programme, but then I realised that Mount Olympus is a place far from here, where the fate of individuals and nations is changed at the whim of a select few elite individuals who are far removed from the mere mortals whose lives they affect and who have no mandate to do so. Perhaps, then, he was quite close to the mark. I am, of course, very excited about the referendum bill, because it gives us an opportunity to discuss and debate the issue and engage with all Scotland’s people on the type of country we aspire to and the type of constitution that we want to live under. However, I want to concentrate on what this Government is doing and delivering for Scotland’s young people. Over the past two days, the debate has varied in tone and content. However, listening to the speeches, I have become increasingly surprised at the rewriting of history by, and the somewhat collective amnesia of, some of those on the opposing benches and have to wonder what message some of the comments made in the chamber yesterday are sending to our young people, our teachers and our parents. The delivery of more than 25,000 modern apprenticeships is a success story. Every one of the 26,427 young people in modern apprenticeships in 2011-12 should be congratulated on their commitment and dedication to the training that they have undertaken to reach their goals. Grahame Smith, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, has said of apprenticeships that they “offer a real chance of a job and a decent future. And few would argue that, with two-thirds of people in work given no training by their employers, it is a good thing to at least offer them the chance to train and gain a qualification through an apprenticeship.”

Yes, please.

Of course there is, but the modern apprenticeships are defined as such—modern apprenticeships. Attacking the fact that young people in work are taking up that opportunity sends out a message that they are somehow a different class of apprentice, somehow undeserving of their position, when we should be celebrating them. What is worse is that we are sending out a message that that opportunity is costing another young person a job, which is simply not true. We should be celebrating all our young people who are taking advantage of the modern apprenticeship programme. I also make it clear that the modern apprenticeship programme exists and runs under the same terms and conditions as it did under the Labour-Lib Dem coalition. In 2006, when Labour was in power, 49 per cent of apprenticeships were given to young people who were already in work. Under this Government, the most recent figure for apprenticeships given to 16 to 24-year-olds who were already in work is 23 per cent, so to claim that somehow we are fiddling the figures or doing anything inappropriate is simply not true. There also seems to be a bit of confusion among Labour members about council tax in particular, which was mentioned by Mr Findlay today and by Hugh Henry yesterday. Labour stood under a manifesto commitment to maintain the council tax freeze, but yesterday Hugh Henry called into question why we have universal benefits such as the council tax freeze, free prescriptions and free personal care. In what was almost an aside in his speech, Mr Henry also commented that current nursery pupils would be lucky if the curriculum for excellence was being delivered when they were university students. What message does that send out to our young people who are currently studying and preparing for their exams in the curriculum for excellence, to their parents and to the teachers working hard to deliver the curriculum for excellence? It is fit for purpose and we should commend our teachers and the people who are delivering it. I wonder what message Mr Henry’s comment sends out to Labour North Lanarkshire Council, whose educational director has commented in the press that the council is going to be in a position to deliver the curriculum for excellence. What irony to cast doubt on the delivery of the curriculum when, in March, Mr Henry stood in this Parliament on a motion to delay the curriculum for excellence even further. Mr Findlay mentioned the rights of workers in his speech—what trade union legislation did Labour reverse in its 13 years in power? The Government is committed to our young people. The children and young people bill will be transformational for the young people of Scotland. By providing £274 million to support early years, implementing the curriculum for excellence, implementing a national domestic abuse delivery plan to help our most vulnerable young people, rolling out family nurse partnerships for our youngest and most vulnerable people, and introducing minimum pricing for alcohol, which will tackle some of the problems that blight our young people—

Westminster has delivered for us Thatcherism, the de-industrialisation of Scotland, the poll tax, illegal wars, nuclear weapons and the Trident replacement. However, Labour seems to have written out things such as the 10p tax rate, which attacked the most vulnerable and low-paid workers in our country.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what benefit the Edinburgh international culture summit will bring to Scotland. (S4O-01157)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the international cultural discourse fostered by the summit will enhance Scotland’s international reputation?

I welcome the debate and agree that the lack of women’s representation at the highest level of public life—and in private industry—is a concern that everyone in the chamber should have and that all our society should share. Our demographic profile in Scotland is such that women live longer on average than men. If our women pensioners have been less well paid throughout their careers and unable to progress as easily as their male counterparts for whatever reason—and I am sure that many of those barriers will be examined today—our society is storing a problem of pensioner poverty for women. I am a member of the British Computer Society and I had a 20-year career in information technology before entering politics full time in 2007. I realise that that makes me one of the women who have chosen to leave that profession. However, I remain passionate about encouraging young women into rewarding careers in IT and in science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM subjects. IT is a relatively new industry, and one might expect that the problems that exist in older, more traditional sectors, public bodies, and industries such as medicine, engineering and banking might not be so prevalent in IT. However, in 2008 the British Computer Society published a report, “Women in IT Scorecard”, which mapped gender imbalance in the IT workforce. It had some startling findings. Although women represent 45 per cent of the United Kingdom working population, in the IT sector women represent only 19 per cent. The representation of women in the IT sector in the UK is only two thirds that of Italy or Ireland. The report also shows that women coming into the profession outperform their male counterparts academically—as alluded to by Annabel Goldie—yet their career paths do not reflect that starting base. Most significantly, the BCS report showed that the pay gap in IT answers many of the questions about why women leave or fail to seek advancement. The pay gap for 16 to 29-year-olds was a staggering 14 per cent, and it was shown that that gap starts from virtually day one of employment. However, by the time people get to ages 40 to 49—a point at which the board room is perhaps a natural progression for people in the profession—the pay gap between men and women is 30 per cent. That is why I have much sympathy with the concerns and serious issues that the Labour motion raises. However, I do not believe that the problem can be tackled from the boardroom down. It is far more fundamental and must involve us all embracing a cultural change in our society. That has been identified in the Royal Society of Edinburgh report, “Tapping all our talents”, which is an investigation into women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics that looks for a strategy for Scotland. The report shows that the cause of loss of talent of women in STEM subjects is mainly due to cultural factors. In paragraph 6 it states that change will “require a major cultural change in attitude and approach.” That is why I do not believe that quotas will be the answer. We need to achieve a much more fundamental change in our society.

I am in my last few minutes. A European Commission report, “Women in economic decision-making in the EU”, looks at improved company performance evidenced by women in the boardroom. I suggest that that improvement is because women have achieved the boardroom in those companies and that their culture reflects that success. I commend the progress that is being made by the Scottish Government.

I rise to talk about Scotland’s future—my future, my teenage son’s future, my community’s future and the future of our nation. There can be no greater privilege. Somewhat ironically, I begin by talking about my past. My journey to this point started with a choice. It was a choice that I made in my late teens and it was born of the devastating impact of the de-industrialisation of Scotland that I witnessed in my teenage years. In my early primary school years, my education ran concurrently with that of my father. A late returner to education, he helped to support our family during his education through enlisting in the Territorial Army. He attended college at the same time as my elder brother, who is now a successful information technology consultant, and my sister, who is now a general practitioner. I have absolutely no doubt—because it was one of my earliest financial and life lessons—that without free education and the grant system that was then in place, my father and our family would never have gone on to have such successful careers. It is no surprise that my family were traditional Lanarkshire Labour supporters, because Labour at that time stood for many of their values—free education based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay, being of paramount importance. As I got older I witnessed the pain of my best friend’s family—her father and brother were miners. I was shocked as I watched the television coverage of the scenes outside Ravenscraig, my home town, where working-class people were pitted against one another and against the police as the Tory Government’s agenda began to bite. It was a country—a community—that was being divided by UK Government policy. Then came the devastating blow: Ravenscraig was to close while UK steel plants outwith Scotland were saved to meet EU quotas. Steel was an industry that my grandfather had worked in and that supported 10,000 jobs in Lanarkshire. I asked myself, “If Scotland was an independent nation, would the same choice have been made, or would Scotland have protected its indigenous steel industry as Spain, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and Austria did?” That is when I made my choice about Scottish independence. It was not without some controversy in my family—initially they thought in true “Star Wars” fashion that I had crossed to the dark side. However, it is a great comfort to me that before he died my father stood as an SNP council candidate in Motherwell. His values had not changed, but the political landscape had and he knew that only through independence could those values of social justice and aspiration for Scottish citizens be met. That is why the words of former Ravenscraig works convener and trade union leader Tommy Brennan, at the yes campaign launch, were so important to me. He said: “With an independent parliament and government working to build recovery, and able to bring together all the levers of social and economic policy, we can take big strides forward. We can deliver an economic and industrial policy based on Scotland’s particular circumstances.” That is the future for Scotland that I aspire to. If the right to vote from the age of 16 is granted—I fully support that campaign—my teenage son will be making his choice about Scottish independence in 2014. I want that to be a choice that is made from confidence, strength, knowledge, creativity and altruism. If I look to Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, I want that choice to be made from the pinnacle of Maslow’s pyramid because I believe that all Scottish citizens should be free to reach positive self-actualisation, shape their country’s future and fulfil the self-actualisation of an independent Scotland. The fact that our citizens—as Johann Lamont said—are so worried about feeding their families and are working at the base level of that pyramid of needs is an indication of just how much the UK is not working for the citizens of Scotland.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the grant funding of the Lighthouse, which represents the rebirth of a building, was vital in securing the legacy that is well known to be associated with Charles Rennie Mackintosh?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what projects will be supported by its 2012 Edinburgh festivals expo fund. (S4O-01057)

Will the cabinet secretary talk about the benefits of the young talents programme, including the project that was developed for film fans aged between 16 and 18, through which selected participants are given free Edinburgh international film festival student passes, which allow them access to the full range of festival events?

I am glad to speak in this important debate on a national parenting strategy for Scotland. I congratulate my colleague Jim Eadie on sponsoring yesterday evening’s event in Parliament that showcased Children 1st’s national services. The excellent presentations detailed the work of three key support services that are funded and supported by the Scottish Government. The first was safeguarding in sport, which works with sports’ governing bodies and with clubs, parents and—above all—children to ensure that young people who participate in sport are protected and supported, and that proper practices are in place. Parentline Scotland was the second service that was highlighted. It is the free helpline and e-mail service that Children 1st runs for anyone who is concerned about a child. It is provided by trained volunteers and call takers and is open seven days a week, 365 days a year. We then heard about the work that Children 1st is doing on national kinship care and about the advice and support that it provides to families and carers who are in that position. Mr Bibby mentioned that little support is akin to no support at all, but I remind him that no support at all was available before 2009, when the Scottish Government introduced the looked-after children regulations, which for the first time allowed the payment of allowances for kinship carers. Children 1st treated us to a couple of role-play calls to their support services. It was immediately obvious that signposting to other support agencies and local programmes is a key element in their successful outcomes. It brought home to me the importance of cross-agency, cross-society integrated partnerships to the success of a national parenting strategy. The minister’s motion expresses Scotland’s ambition to have all our children safe, secure and adequately and appropriately supported in reaching their full potential. As the work of Children 1st has demonstrated, the approach must be holistic and involve all aspects of a child’s life—education, social interaction or sporting activity. The role of the voluntary sector is key to that success. A national parenting strategy must ensure that all partners—education, social work, health, and the voluntary sector—work seamlessly within a framework of services and service planning that addresses a continuum of need, from prevention and early intervention to acute services. Although we recognise that key services will be delivered locally, this is a national strategy that should deliver national improvements and outcomes for our children. Parents and carers must be an integral part of that support service. I believe that parenting and caring are undervalued roles in our society. Mark McDonald mentioned paternity leave, which is perhaps an indication of that—we have such little time with young children, as parents. Parents and carers must be part of the solution, and they must be integrated into it and not be defined as the problem. Our integrated services must work with parents in improving outcomes for our young people. Much of today’s debate will focus on the early years. However, we must not forget that there are children in the system who need our additional support. I commend Made4U in ML2, which is in my area—Central Scotland—and is working with young people to build resilience in the parents of the future.

The bill that is being passed today marks a new era for the National Library of Scotland, bringing its governance into the 21st century and freeing it to continue to be “the world’s leading centre for the study of Scotland and the Scots.” That is a quotation from its own website. The bill will also allow the library to remain a major European research library and, as the cabinet secretary has mentioned, to continue to hold its important world-class collections. The bill will strengthen the role of the NLS in safeguarding and sharing knowledge for current and future generations. On the launch of the consultation on the bill, Martyn Wade, the library’s chief executive, said: “The Library has changed immeasurably since the previous legislation was passed in 1925. The Bill recognises and reflects our role in the 21st century and is very welcome.” In the past, I have mentioned that I grew up in Motherwell, where we had a Carnegie library. The Carnegie UK Trust has just published “A New Chapter—public library services in the 21st century”, which sets out the findings of the research that it has carried out over the past six months. It provides clear evidence about the current use of public libraries and public attitudes to libraries. The Scottish data are very interesting and show that 76 per cent of those who were surveyed indicated that libraries are “very important” or “essential” for communities. Service improvement was welcomed by the people who were surveyed: they were interested in online reservation and cataloguing and in building a community facility, including other attractions such as cafes. Many of our communities already benefit from such facilities and from innovations such as e-reader books—which have recently been introduced by North Lanarkshire Council—and information technology provision within libraries. There is no doubt that the Scottish people and our communities value library services and are comfortable with those services evolving to meet the needs of the 21st century. The innovation and leadership of the National Library of Scotland will be integral to evolving library services for the future. I pay tribute to the e-learning zone on the library’s website, which supports literature and language, creativity, science and technology, history, politics and society, and geography and exploration, thereby supporting education in our communities. This is an exciting time for the National Library of Scotland. In March, the Scottish Government announced a contribution of £250,000 to the relocation of the NLS’s Scottish screen archive to Glasgow, as part of the planned redevelopment of the Kelvin hall, and the cabinet secretary has mentioned the £2 million that is being provided for refurbishment of the library’s store.

Unsurprisingly, I open with a quotation from Tennessee Williams, describing the creative process as he saw it. He said: “I believe the way to write a good play is to convince yourself it is easy to do—then go ahead and do it with ease. Don’t maul, don’t suffer, don’t groan till the first draft is finished. A play is a phoenix and it dies a thousand deaths. Usually at night. In the morning it springs up again from its ashes and crows like a happy rooster. It is never as bad as you think, it is never as good. ... An artist must believe in himself. Your belief is contagious.” Tennessee Williams’s description of that creative process is probably true of all creative processes. Whether it is acting, performing, directing or writing, it is about the initial spark of enthusiasm; the inspiration that leads to the pain and self-doubt; the obstacles that are to be overcome during production; and finally the finished production, which is made possible by the self-belief, dedication and hard graft of all those involved. Thank goodness that our national performing companies are filled with writers, musicians, actors, dancers, performers and directors who are driven by that self-belief. I, for one, am glad—just as Tennessee Williams said—that “belief is contagious”, because I certainly have the bug. I quoted Tennessee Williams because of Scottish Ballet’s interpretation of “A Streetcar Named Desire”. I was lucky enough to see a performance and I consider it to be a masterpiece of storytelling and drama. At the post-performance talk in the evening, I also learned that it is groundbreaking. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, the director, Nancy Meckler, is normally associated with theatre direction, and is best known for her work with the Shared Experience theatre company. Nancy co-directed with the choreographer to bring the production together. I was enthralled by the dancing, but the music in the production is so powerful and evocative that I am sure that if I had shut my eyes, I would have heard the whole story through the New Orleans jazz. It was another innovative move to commission Peter Salem, who is a screen and television composer, to provide a new jazz score for the live ballet. I commend those who are responsible for commissioning that brave and innovative production because without their firm belief in the concept at the earliest stage and the way in which their contagious belief and excitement affected the creative process, our country’s cultural reputation would not have been enhanced as it has been by Scottish Ballet’s “A Streetcar Named Desire”. Although our national performing companies have excellent international reputations for their craft and for big traditional productions such as Scottish Ballet’s “Nutcracker”, Scottish Opera’s “Tosca” or the National Theatre of Scotland’s “Peer Gynt”, their willingness to innovate and experiment has led to great productions such as “A Streetcar Named Desire” and the National Theatre’s “Black Watch”, which I note has been ranked by the National Library of Scotland as being one of the 12 most significant plays in Scotland in the past 40 years. That kind of self-belief and ability to infect and enthuse everyone with new and exciting ideas led to Scottish Opera’s phenomenally successful “BabyO” project for six to 18-month-old babies, which Annabel Goldie mentioned. I am delighted to hear that it will be followed by “SensoryO”, which is a 30-minute show that is designed for children from 18 to 36 months and their carers. “SensoryO” is rich in sound, rhythm and music and takes toddlers into a magical night-time world. The production has been developed specifically to introduce young audiences to live performance in a relaxed and intimate environment, and mixes live singing performances, smell, textures and actions to stimulate the imagination of the young. In short, it is a curriculum for excellence dream. I saw my first opera in the Henderson theatre in Shotts as part of a Scottish Opera programme to take opera into our communities. The company is still doing the same today. I was a bit older than the audience for “BabyO” and “SensoryO” but seeing opera at primary school contributed to my lifelong love of live music and theatre performance, so I have no doubt that both shows will inspire future artists, performers and fans. Finally, I want to mention the wonderful role that our national performing companies play in nurturing and supporting youth development in their crafts. Scottish Opera’s “Connect” programme for 14 to 21-year-olds gives aspiring singers and orchestral musicians a unique practical introduction to the skills and experiences that are needed to perform opera. No matter whether they are singers or musicians, participants have a chance to develop their knowledge, technique and creative skills under the expert tuition of Scotland’s top opera professionals, and are able to attend Scottish Opera rehearsals and productions to allow them to see what really happens when everything comes together. In short, our national performing companies are truly the jewels in Scotland’s cultural crown.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made in establishing regional models for colleges. (S4O-00922)

Will the minister assure me that the outcome agreements will focus on putting learners at the centre of the process, which will lead to a range of models across the country, each of which should ensure that the learner journey is improved and that the best possible outcomes will be achieved for our college students?

I declare an interest; I am an executive member of the Scottish Accident Prevention Council. I welcome the debate and endorse the comments about the health and environmental benefits of cycling. I will talk mainly about safety. I have no doubt that if we want to make cycling in Scotland safer, we must ensure that cycling informs and is integrated into transport planning. I welcome what Alison Johnstone said about the need to consider what safety measures can be implemented when we are digging up roads and therefore already incurring costs. In 2005, the Scottish Government commissioned the comprehensive report, “Extent and Severity of Cycle Accident Casualties”, which tried to get to grips with why there had been so many accidents in Scotland. The research exposed interesting facts about gender. Many more males than females were involved in cycling accidents—the ratio of males to females presenting at hospital accident and emergency departments as a result of such accidents was 3:1. That gender imbalance was observed across all age groups, although it was least obvious in children under 10. Staggeringly, among 16 to 18-year-olds, 91 per cent of the casualties were males. I suggest that that follows a pattern of risk taking among young male drivers that is well recognised by the insurance industry. If we are to tackle such issues through education, we must examine risk taking. That might improve some of the accident statistics. The pattern of accidents does not reflect cycling participation rates, as the study showed that 55 per cent of cyclists were males and 45 per cent were females. John Lamont mentioned night-time cycling. The study also showed that males tended to cycle more in the evening and that women tended to cycle more during the day, which might be a reason for the imbalance in the accident rate. We must fully understand what is happening on the roads if we are to make progress. People are more likely to become casualties as a result of cycling accidents in childhood—in the study, 54 per cent of all casualties were under the age of 16. When it comes to such accidents, our children and young adults are extremely vulnerable. Safety is paramount and improvements can still be made. Much can be done to improve safety for cyclists, especially our children. I am still a member of North Lanarkshire Council, which used to have a very poor record on general road safety. I commend the council’s leadership, which, over the years, has made a determined effort to reduce the number of road accidents. The council has achieved the national road safety targets and has reduced the number of fatalities and serious casualties by 74 per cent—information published by Strathclyde Police shows that it fell from 276 in 1999 to just 72 in 2010. At the same time, the total number of people who were injured reduced significantly. I put those reductions down to the council taking some key steps. Notably, it introduced a 20mph speed limit not just outside schools in North Lanarkshire—that was done as a pilot—but in all residential areas. That is a significant step that can greatly reduce the number of accidents on our roads.

Does the member not agree that the same arguments were made by Anne McGuire, the then Minister for Disabled People, and Peter Hain when they set us on this path of a declining number of Remploy factories?

Presiding Officer, thank you for affording me the opportunity to speak in the debate. It was Gandhi who said: “A nation’s greatness is measured by how it treats its weakest members.” I would not like to be the entity calibrating the measure of the UK in the past few months. In this chamber alone, we have debated welfare reforms that will have devastating effects for disabled and vulnerable people, and talked about payday loans and their effect on the poorest in our community. There was an £83 cut in pensioners’ benefits in the budget. Today, we are debating the devastating news that Remploy factories, which were designed to help and support our society’s most vulnerable members, are due to close. Edward Heath once said: “We are the trade union for pensioners and children, the trade union for the disabled and the sick ... the trade union for the nation as a whole.” Although, politically, I take exception to being included in Edward Heath’s “We”, I agree that elected politicians should be representatives and protectors of and campaigners for the most vulnerable. That should be our greatest concern. The Remploy factory in Wishaw was opened in 2003 by the First Minister at the time, who is now Lord McConnell. At the time, he said: “People with disabilities deserve the same opportunities in life as others in society and Remploy factories allow them to put their talents to good use, while increasing their sense of self-worth and allowing them to become more confident and develop new skills.” He welcomed Remploy to Wishaw and said that he looked “forward to seeing their continued expansion.” I shared that hope and ambition, but I am afraid that, when it came to delivering, the Labour Party was sorely lacking. Within five short years, the UK Labour Government and the Minister for Disabled People, Anne McGuire, would be standing in full support behind the Remploy restructuring plans, which have led us to where we are today. I say to my Labour colleagues that, if the Labour Party in government had stood in defence of workers at that time and stopped the proposals dead, we would not be where we are today and the Remploy factory in Wishaw would not be closing after only nine years’ operation.

Two motions were lodged in the Scottish Parliament in 2007 on the proposed closure of Remploy factories. The Liberal Democrats lodged a motion on the campaign against Remploy closures, and Brian Adam lodged a motion against the closure of Remploy factories. No Labour motion was lodged, and only one Labour member was good enough to sign one of those motions.

No, I will not take another intervention. I am sorry. The Labour MP Mr Frank Roy campaigned to secure a reprieve for the Netherton factory. [Interruption.]

At the time, Frank Roy was quoted as saying: “I am delighted Remploy have accepted my proposal to keep the Wishaw factory open by partially turning the Netherton site into a training centre to help people throughout Lanarkshire get back to work.” The GMB said: “We have now got to prove ourselves financially. They want us to cut costs and that makes us feel annoyed as in five or six years we may need to go through the same process. If we don’t prove ourselves, we will close. This is just a reprieve ... It will stay open for possibly five or six years.” It did not get six years—it got five years. The problem with what happened in 2007 is that it set us on an inevitable path. At the start of 2007, Remploy at Netherton had more than 70 supported disabled workers. By the time the reprieve was won—Frank Roy said that he orchestrated it—the factory employed 53 workers. Today, there are only 22 supported disabled workers in Remploy in Netherton. Mr Roy is quoted as saying: “This is the wrong plan at the wrong time. Unemployment is going through the roof, and is higher in Scotland than the rest of the UK. Back to work schemes aren’t working, and the government think this is a good time to sack disabled workers. It is utterly shocking.” He continued: “This is a cut too far from a government that doesn’t care.” Although I agree with some of the points that Mr Roy has made, the betrayal of Remploy factory workers happened in 2007, when Labour failed to stop the restructuring plan. At that time, it was the UK Labour Government that did not care. The plan set in motion the inevitable decline of the Remploy factories, and the closures that we are discussing now are because of the decisions that were made in 2007. Mary Scanlon made much of the cost difference between supported working places and disabled workers in mainstream employment, conflating two different types of employment that bear no relation to each other. It just goes to show that both the Labour Party and the Tories know the cost of everything but the value of nothing.

As the newest member of the European and External Relations Committee, I express my thanks for the work that has gone into collating and publishing the committee’s report, “The Scottish Parliament’s EU priorities for 2012”. I also thank the committee’s members and its convener for their warm welcome. I previously served on the Equal Opportunities Committee, for which I was EU reporter. That committee has identified five areas of the Commission’s work programme in which it is interested. They are child poverty, advancement of Roma integration, the European accessibility act to improve the accessibility of goods and services, improvement of the gender balance on the boards of companies that are listed on stock exchanges, and consultation of European social partners on the review of the equal pay directive. I have quite an interest in some of those issues but, as the European and External Relations Committee’s convener said, they are for debate on another day. However, I will discuss child poverty, which Patricia Ferguson raised. Parliament is leading the way on early intervention. Early support and preventative spending for vulnerable children and families in Scotland help to tackle problems before they turn into crises. All that is hugely beneficial for children and young people, as well as for our society as a whole. It is estimated that every £1 that is spent on early intervention or in the early years saves taxpayers £9 in the future. That investment is taking place across almost the whole of Scotland to support parents, children and communities. Much of the work on early intervention that we deliver will depend on working with partners and on accessing relevant European funding; Helen Eadie mentioned partnership working. It became apparent in the evidence that the European and External Relations Committee took the other day that it is important to involve community planning partnerships in delivering programmes in our communities. The view is that CPPs will become the delivery mechanism for European structural funding. From the evidence, I know that that model greatly interests the European Commission, because it would ensure that delivery through the funds reached communities through local partnerships that include local authorities, health boards and—importantly—third sector organisations, on which we are very dependent. I do not need to tell anyone in the chamber how important the European Union is to Scotland. Sometimes I think that we do not realise how much of an impact it has on our daily lives. Recently, I was listening to a radio advert encouraging visitors to come to North and South Lanarkshire, which cover a lot of my region. I encourage every member to take up some of those visiting opportunities. At the end of the advert, it was mentioned that it had been partly funded by European regional funding. We often go into sports centres and museums without understanding what that European flag that is so visible in those places means for Scotland.

15. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to review the criteria for exemption from council tax. (S4O-00813)

The minister might be aware that The Daily Telegraph recently reported that the Liberal Democrats in England are seeking powers to remove the council tax exemption for students. Given their record on student fees, such a blow to students from the Liberal Democrats would not surprise people. Can the minister confirm that the Scottish Government has no plans to remove the council tax exemption for students?

I am a proud Lanarkshire lass who was born in Motherwell, which is one of the burghs that were blessed with the gift of a Carnegie library. I spent much of my early childhood in that library—indeed, one of my earliest pre-school memories is of sitting in the children’s area of the library with the coloured glass panes at the back. In trying to encapsulate why the bill is so important, I will quote from Andrew Carnegie, who said: “the best means of benefiting the community is to place within its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise—free libraries, parks, and means of recreation, by which men are helped in body and mind; works of art, certain to give pleasure and improve the public taste; and public institutions of various kinds, which will improve the general condition of the people; in this manner returning their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms best calculated to do them lasting good.” That quote encompasses many of the issues that have been discussed in relation to the bill. For example, it mentions free libraries. The issue of pricing has been discussed, as has the important principle of maintaining free access to the collections, with charging being used in exceptional circumstances for added value. The quote also mentions public institutions. The National Library of Scotland is one of Scotland’s precious public institutions that should be preserved. Carnegie says that it is important that institutions, whether they are galleries, museums or, as we are discussing today, libraries, deliver the “forms best calculated” to do people good. That encompasses much of what the National Library has done in moving forward and embracing 21st century technology through the delivery of its website. However, that is happening in a vacuum, as the library’s governance arrangements do not give it comfort in relation to the work that it is doing so well. In this year of creative Scotland, it is right and proper that the Scottish Government should seek to bring the governance of the National Library, which was established in the 1920s, into the 21st century and up to an appropriate and measured level that will allow it to function in this technological era and meet the demands of this century. The changes will facilitate the National Library’s work to meet its ambition to expand and to achieve its goals on improving its service to Scotland and the world. As the Education and Culture Committee convener said, it is widely accepted that the current board of 32 representatives is too large and unwieldy. The board is not comparable with boards of other organisations, as the cabinet secretary set out in evidence at the committee meeting of 21 February. Ms Hyslop specifically mentioned National Museums Scotland, the National Galleries of Scotland and Creative Scotland. The current National Library board includes the First Minister—I hope that he will not be too disappointed if he loses his job at the end of the bill process. The bill was introduced following rigorous consultation that ran from March to June 2010. There is broad consensus on the proposals, which is reflected in the committee’s unanimous support for the general principles of the bill. We should not forget that the National Library is one of Europe’s major research and reference libraries. It offers world-class collections and a range of modern library services, exhibitions and resources. It plays a vital role in bringing Scotland’s history and culture to life for not just Scottish but international audiences. What better resource could they have than the National Library? The library reaches out to the Scottish diaspora by supporting genealogy projects and investigations. It stores plays and literature that resonate throughout Scotland. In a current project on the most important Scottish plays of the past 20 years, students and pupils from all over Scotland can access “The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil”, the uncompromising and thrilling “Black Watch” and “The Steamie”, which I note is to be revived at the Citizens theatre later this year—I will certainly be there to see that. The resources are all in one place and they are accessible through the National Library’s doors or through its website. That is a fantastic opportunity for teachers who are developing curriculum for excellence work streams, and for pupils. The committee convener described the committee’s concerns about ministerial direction in the areas of promoting collaboration between libraries and information services and promoting the diversity of the people who access the collections. However, we must remember that the way in which we deliver library services across the nation has changed and is changing. They were once the domain of local government, but many library services and functions are now delivered—or are planned to be delivered—through trusts. That fundamentally changes the relationship between the National Library and the front-line delivery of what we might call traditional library services in our towns and cities. Although local authorities still have a statutory duty to secure the provision of adequate library facilities for all persons in their areas, the trusts are now an additional step, and an additional complication, in that relationship. I thank the National Library board for the fantastic opportunity that it gave the committee to tour the library, for the knowledge that it imparted about its collections and especially for the information about the wonderful plans to create a home for the film archive at Glasgow’s Kelvin hall, which will be a great advantage for the city.

We have talked a lot about the reasons for introducing curriculum for excellence, which is underpinned by the four principles of producing successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. However, have we forgotten why the curriculum for excellence was necessary? We have not talked about the problems with the existing system. Too much of the teaching material skates over the surface of issues; children are passive in their lessons; lessons are fragmented; and pupils are not rewarded for practical achievements such as the Duke of Edinburgh awards. I should declare an interest in that I am a councillor in North Lanarkshire and I am married to a National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers representative. The Opposition has offered anecdotal evidence, which is not the basis for good policy, but I point out that my son is just going through his standard grade English, and he is sitting it in third year, not fifth year. I mention that lest we forget that there are a variety of ways of implementing standard grade across Scotland. In fourth, fifth and sixth year, which is when pupils normally present for standard grade, there are problems with people spending too much time doing unit tests, preliminaries, coursework and exams and too little time learning new things. I have seen that in my child’s case in relation to folios. I know from living with an English teacher for many years, and from other anecdotal evidence, about the pressures in schools at folio time. The standard grade system is not ideal, so it is necessary to change it. I am not an educationist, although I know that many of the members taking part in the debate are, but I am a mathematics and statistics graduate. Although 70 per cent of teachers saying that they are not ready for curriculum for excellence is a good headline, actually 73 per cent of EIS members did not respond to the survey asking whether they had problems with their workload or with readiness for curriculum for excellence. So 73 per cent of teachers did not feel it necessary to respond. I am not at all complacent about those who have raised concerns, but—[Interruption.]

The cabinet secretary could not have been clearer in his commitment to provide support for any individual teacher, department or school that experiences problems. In fact, Hanzala Malik raised the issue—he drilled down into it—during this week’s Education and Culture Committee meeting and received an assurance from Education Scotland and the cabinet secretary that individual teachers could self-refer if they had a problem. Although I am not an educationist, I have considerable experience of project management, so I know that delay means cost. There will be cost attached to the capacity issues in those organisations that have to cope with the delay. Where will we find markers if we end up with a triple-running nightmare scenario? How will schools’ timetabling arrangements be affected if three different projects are run at once? How will that help us advance educationally? East Renfrewshire is unique. There is no impact on capacity, the SQA or timetabling arrangements, because the council does not do standard grade. To delay, even in part, and end up with a triple-running nightmare scenario in Scotland would be the worst possible outcome for our young people. I recently visited the Scottish Poetry Library and the Scottish Book Trust, which are working incredibly hard to deliver excellent online programmes for curriculum for excellence. The whole of civic Scotland is behind curriculum for excellence and today we in this Parliament should get behind it, too.

Will the member take an intervention?

What measures are being taken to ensure that support is available for supply teachers, so that they have an opportunity to continue their professional development?

The member knows that on previous budget days in North Lanarkshire a press release from Jim McCabe had the council tax freeze as the headline benefit of the budget.

Will the member take an intervention?

I—

Does the member acknowledge that, when the principal contract for the new Forth bridge was awarded, 83.5 per cent of the contracts went to Scottish companies?

Will the member comment on the 32 per cent cut in college funding south of the border and say how his sentiments marry up with that?

Last year, the Government published “Putting Learners at the Centre: Delivering our Ambitions for Post-16 Education”. The ministerial foreword to that document quotes John F Kennedy, who said: “our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education.” The foreword also says: “Education ... plays a central role in improving ... chances for those from disadvantaged backgrounds and learning in all its forms and settings has a wide reach.” The SNP Government is absolutely committed to education and to improving outcomes for all our young people, especially those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds, whether it be through early years intervention and the preventative spend agenda, extending nursery places to those from disadvantaged backgrounds, giving people the opportunity to gain further education, or the appointment of a minister who is dedicated to tackling youth unemployment and ensuring that all our 16 to 19-year-olds get opportunities from the programme. That means all our 16 to 19-year-olds, including people who have disabilities and women. The draft strategy that was published yesterday sets out a clear and targeted approach to supporting young people as they are looking for employment and fulfilling their ambitions in life. It focuses on opportunities in the apprenticeship programme, which our colleges will support, and it targets support on helping young people in our new and emerging commercial opportunities, especially in the area of the low-carbon economy. It also looks to Skills Development Scotland working in partnership with our colleges and employers, and changing the way in which we deliver our further education programme to ensure that it meets the needs of our employers and improves the life chances of our young people. We have also included an early years action fund, run by Inspiring Scotland, to improve outcomes for our vulnerable young people. I am delighted that, in one of her first announcements as the Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance targeted her support at young carers and those who are leaving the care system so that further education opportunities are made available to them. I listened to members’ speeches. I agreed with the start and end of Liz Smith’s speech and her wonderful praise for our further education colleges. That is absolutely right, but establishing the independence of our colleges caused problems. Their charitable status is flawed because of the possibility of Government influence and direction on how the colleges should proceed, and it sets up competition between the colleges. Many things in our colleges need to be looked at, especially student support. When they go to college, students should be able to expect that there will be no discretionary element to their support. The regionalisation and pulling together of resource should enable us to tackle some of those issues.

I am convinced that the regionalisation model will give the opportunity to reform and improve our college sector.

How does the cabinet secretary’s statement on the future of FE governance fit into the wider objectives of the 16 to 19-year-old opportunities for all programme?

The cabinet secretary mentioned the incredible wealth of creativity in Scotland. In mulling over my speech, I was concerned that I should do justice to Scotland’s culture and cultural heritage in this year of creative Scotland. How could I do justice to such a wealth of talent? Yesterday, I decided to look at the year of creative Scotland events calendar on the partnership VisitScotland website. The cabinet secretary has encouraged many organisations to register their creative events and, by using the calendar, to take full advantage of the opportunities offered by the year of creative Scotland. I found my inspiration in Alasdair Gray—novelist, artist, playwright, academic, teacher and polymath. On 31 January, the gallery of modern art in Glasgow was hosting the “City Recorder” exhibition of Gray’s work. The exhibition includes city scenes captured by Gray in the 1970s, defining Glasgow’s life then, and capturing its famous inhabitants and characters. The diary for yesterday also included many Celtic Connections events—and one of the venues for Celtic Connections is Òran Mór, with its iconic Alasdair Gray mural. I am delighted that Scotland’s largest traditional music festival will head to Chicago in September 2014 as one of the events supported by the year of creative Scotland. The 30th anniversary of Gray’s masterpiece, “Lanark”, was in 2011. On its publication, Anthony Burgess hailed Gray as “the most important Scottish writer since Walter Scott”. When thinking about “Lanark”, I noted that an event took place in the town of Lanark yesterday—the “Saving New Lanark” exhibition, showing images from before and after the restoration of New Lanark and documenting the work of the conservation trust over the past 25 years. New Lanark is one of the digital imaging projects featured on the Scottish ten website, where there is a modern, hi-tech, 3-D image mapping of the town. The town is also beautifully captured by Alasdair Gray in his spectacular mural of the falls of Clyde, which he painted in 1969, and which was recently beautifully restored. A tour through some of the events on one single day of the year of creative Scotland calendar leads me to remark that Alasdair Gray—in relation to whom one single day of the year of creative Scotland weaves together music, 3-D imaging, venues, restaurants, historic landmarks and artistic and writing talent—has made a contribution that, alone, merits Scotland a place as a world-class cultural tourism destination. Many members in the chamber will have read the beautifully crafted essay by Pat Kane in this week’s Sunday Herald. A judge in Creative Scotland’s creative places awards—which are a key element of this year’s celebrations—Pat Kane examines the concept of creative places in the context of his home town of Coatbridge. So it should be for us all: the creative places awards, and the major events and festivals featured in this year’s programme, should inspire all Scotland’s places, communities and festivals to take part in the celebrations. Pat’s article mentions Mark Millar and the superhero archway in Coatbridge. I was lucky enough to see Mark in a question-and-answer session in Coatbridge library last October, as part of North Lanarkshire’s book festival. To a young audience, Mark imparted a tale of the self-belief, dedication and work ethic that have enabled him to achieve his ambitions in the creative industries and to become one of the greatest writers of comic books of all time and an A-list Hollywood producer. It was truly inspiring to everyone in the audience. Mark urged them to work hard on their craft, whether as writers or graphic artists, and to become the best they could be. Last week, I returned to Coatbridge, this time to the Summerlee museum to attend North Lanarkshire Council’s creative residency exhibition, which features talented youngsters from the area. Every year, creative pupils from North Lanarkshire are taken to Kilbowie outdoor centre for a week’s residency, during which they are given master-classes in the visual arts, jewellery making, digital photography, film making, textiles and printmaking. At the event, those who feature in the exhibition were honoured with another inspirational speech, this time from Sandra Gunn, the curriculum director of City of Glasgow College. A graduate in fine art with a masters degree in architecture and design, Miss Gunn urged the pupils to work hard and to embrace the creative industries and not to be put off by naysayers, but to trust their ambitions and talents. After all, our creative industries are worth more than £5 billion a year to Scotland and support more than 60,000 jobs. There are new modern apprenticeships and opportunities for young people in the industry. I was delighted when, last year, the cabinet secretary announced the creative edge partnership, which will be worth more than £1.4 million over three years to Scottish talent and creative businesses. Working with partners Channel 4, Creative Scotland, Scottish Enterprise and TRC Media, the initiative aims to strengthen our talent and business base in Scotland in what is obviously a priority area for the Government.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate this afternoon. The budget is being set in the most difficult of financial circumstances. The Scottish Government has highlighted a 12.3 per cent real-terms reduction in the budget in 2014-15, with a 7 per cent fall in this financial year and the remaining 5.3 per cent reduction falling over the next three years. In these financial circumstances, decisions have to be made. I commend the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth on the budget, which will deliver so much in the way of transformational policies with so little. I particularly welcome the move towards preventative spend, as I know that it will impact most on the Government’s early years agenda. Early support and preventative spending for vulnerable children and families in Scotland will help to tackle problems before they turn into crises. That will be hugely beneficial for children and young people, as well as for society as a whole. It is estimated that, for every £1 spent on early years intervention, the taxpayer saves £9 in future spend. We have an opportunity to tackle and address the problems of poverty that have led to low educational outcomes for young people and limited their options in life. Preventative spend is innovative and transformational, and it is an agenda that the Government is pursuing. It encompasses all areas of government, both local and national, and it works across our universal and targeted services. The cabinet secretary has embraced the agenda, despite the financial constraints in which we find ourselves. The early years agenda will transform the lives of children and their communities. It is a principle that will enable partnership working, and it is a lever that will bring together NHS, education and local government services to deliver better outcomes for Scotland’s children, enabling them to live in the way that Angela Constance described when she was Minister for Children and Young People: “At the heart of everything we do and of all our aspirations for our children is to ensure that we have happy healthy bairns who reach their full potential.”—[Official Report, 27 October 2011; c 2777.] Following the publication of the report and recommendations of the Smith group—an eminent group that included Willie Haughey, Sir Tom Hunter and Rory Mair—Angela Constance moved position and has now been appointed Minister for Youth Employment. The SNP Government is the Government of opportunities for all. It has already made the commitment to 16 to 19-year-olds of a place in education, employment or training, and it is committed to 25,000 new apprenticeships every year in the term of the Government. The appointment of Ms Constance to the role of Minister for Youth Employment shows that the Government has recognised the potential gravity of the problem. Ms Constance has already set out some of her priorities. She has brought together business leaders, the third sector and other agencies to look at the best way forward to tackle youth unemployment and to enable our youngsters to take advantage of the opportunities available in Scotland. She has also recognised that those most disadvantaged in Scotland deserve our help and support, and she has committed funds to looking after carers and those leaving care to enable them to achieve their potential. I am very glad that the Government is supporting our young people in other areas, too. We have been able to protect the youth music initiative, which supports more than 300 projects across Scotland, ensuring that Scotland’s talented youngsters get the support and opportunity to fulfil their potential that they deserve. We have also been able to commit an additional £5 million to the young Scots fund to invest in a national centre for our youth companies in Glasgow. The centre will be transformational and will give accessible rehearsal space, production facilities and administrative bases for the organisations. The Government also continues to fund the Edinburgh festivals expo fund, which showcases our young Scottish talent to the world. Our new apprenticeships include those in the areas of conservation and heritage, which will ensure that traditional building and the maintenance of our historic buildings is secured for the future. I finish by mentioning a trip that I took last week to Thornlie primary school in Wishaw. The school sits in a disadvantaged area of North Lanarkshire and the previous Government committed funds to create an open, free play area for it. It has a sandpit, a firepit that is used with teacher supervision, and areas where the children can climb and play on tree stumps that have been placed in the school yard. It is very much about encouraging the children to go outdoors. They also have areas in which they can put up tents, and they are encouraged to enjoy the open, free space and unstructured play. I am grateful that I was there to hear the announcement of a further £3 million from the Scottish Government for free play, which is so important to the development of our young people.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member aware that John Birt of Angus College recently stated: “It does seem likely now that Angus College, working collaboratively with local and regional partners, will be able to deliver the same number of funded student places as in previous years and this will assist us in meeting the Scottish Government’s commitment to young people”?

Will the member take an intervention?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the 2010 guidelines issued to general practitioners on recommended vitamin D levels have had on tackling vitamin D deficiency. (S4O-00564)

Has the Government considered the calls for vitamin D to be added to food products, given its proven health benefits and Scotland’s history of deficiency of the vitamin because of our latitudinal position?

I am very grateful to be speaking in this debate. As Mike Russell said, it is the second education debate in the chamber this week. Yesterday, we invited contributions from across the chamber to examine problems of attainment, particularly for looked-after children. As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I found our investigations on that issue to be challenging and sometimes humbling. It was somewhat frustrating to examine an identified problem on which little progress has been made. Following that process, many of the points that were raised in the debate yesterday highlighted that, if we are to tackle and improve attainment levels, it is imperative to solve problems of social injustice. My family has strong education connections. I am married to a teacher and my father was a university lecturer, but possibly the greatest influence on me was an uncle who spent his working life as a teacher and headmaster in the Calton in Glasgow. I remember him telling stories of appalling deprivation and post-war poverty that I could only imagine as a child in the 1970s. As Colin Beattie said, it was believed in the post-war period that education was a route out of poverty, and my uncle passionately believed that. Perhaps it is now an even more important route, given that other routes, such as apprenticeships in heavy industry, no longer exist in areas such as Glasgow. I was therefore dismayed this week when the child poverty statistics that were published by End Child Poverty showed that the Calton remains one of the poorest areas in Scotland, 40-odd years after my uncle’s teaching career ended. We must break the culture of poverty being the determining factor in people’s outcomes in life. That is why I welcome the Government’s early years strategy, which provides an opportunity to tackle some of the most challenging circumstances for children and sets the expectation that health care, social care and education services will come together collaboratively to deliver on care plans and ensure the best start for children, particularly those in challenging circumstances. One issue that emerged from the committee’s investigation was that, although we have a corporate responsibility for looked-after children, many children are on the verge of being looked after and many live in poverty but are not necessarily in the ken of social services and therefore do not receive their support. Part of the evidence from the centre of excellence for looked-after children in Scotland was that children need to be able to approach a person in their school to get the support that they need. Recommendation 39 of the Donaldson report states: “All teachers should see themselves as teacher educators and be trained in mentoring.” Christina McKelvie’s comments about the wonderful work that has been done in Hamilton showed that it is important for children’s development for teachers to support them and to be more than just a person who stands in front of them in a class. The Donaldson report states: “Mentoring is central to professional development at all stages in a teacher’s career and all teachers should see themselves as mentors not just of students and newly qualified teachers but more generally.” It goes on to state that young people should expect “the high quality of personal support to which they are entitled as part of Curriculum for Excellence.” It is important that we consider those challenges as we move forward. There are many changes and issues for teachers at present, but our education process must move forward. The SNP Government has demonstrated its commitment to all Scotland’s young people in a programme for government that will transform outcomes for them. Much has been said about the early years framework, the parenting strategy and reading and learning support in family environments, but no one has mentioned the legislation relating to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child that the Government seeks to introduce. That will place an obligation on the Government to include the rights of the child in everything that it does and will be a marker to the rest of Scotland that safety, security and equal opportunities for all our children must come to the fore in what we do. Hugh Henry said that there seems to be a huge issue to do with having peripatetic teachers, particularly in the early years, but his point is in direct contradiction to recommendations in the McCormac report. In the section on “Development of the Profession”, recommendation 9 is for “greater mobility of all teachers, including headteachers, between schools and more widely within the educational sector as a component of CPD to enhance professional development and improve understanding of issues related to the learner journey.” We must reach consensus on how to move forward. There is an expectation that that mobility should happen in future. Liz Smith mentioned swingeing cuts to colleges. All that I can say is that I am glad that I am not south of the border, where her party is in control and where the cuts are much more significant. I will finish by talking about the principle of free education, which is something that I and the Parliament are passionate about and to which the Scottish National Party has made a huge commitment. If we are truly to break the cycle of poverty and give all our young people an equal advantage, it is important that we continue to support the education maintenance allowance—we have continued to support it—and the right to access free education on the basis of learning and not the ability to pay. They are vital to what our country does.

Does Dave Thompson welcome initiatives in my council ward of Wishaw, where Wishaw Credit Union has formed a partnership with one of the local primary schools and offers the children initial savings accounts and advice about financial matters?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the benefits will be of the year of creative Scotland 2012. (S4O-00511)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s assertion that the year of creative Scotland will put Scotland’s culture and creativity in the international spotlight. I ask her to encourage organisations in the Central Scotland region to apply for money from the £6.5 million national lottery funding programme that is supporting the year of creative Scotland, so that they may take part in it fully.

I, too, welcome the Finance Committee’s comprehensive and robust report. I am not a member of that committee, but I am on the Education and Culture Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee. It is welcome that the Finance Committee’s report notes the fact that the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee has asked all committees to detail how they will include equality issues in the conduct of their business. Mr Gibson referred to the HEAT targets in his speech. As we move towards more collaborative working, it is vital that HEAT targets and equality issues are mainstreamed into the restructuring of our services. That is nowhere more important than in collaborative working between the NHS and social work services in elderly care. We have talked about some of the priorities. One of those is growing the economy and getting benefit from the opportunities that we have in Scotland. We have also talked a little bit about leadership. I will talk about some of the leadership that the cabinet secretary has provided on culture and reflect on some of the things that are being delivered in the context of the budget. Scotland is a creative nation. We are rich in heritage and in contributions to the world and we are preparing to be an independent nation. In establishing our nation’s identity, it is our creativity, culture and innovation that defines us as Scots. In the face of the deep cuts in public spending that the UK Government in Westminster imposed, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs and the Scottish Government have managed to minimise the impact on Scotland’s cultural heritage and have tried to protect front-line services in the area. The economic benefits of our creativity and the opportunities for cultural and genealogical tourism should be maximised. We have great assets, such as the National Library of Scotland and the National Records of Scotland, that offer a wealth of resources for education, leisure and research. As we move forward to our second year of homecoming in 2014 and the Glasgow Commonwealth games, it is vital that we make the most of our resources and ensure that our economy and tourism grow in Scotland. The Scottish Government has continued revenue funding for the National Galleries of Scotland and National Museums Scotland, protected our world-class performing companies, delivered capital investment for the Theatre Royal in Glasgow, improving its front-of-house and disabled access, and committed to the extension of the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall in support of the Royal Scottish National Orchestra. Our great commitment to early intervention, the commitment to 25,000 apprenticeships in every year of Government and the strategy for 16 to 19-year-olds are policies that will transform opportunities for people in our nation. I am delighted that we have also been able to protect the youth music initiative, which supports more than 300 projects across Scotland, ensuring that Scotland’s talented youngsters get the support and opportunity that they deserve to fulfil their potential. The cabinet secretary has also committed an additional £5 million to the young Scots fund to invest in a national centre for our youth companies in Glasgow. The centre will ensure accessible rehearsal space, production facilities and an administrative base for the organisation. We are also continuing to fund the Edinburgh festivals expo fund, which showcases our young Scottish talent to the world. Within the 25,000 modern apprenticeships, we have apprenticeships in the creative industries and in the area of conservation, ensuring that traditional building and the maintenance of our heritage is secured for the future. I welcome the fact that the Finance Committee has not only recognised equality issues in its report, but committed to continue to review and scrutinise some of the major developments in the area. I will say a little bit about accident prevention in our local authority areas in the context of preventative spend. I am passionate about the issue, not least because I am vice-chair of the home safety committee of the Scottish Accident Prevention Council. It is vital that as we move to support elderly people in their own homes we continue to ensure that advice is given about trips and falls before people end up in the NHS and the care system. We could do a lot more education about such issues in local authority areas. I note that there is a commitment to look at statutory duties, but home accidents are not within the remit of statutory duties, even though more people are injured and killed in their own homes than on the roads. We could perhaps investigate that. There have been a lot of jokes about Christmas today. I am afraid that I will lower the tone a little bit, because when we look at the finance settlement and the budget as a whole we cannot ignore the Grinch who stole Christmas. Unfortunately, we have had to take difficult decisions after inheriting a situation in which gold reserves were sold at a record low, our pension pots were raided, the 10p tax rate was abolished and there was a debt crisis of £19.9 billion. That is the context in which the difficult decisions have been made and we cannot ignore it.

15. To ask the Scottish Government to clarify how it will ensure that access to university places is widened. (S4O-00473)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that one of the most effective tools that we have for ensuring access to university for young Scots is to keep access to higher education based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay?

I declare an interest as a councillor for North Lanarkshire Council and a member of the board of North Lanarkshire Leisure. I know that both organisations will have many employees on strike today. I have a further declaration of interest to make. Along with many of the 500,000 public sector workers in Scotland—otherwise known as taxpayers; I say that for Gavin Brown’s benefit—my brother, my sister-in-law and my husband are on strike. I come from a working-class Lanarkshire background. I was brought up with principles that bound the working classes together and held dear the trade union rights that had been so dearly won on my behalf by others. My mother was a civil servant, and my father, who re-educated himself later in life, went on to become a university lecturer. Service—public service—was the working tradition that surrounded my formative years. I was taught to respect the trade union movement and to trust it to look after the rights of its members, whether steel workers, miners, teachers, civil servants or nurses. However, I was also taught that public service is, by and large, a vocation. Civil servants, teachers, care workers, binmen and social workers all dedicate their lives to the benefit of our society and, in doing so, sacrifice the opportunities that are afforded in the private sector. I do not intend to diminish the hardship that is being faced by all in our society during this Labour-made recession—I know that it is very tough for everyone—but public service workers forgo bankers’ bonuses, large salaries, share options, private healthcare and many other benefits that can be afforded to those in the private sector. Working in the public sector is a choice, which involves individual employees making a contract with an employer. Up until now, the choice of public service offered a safety net and a promise that, after years of dedicated service, a reasonable pension would be provided in old age. The cabinet secretary alluded to the fact that public sector pensions are described as gold plated. I have heard the argument that those in the private sector are envious of what is perceived to be a public sector benefit, but that is no reason to attack and destroy the public sector pension schemes; it is an argument to bring the private sector schemes up to standards in the public sector schemes.

No, thank you. It is many years since my husband, who is a teacher, has been on strike. Over the past few weeks, as it has become apparent that there would be no negotiated settlement with the Con-Dem Government, I have reflected on my memories of more than 20 years ago. When I was a teenager, my best friend’s father and brother were miners and both were on strike for months on end. I remember the hardship, worry and alienation that her family experienced during the miners’ strike, and I remember the fear that was felt in my community when miners picketed Ravenscraig. This was my home town, and I was stunned that miners and steel workers, who were both fearful for the future of their industries, were pitted against one another. Whether in the form of rent strikes, shipyard worker work-ins or marches to London to save the Craig, Scotland has a proud tradition of activism and today’s strike is no different from those struggles. Workers strike because they fear for their future and feel alienated. Jimmy Reid described what alienation meant in his famous address to the University of Glasgow: “It is the cry of men who feel themselves the victims of blind economic forces beyond their control. It is the frustration of ordinary people excluded from the processes of decision making. The feeling of despair and hopelessness that pervades people who feel with justification that they have no real say in shaping or determining their own destinies.” The mining and steel industries have been virtually wiped out in Lanarkshire. Breaking the miners and the closure of Ravenscraig were just two of the blows dealt to Scotland by Thatcher’s Government. Between 1980 and 1993, six acts of Parliament increasingly restricted the unions’ ability to take lawful industrial action. Secondary action was outlawed and picketing was restricted. Ballots were needed for official industrial action from 1984 and they have had to be postal since 1993. The seven days’ notice for employers further reduced unions’ ability to respond quickly, and potentially reduced the effectiveness of any action that they took. The Tory Government was determined to weaken and break the trade unions and leave them at the mercy of the courts.

No, thank you. High Court injunctions prevented unions from undertaking strikes. They allowed unions to be sued for damages, which was the situation before the Trade Disputes Act 1906 came in. The Conservative Government also interfered with the running of unions by compelling certain forms of election and throwing out the traditions of those unions. It created a—so-called—Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members, encouraged members to pursue complaints against their unions, and demanded political fund ballots. [Interruption.]

Each of those demands was a blow to the trade union movement, and the empty chairs in the chamber belong to the party that would lay claim to being its champion. However, the incoming Blair Labour Government kept almost every aspect of Conservative trade union law. They described the new relationship as “fairness not favours”. The right to strike is just that—the right to strike, not a favour handed out by a Labour Government that managed to out-Thatcher Thatcher. Today I am supporting my family members and my friends as they exercise their right to strike over the threat to their pensions. I know that they support us in condemning that threat in the chamber today.

Will the member give way?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in rolling out reablement strategies across local authorities. (S4O-00406)

I congratulate the Government on launching the best practice toolkit on managing falls and fractures in care homes for older people, which is designed to manage and reduce falls and fractures in Scotland’s care homes. Does the minister plan to extend that toolkit to the care of elderly people in their own homes?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with North Lanarkshire Council regarding its winter gritting programme. (S4O-00359)

The minister will be aware that North Lanarkshire Council issued a press release in which it threatened to withdraw gritting services in areas where crews had been subjected to attacks and highlighted the Pather area of Wishaw, which received national coverage on television and in newspapers. Would it surprise the minister to know that, when it was approached, North Lanarkshire Council was unable to confirm how many incidents had taken place and that Strathclyde Police has confirmed that it has had no discussions with the council about how to tackle what was alleged to have been a serious problem? Furthermore, Strathclyde Police stated that it was “rather surprising to hear North Lanarkshire Council’s announcement”.

Does the member acknowledge that the Government’s opportunities for all programme, which benefits 16 to 19-year-olds, as well as the commitment to 25,000 apprenticeships every year, will go some way to tackling the issue?

What benefits to business activity have come about as a result of the small business bonus scheme, particularly in light of the recent increased uptake, which indicates growth and buoyancy?

I refer members to my declaration in the register of members’ interests as a North Lanarkshire councillor and member of North Lanarkshire Leisure Trust. I am a Lanarkshire lass, born in Motherwell, and the closure of the Ravenscraig steel works brought me to the cause of Scottish independence. My overwhelming memory is of a skyline that was dominated by the gas holder and the plant’s three cooling towers. Indeed, it affected my formative years so much that I believe I would prove to be an interesting study subject for gestalt theory practitioners. When I drive between Motherwell and Wishaw, I am still surprised and confused by the absence of the towers on the skyline. It is because of the dramatic and lasting impact that our environment can have on our appreciation and enjoyment of our home towns that I believe that place making—and getting it right—is so important. As Mike MacKenzie pointed out, we cannot escape our built environment and although I mourn the loss of the steel works to the area’s economy I do not mourn the loss of the view. At more than 455 hectares, Ravenscraig is one of the biggest brownfield sites in Europe and presents North Lanarkshire Council with one of the country’s greatest place-making challenges in recent history. Its size is equivalent to 13 London Canary Wharfs or 700 football pitches and it is almost twice the size of the development site for the 2012 London Olympics. It is uniquely placed to benefit from Scotland’s current infrastructure and it is set at the heart of Scotland’s central belt.

Michael McMahon knows very well that the failure to set Ravenscraig as a development of national importance belongs to Jack McConnell, the then First Minister of Scotland and MSP for Motherwell and Wishaw. The member should direct his questions to Lord McConnell, not to the Government, which inherited the situation from the Labour Administration. Ravenscraig could provide many local and national benefits. Its redevelopment has been a long time coming. It is estimated that Ravenscraig steel works at its height supported as many as 10,000 jobs in the Lanarkshire area, so the loss to the community is so much more than the loss of the 770 jobs at the plant’s closure. In September 2009, the doors of the new £70 million Motherwell College campus opened for the first time, marking the completion of the first major regeneration development at Ravenscraig. The college includes a five-storey state-of-the-art teaching block and has an iconic circular residential building that reflects the former Ravenscraig cooling towers. The theme of referencing the former site has continued in the £32 million Ravenscraig regional sports facility, which was funded by the Scottish Government in conjunction with North Lanarkshire Council and Ravenscraig Ltd, and which opened its doors to the public in September 2010. It is a fabulous sporting facility that has already delivered real benefits for sport and recreation. I believe that it is a beautiful building. It is designed to resemble the coils of steel that rolled off the production line at Ravenscraig. Ravenscraig sports centre was highly commended in the community benefit category in this year’s Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors awards. The new facility has green credentials, too. The designers, mindful of its carbon footprint, designed it to use as much natural daylight as possible, with north light windows in a striking serrated roof that bring natural light into the main activity areas. Linda Fabiani mentioned the importance of innovation. Perhaps the most exciting and innovative part of the regeneration of the Ravenscraig site is the development of the Building Research Establishment Scotland innovation park. The park will be used as a housing demonstration project that incorporates new technology in energy performance and sustainability. Building Research Establishment Scotland will create up to six full-scale demonstrator houses at the innovation park, which will seek to point the way towards how houses of the future will tackle affordability, energy efficiency, recycled materials, carbon emissions and sustainable methods of construction. The site will build on the lessons that have been learned from BRE’s first demonstration centre, which pioneered the use of groundbreaking technologies such as wind turbines, rainwater harvesting, heat recovery systems and recycled waste timber, in the homes. The innovation park can inform our future choices about the built environment and place making. I will conclude by raising a local concern. The Ravenscraig site has much potential and presents many challenges, but we cannot forget that it should not eclipse the existing towns of Motherwell and Wishaw. The development must complement regeneration in and benefit the existing towns. I welcome the award to North Lanarkshire Council of £2.745 million from the Scottish Government’s town centre regeneration fund to support a series of projects that support physical regeneration, including of Motherwell and Wishaw town centres. Ravenscraig has many challenges, not least of which is the current economic climate. It has the potential to house 10,000 residents and to have two new schools and a retail park. The Scottish Government has already driven the provision of social housing on the site, which opens to residents this year. The site is a unique opportunity and challenge. The Government’s motion will compel the best practice in place making to be brought to bear and applied to its evolution.

I declare an interest: I am an elected member of North Lanarkshire Council. As such, I have been a member of the living well officer-member working group in North Lanarkshire. We worked with partners that included the Voice of Experience Forum in Lanarkshire, North Lanarkshire Carers Together, Cumbernauld Action on Care of the Elderly, Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia and NHS Lanarkshire in developing the quality of life strategy for older people in North Lanarkshire. I am sure that that is of interest to Jackie Baillie. During the project, I was introduced to the concept of reablement, which is a different approach to home care services that provides short-term support to encourage people to be as independent as possible, and supports people to learn or relearn skills and regain confidence through a wide range of personal and practical support. In conjunction with its partners, which include NHS Scotland, North Lanarkshire Council recently completed a number of road shows with staff rolling out their reablement strategy. The success of any reablement strategy is underpinned by delivering on key stages in the patient journey. Proactive care and support at home must include a responsible and flexible way of delivering home care. There must, of course, be integration of case and care management with all the partners involved, and carer support must be included where that is appropriate, including respite care where that is necessary. Timely access to equipment and the installation of aids and adaptations are important, and telecare support services and technology will form a vital part of reablement implementation. We must ensure that effective care is delivered in times of transition. Reablement and rehabilitation services need to be available when they are required in the patient journey. We must ensure that special clinical advice for community-based reablement teams is available when it is required and that NHS teams are fully involved in the process, and we must look to alternatives to emergency care admissions for elderly patients who are already known in the system. Hospitals are not always the best places for them to be. Responsive palliative care where it is required is also important, of course. In hospital care and in homes, we must ensure that triage training is given to identify the needs of frail and vulnerable elderly people at the earliest opportunity. Early assessments, timely referrals to rehabilitation services, and effective and timely discharges into homes or intermediate care services are important, and there must be no more bed blocking. I am most concerned about the fourth area of the patient journey, and must declare another interest as the vice-chair of the Scottish Accident Prevention Council’s home safety committee. In preventative and anticipatory care, we must ensure that we care for the mental health of elderly people in our communities, and we must support and build social networking opportunities and maximise opportunities for participation in communities. Early diagnosis of conditions such as dementia is needed. On accident prevention, it is important that we consider preventing falls and fractures. Prevention is better than cure, and preventative spend is necessary to ensure that elderly people are informed of the risks that they face in their own homes. The Scottish Accident Prevention Council has been vocal in its support for statutory duties relating to home safety that are similar to those for road safety. In times of unprecedented budgetary cuts, it is unfortunate that home safety officers and home safety functions in councils have been cut, whereas road safety is protected by a statutory requirement. More people are injured or sustain fatal accidents in their homes than on the roads.

I agree that the strategy was very successful, but it tended to pick people up after they had incurred an injury at home. We need preventative action and education before things happen. Home safety officers provide vital training for elderly people to understand the risks that they face. For example, training is given on the appropriate use of safe steps, which are designed for people who have impaired balance and mobility and which can prevent falls from height. Simple advice about removal of rugs from rooms and positioning of furniture to reduce risk can literally be life saving if it prevents a hip fracture in an elderly person. Where necessary, access to information about Care and Repair Scotland’s services can be vital, especially in tackling poverty issues such as loose or frayed carpeting or bad maintenance that could lead to a fall or injury. I am most concerned about fire safety, particularly in relation to supporting people who have mobility issues in their homes. The Rosepark care home fire and the 12 tragic deaths there led the Parliament, under the steam of Michael Matheson, to introduce the mandatory use of sprinkler systems in residential care homes. I argue that, when we support an elderly person in their home, in some circumstances, the installation of a domestic sprinkler is just as imperative.

I declare my interest as a corporate parent, as an elected member of North Lanarkshire Council. The SNP Government has demonstrated its commitment to all of Scotland’s young people in a programme for government that will transform outcomes for children and young people throughout Scotland. It has delivered on the commitment to establish the centre for excellence for looked-after children. My understanding is that the centre has already established a permanence team to examine the very issues that have been raised in the debate. The Government’s early years strategy provides an opportunity to tackle some of the most challenging circumstances for children and sets an expectation that healthcare, social care and education departments will collaborate on delivering care plans and on ensuring the best possible start for children—especially those who are looked after or who are on the fringes of becoming looked-after. The debate and the consensus across the chamber have demonstrated not only that we understand the debt that we all owe to foster carers, adoptive parents and kinship carers but—I believe—that we all understand the issues and the problems. We have a wealth of research and submissions on the matter, not least of which is Susan Deacon’s report, entitled “Joining the dots: A better start for Scotland’s children”. The Government’s commitment to providing £6.8 million for an early years action fund, alongside its support for the third sector in helping to improve the life chances of our children and for projects such as the go play initiative, demonstrate its understanding of some of the issues. The Government has also demanded that we improve child protection practice through inspections of each of Scotland’s 30 child protection committees, and it has published new national guidelines on the implementation of the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007. I know that the ministers are committed to protecting children and to delivering legislation through the Parliament to strengthen and modernise the children’s hearings system, to strengthening choices and decision making for looked-after children, and to investing in early intervention to reduce the number of children who enter the criminal justice system. To support delivery of those priority areas, the Government is continuing to roll out business systems and trying to achieve the cultural change in the getting it right for every child approach. However, the legislation that could have the most impact on how we improve outcomes for young people is the proposed rights of children and young people bill, which will enshrine in law a duty for Scottish ministers to have due regard to the UNCRC when exercising their responsibilities. We need to achieve cultural change. Adoption of the UNCRC will put children at the heart of decision-making processes that affect their lives and is the lever that is needed to achieve the cultural change that all members recognise is necessary. I will mention a few of the UNCRC articles, which I have taken from the National Assembly for Wales’s documentation. Article 1 states that everyone who is under the age of 18 has all the rights of the convention. Enshrining that right in law will ensure that no one can be abandoned by the system at the age of 16. So much of our research highlights the plight of young people who have no security and certainty about their future and whose support mechanisms are pulled like a rug from under them, so that they are left to fend for themselves. Article 3 says that organisations that are concerned with children should work towards what is best for each child. We know that lack of collaboration, delayed decision making and temporary short-term placements all damage the life chances of looked-after children. What is best for a child is not in the current culture. The UNCRC could compel people to work towards decision-making cultures and working practices that will improve outcomes. Article 9 says that children should not be separated from their parents unless it is for their own good: if, for example, a parent is mistreating or neglecting their child. Children whose parents have separated have the right to stay in contact with both parents unless that might hurt the child. Decisions about removing children from their parents must be the right decisions. When we take the decision to leave a child as a looked-after child in their own home, we have a duty to support the parents and to work with them to improve their parenting skills, particularly in helping them to support their child’s educational development. Every care plan must give due recognition to improving the educational outcome for children and it must ensure that learning support is given whenever it is required. I am sure that there is not an elected member who has not been contacted by a parent who is looking to establish extra learning support for a child in need. However, if a young child’s parent is not able to do that for them, who is there to speak up for them? Who is their advocate or champion? Article 25 says that children who are looked after by the local authority have a right to have their situation reviewed regularly. Surely the cultural change that the UNCRC could bring will tackle some of the delays in establishing permanent solutions for children. I do not want to pre-empt the investigation that is being carried out by the Education and Culture Committee into the attainment levels of looked-after children. However, there is overwhelming evidence about their chances, especially those who are looked after at home. Mr Malik talked about cultural issues for children from ethnic minorities. Article 29 of the UNCRC states that education should develop each child’s personality and talents to the full, and that it should encourage children to respect their parents and their own and other cultures. I am sure that that will be of interest to Mr Malik. Children should be protected from any activities that could harm their development. We know that some of the current practice is harming the development of children, but the proposed rights of the child and young people bill will legislate for our moral obligation to take every action that we can take to ensure that every Scottish child is safe, secure, happy, healthy and able to fulfil their potential.

I am pleased to speak in the debate. I recognise that we are talking about not only education but a joined-up approach to how we deal with inequalities in our society. The Scottish Government is tackling the causes of inequality as never before. Our early years intervention work and the equally well strategy are geared towards improving opportunities for all Scotland’s children. We must tackle the causes of inequality if we are to make any progress in those areas, and the previous SNP Administration had a good track record in relation to recognising some of them. It supported projects that encouraged play because it recognised the scientific research that shows that cognitive development in the first three years of life will define children’s outcomes. Preventative spend on early years will transform opportunities and outcomes for children across Scotland. This is not just about our early years strategy. Curriculum for excellence focuses on the needs of children and their learning journey and is a stepping stone that will support and develop each pupil to enable them to achieve their full potential, carrying on into the opportunities for all programme for 16 to 19-year-olds. Curriculum for excellence also works hand in hand with GIRFEC to transform our young people’s opportunities and outcomes. I will talk a bit about ambition, which has not been touched on much in the debate. Before I do so, I will address some comments made by earlier speakers. Jenny Marra and Ken Macintosh talked about college places in some detail. At a time when we face unprecedented cuts in the budget, they seem to believe that, while every other sector must rise to the challenge, the colleges that were preserved in aspic by Margaret Thatcher should remain as they are. Are they seriously suggesting that we should maintain places and teaching numbers that are not required for the 16-to-19 strategy? If so, that explains a lot about the economic chaos that the previous Labour Government left.

No, thank you. On class sizes, which John Pentland and Ken Macintosh referred to, Derek Mackay talked about how his local council was able to tackle that issue and make good progress on it. John Pentland was the finance convener of North Lanarkshire Council when it and Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council were the worst-performing councils in delivering class-size reductions. Liz Smith described the motion as “benign”. I find that a bit curious. I remind members that the Government has a track record of delivering on commitments and achieving change in Scotland through the delivery of some of its policies. Far from it being benign, I regard the motion as transformational, innovative and inspiring. Kezia Dugdale made a thoughtful speech. I recognise and share her concerns about people from deprived backgrounds entering further and higher education. However, she said that there was a monetary aspect to that, which I found quite ironic, given that it was her party and the Liberal Democrats who introduced—to their shame—the graduate endowment. Thank goodness the Scottish Government is committed to delivering free education. I was at the SNP conference at the weekend, where I saw a presentation by a senior medical student who is involved in the University of Edinburgh’s pathways to education development programme. That outreach project is for schools that do not normally feed into the university and it tackles specifically people who are the first person in their family to go on to further education, developing a nurturing process to allow them to do that. It has been so successful that Universities Scotland has committed to roll it out. We ought to recognise the good work that is being done in that area. On ambition, I am delighted that the Scottish Government has protected the youth music initiative, which gives children the support that they need to achieve their musical ambitions. I am delighted, too, with the new Scot fund, which will support sporting, entrepreneurial and creative skills in our young people. I am also delighted that £5 million of that money will create a hub in Glasgow to support the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland, providing administration, rehearsal and studio space. That money is, of course, in addition to the money that has already been given to the Theatre Royal and the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall to develop their projects. However, Glasgow councillors will no doubt still say that Glasgow gets nothing. I am glad that the Government has protected the festivals expo fund, which offers opportunities for talented young people in Scotland to showcase their wares to the wider world. I have very little time left.

I would like to see more ambition for women who are involved in stem projects and who work in technical areas. Again, we have a way to go on work on that.

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating Creative Scotland on its continuing support through the Big Lottery Fund for North Lanarkshire Council’s October book festival—words 2011—which this year included a presentation at Coatbridge library by comic book writer and local superhero Mark Millar?

13. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its plans to introduce a minimum price for alcohol. (S4O-00260)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with Professor Tim Stockwell from the centre for addictions research in British Columbia, who briefed MSPs last week on the impact of minimum pricing in Canada, where it led to a fall in levels of drinking, that Scotland is in a position to embrace a unique opportunity to transform its alcohol policy?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, in some cases, ambulances have struggled to locate properties, particularly in rural areas. Will the cabinet secretary provide a bit more detail about how ambulances are matched with call-outs and what steps are being taken to improve that?

I am delighted to speak in the debate. My experience is similar to Willie Coffey’s, in that I had a 20-year career in the IT industry prior to entering politics in 2003. I confess to being a bit of a geek and, yes, I do dream of electric sheep. I cannot express how excited I am at the prospect of laser technology and computer imaging. When I embarked on my career in computing, my vision was for technological revolution, animatronics, the realisation of the Star Trek holodeck and a sci-fi vision of a future fuelled by the imagination of HG Wells and Philip K Dick. I take this opportunity to express my great sadness at the news that Steve Jobs has passed away. He was a true pioneer of the computing age and brought so many innovations under his Apple brand and advanced digital animation through his work with Pixar. In the 1980s, history and archaeology were for me the very antithesis of what the computing revolution would be about. I therefore find it very exciting that in the early years of our new century our history, archaeology and heritage have become intertwined with our computing innovation and excellence. Heritage sites throughout the world are in constant danger from the effects of the natural environment, from seemingly benign sources such as the sun, wind and rain to dramatic earthquakes and fire—as we saw in Windsor castle a few years ago—and, regrettably, from human aggression. Who can forget the dismay that was felt around the world when the sixth century Bamiyan Buddhas in Afghanistan were destroyed in a matter of weeks by the Taliban? It was that incident that prompted the developer of the laser technology used in the Scottish ten, Iraqi-born Ben Kacyra, to establish the CyArk not-for-profit, non-commercial project, which is dedicated to the application of new technology in the documentation of archaeological and cultural heritage resources—particularly threatened architecture—throughout the world. CyArk and the centre for digital documentation and visualisation, which was formed in partnership with the Scottish Government, Historic Scotland and Glasgow School of Art, have worked collaboratively with Scottish Heritage’s Scottish ten project to contribute to the groundbreaking work that has been carried out in capturing and documenting archaeological and cultural heritage throughout the world. I am delighted that at the inception of the project in 2009 the decision was taken not just to document Scotland’s five UNESCO world heritage sites, but to capture five sites throughout the world. The good will towards, interest in and recognition of Scotland’s expertise in this area generated by the Scottish ten project cannot be overestimated. A New York Times article in 2009 described the technology not as new or unique but as Scotland’s team being on the cultural front line. When thinking about my speech today, I mused about whether to share, as a Lanarkshire lass, my memories of my experiences of visiting New Lanark. It is the individual interaction and relationship with our heritage that is so vital and important. As a primary 5 pupil, I was lucky enough to visit New Lanark as part of a project to examine the work of David Dale and Robert Owen. New Lanark was very different in those days: there was no visitor centre, and many of the now occupied mills were derelict. However, I was welcomed, along with my classmates, into the home of an elderly resident who had worked in the mills and had lived in the same house her entire life. That personal interaction had a profound effect on me and brought to life the project that I had been working on. It was a unique experience that was of its time and a snapshot that is now gone but for my memory and that of my classmates. However, digital heritage is of this time, and the work that is being done will ensure that people of all ages throughout the world can share, enjoy and learn from our heritage in digital media form over and over again. Yesterday evening, I hosted a drop-in event for the National Records of Scotland, featuring the Scottish ten, the genealogy support website ScotlandsPeople and the geographical website ScotlandsPlaces. It was amazing to see not only the work that has already been undertaken in the Scottish ten project—I was particularly interested in the New Lanark stage of the project, which is most familiar to me—but the technology in action as a digital scan of the room was prepared, which we were able to browse on screen. Seeing ourselves in that format presented challenges for some of us who were scanned. I said at the start of my speech that I am a creature of science fiction and fascinated by the future. However, last night, I was moved by, and interested in, the ScotlandsPeople website, where I was able to trace through birth certificates my maternal great-grandparents and see the record of their marriage in the parish registers. I was also able to see that three generations of my family lived together at the time of one of the censuses from the 1800s. It quickly became apparent to me why genealogy is such a popular hobby or pursuit. Scotland’s economy can certainly benefit from it. Homecoming Scotland 2009 was one of the largest collaborative tourism initiatives that Scotland has ever staged. The year delivered additional tourist visits from the Scottish diaspora and our indigenous population. It is estimated that £53.7 million of additional tourism revenue was generated for Scotland. As we prepare for a second homecoming in 2014, there is no doubt that Scotland is well placed to meet the expectations of our visitors and to inspire them with its digital heritage.

I welcome this Scottish Government debate. Defining Scottish studies is not an easy task. Thankfully, that task falls to the Scottish studies working group as it determines the way forward. That said, I happened upon one definition that encapsulates what I would like to see. Scottish studies should “promote, preserve and perpetuate through studies in all related areas—the culture, music, language, arts, crafts, customs and traditions of ... Scotland.” If we can include under “traditions” our remarkable scientific achievements, I think that that definition covers just about everything. However, I am being a little bit disingenuous, because that quote does not come from Scotland, a Scottish academic, a Scottish scientist or a Scottish cultural icon. It is the mission statement of the Gaelic College in Nova Scotia in Canada, except that where I have said “traditions of Scotland”, it uses the phrase “traditions of immigrants of the highlands of Scotland.” I find it ironic that we are debating the merits of Scottish studies in Scottish schools when it is evident that the rest of the world and the Scottish diaspora understand fully the importance of such work. In 2009, the esteemed Scottish historian Tom Devine reviewed the BBC’s “A History of Scotland” in an article for The Journal. In framing his review, he stated: “The educational deficit in the teaching of Scottish history in our schools, which has been a scandal for many decades, was now being vigorously debated and plans were put forward for welcome improvements. It was also widely agreed that post-devolution Scotland urgently needed to develop a greater sense of itself and of the nation’s place in the world.” I can think of no more compelling argument for the incorporation of Scottish studies in our curriculum. Given that one of the world’s leading historians talked, as recently as 2009, of the teaching of Scottish history in our schools as a “scandal”, we in the Parliament should surely take note.

No, thank you. Given that one of our leading academics told us, as recently as 2009, that there was a consensus for the development of a greater sense of ourselves and of our nation’s place in the world, we should not only take note but take action. The establishment of Scottish studies within our curriculum and exam diet is the action that is needed.

Yes, absolutely. I think that I stressed at the beginning of my speech that it is for the working group to determine the way forward. Scottish studies is a fabric as intricately interwoven as our tartans, in which all the threads that define our history, our invention, our culture, our emigration and immigration, and our scientific advances come together to define us as Scots and our nation as Scotland. By way of example, I turn to Robert Burns, who is one of our best-known international cultural icons. He wrote that reading Blind Harry’s “Wallace” “poured a Scottish prejudice in my veins which will boil along there till the flood gates of life shut in eternal rest”. He went on to write “Scots, wha hae”. There we have Scottish history, in the shape of the wars of independence in the 13th century, inspiring Blind Harry in 1477, and then Blind Harry inspiring Burns in 1792. Those threads of our history and literature are interwoven into our cultural tartan. Of course, Burns was inspired by more than our history. “To a Mouse” was framed from our agricultural heritage, “Twa Dugs” takes political significance for social satire and, only a few months ago, we heard in the chamber a beautiful rendition of “Westlin Winds”, which was inspired by our countryside and natural heritage—I think a lassie might have inspired him on that one too. I chose Robert Burns because he sits at the heart of the Scottish enlightenment. If we are truly to develop a greater sense of Scotland and its place in the world, it is vital that our children understand the world-changing impact of the Scottish enlightenment. Do they know that modern geology was founded by James Hutton in this country? They need to understand the world-framing ideas that Scotland gave to philosophy, political economy, engineering, architecture, medicine, geology, archaeology, law, agriculture, chemistry and sociology—I hope that I have not missed anything. However, Scottish studies should not be only about our past; our contemporary contribution to the world should also be recognised and should inspire in our classrooms. This is not the first time that I have mentioned the work that Matthew Fitt did with students from Airdrie and Hamilton to develop a colloquial Scots dialect brochure for children who took part in the international children’s games. The project taught children from my home area to value not only their mither tongue but themselves. Next week, I will welcome students aged 14 to 17 from the Goethe-Gymnasium in Frankfurt, who are visiting the Parliament as part of their studies of Scottish politics. Those studies include investigating the idea of Scottish independence; our relationship to Great Britain and the European Union; and the immigration policies and political concepts of our Scottish parties. I look forward to welcoming Scottish children deliberating on the same subjects post the introduction of Scottish studies.

Scotland is a creative nation, rich in heritage. It contributes to the world; it is preparing to be an independent nation; and indeed its creative industries, which sustain 60,000 jobs and contribute £5 billion to our economy, are vital. In partnership with Creative Scotland, the Scottish Government has proved its commitment to attracting, developing and retaining Scotland’s talent and we are committed to helping individuals and companies to reach their full economic potential. I am very glad that Skills Development Scotland will be able to contribute to these industries. The Scottish Government’s commitment to providing 25,000 modern apprenticeships includes, this year, at least an additional 30 apprenticeships in traditional building skills. Such a move will ensure that those skills exist to maintain our heritage in future. I am also glad that SDS is also making apprenticeships available in the museum, gallery and heritage framework and that it will continue its get ready for work programme with projects such as Swamp creative media centre in Pollok, which offers young people the opportunity to acquire skills in music, digital technology and the arts. Tourism is also important, providing 200,000 jobs and generating visitor spend of more than £4 billion a year. Of course, cultural tourism is key to all that. Not least in that respect are Scotland’s festivals. This year, the Edinburgh festivals had their most successful year ever, contributing an estimated £261 million to Scotland’s economy. In August, the number of visitors at Edinburgh castle was the highest in recorded history and represented an 8 per cent increase on the figure for August 2010. That is why I am delighted that the Government has committed to continue funding the Edinburgh festivals expo fund, which showcases our talent, throughout the spending review period. I am glad, too, about the boost that has been given to the national museum of Scotland which, earlier this month, recorded its 500,000th visitor since it reopened earlier this year. There is no doubt that Historic Scotland is key to delivering our cultural heritage. Visitor numbers have increased across the country—in July, for example, the number of visitors to Linlithgow palace was up. That is why I am delighted that the spending review commits the Government to providing continued support for Historic Scotland’s Bannockburn visitor centre. There is much to be welcomed in the area of culture in the spending review, not least of which is the commitment to support the development of the V&amp;A museum in Dundee. The V&amp;A project will deliver a new iconic building for Scotland, will help with the regeneration of the waterfront in Dundee that was started at Discovery Point and will give a boost to the city’s existing cultural icons, such as Dundee Rep. I would just like to say how much I enjoyed the BBC proms broadcast from the Caird hall earlier this week. This year, the repertoire included traditional music. I welcome, too, the Government’s commitment to the new generation of broadband and its roll-out to our communities by 2020. That is not just about ensuring that businesses have the most up-to-date broadband. It is about inclusion and ensuring that every individual has an opportunity to get involved in digital media. It is vital that we get an uptake of broadband in our poorest areas that will support the education and learning of the children in those areas. In addition, I am very grateful to the Government for announcing the young Scot fund, which is a new initiative that will help to support emerging talent. Our culture is world class. We have world-class national performing companies and national museums and galleries. I am delighted that, in 2014, when the Commonwealth games comes to Glasgow, the Government’s support for the redevelopment of the Theatre Royal in Glasgow and the Glasgow royal concert hall as cultural centres during the games will have been delivered. The year of creative Scotland in 2012 and our contribution to the cultural Olympiad are now being backed by real commitment to culture in Scotland. I commend the cabinet secretary for his support in that area in the spending review.

In those local authorities that have adopted the living wage, has that been passed on to and adopted by arm’s-length organisations and trusts within their remit?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is considering to tackle problem alcohol consumption. (S4O-00121)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council on maximising the exposure of museums and galleries to visitors during the recent international children’s games, which included a visit to Summerlee museum of Scottish industrial life in Coatbridge?

In management circles, the mantra is often thrown out that good management is doing a thing well but good leadership is doing the right thing. The election result in May endorsed the good management that the SNP Government has shown, and the legislative programme that has been announced by the Government today certainly shows good leadership. It shows ambition, direction and an understanding of what the people of Scotland want in order to progress our country. Doing the right thing means not just having a big, bold, dramatic legislative programme, but getting it right for all aspects of Scottish life. Mr Gray made a flippant comment about the National Library of Scotland. I hope that members will indulge me while I talk a bit about why the National Library of Scotland is so important to the people of Scotland. We are a creative nation, we are rich in our heritage and we are contributing to the world. The National Library of Scotland underpins all that we do as a creative nation. Margo MacDonald spoke about how important it is that our children understand Scottish history and culture. What better resource could they have than the National Library of Scotland? It reaches out to the Scottish diaspora by supporting genealogy projects and investigations. It stores our plays and literature and holds events that resonate throughout Scotland. It has projects such as the most important plays in Scottish history over the past 20 years, in which students and pupils can go and read plays such as the “The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil”, “Black Watch” and “The Steamie”—one resource all in one place. It links with our festivals in Scotland, including the Edinburgh international book festival. As part of that festival, it holds the Donald Dewar memorial lecture and provides a real flavour of those lectures—given by the likes of Robin Cook; a previous Presiding Officer of the Parliament, George Reid; and Alex Salmond—by recording and storing them and offering them as a resource. As has been said, the governance of the National Library of Scotland was established in the 1920s and is no longer fit for purpose. It has a board of representatives that is far too large and unwieldy. It includes the First Minister, so I hope that he will not be too upset if he loses a job at the end of all this. The consultation was overwhelmingly in favour of a review of the governance of the organisation. I am sure that we will be able to deliver legislation that will allow the library to achieve its full potential and meet its targets in future. The idea of good governance is throughout the legislative programme, from the recognition that the National Library needs reform to the approach to our police and fire services. The Government’s programme is ambitious and will deliver a fairer society. The broadband digital fund will allow our businesses to be more efficient and to reach competitiveness. If we consider individual access to broadband throughout Scotland, we can recognise that some of our poorer areas are still not included in the digital age. We can tackle that. The Government has managed its resources by putting together the Scottish Investment Bank, which is already delivering for small companies that are desperate for funds to move forward. It is also showing its leadership in tackling the problems that have led to the moneys from the banks not being released into the economy. In what area could Government leadership and doing the right thing be more important than in tackling Scotland’s relationship with alcohol? I am happy to debate with members on the opposition benches how, if we had control of our taxation, the products and trade and so on, we could tackle the alcohol problem differently. But we are where we are, and to do nothing is not doing the right thing; it is letting down the people of Scotland. Jenny Marra mentioned that the end of ring fencing had led to nursery closures. I remind her that it was Labour-controlled COSLA that lobbied for the end of ring fencing for so long. She should recognise that one of the biggest problems for single parent families and poor people in Scotland was the abolition of the 10p tax rate by her Government. Annabel Goldie mentioned that we seem to be confused about independence. I guarantee that if she speaks to any one of us on these benches, she will find that we know what independence means. Perhaps she should consult Murdo Fraser, because he seems to have a pretty good idea of what independence means at the moment.

During the consultation period and while the voluntary guidelines are in place, what representation will the cabinet secretary make to universities to ensure that fees are set in a timely manner to give students a clear path ahead?

As a Lanarkshire lass, I am delighted that our new Scots makar is Newarthill-born Liz Lochhead. In her poem “Kidspoem/Bairnsang”, she describes more beautifully and succinctly that I could a little of my and my peers’ early experience of Scottish culture. The poem is about a wee girl’s experience of her first day at school. I quote: “My Mum ... gie’d me a wee kiss and a kid-oan skelp oan the bum and sent me aff across the playground tae the place A’d learn to say ... gave me a little kiss and a pretend slap on the bottom and sent me off across the playground to the place I’d learn to forget to say it wis January and a gey driech day”. We have come a long way since my childhood experiences of education in Lanarkshire. We now celebrate our Scots language and recognise it for its richness and depth of expression. As a Wishaw councillor, I am delighted that North and South Lanarkshire Councils have included in their curriculum development surrounding the international children’s games an ICG Scots language project that has been developed and delivered in conjunction with Matthew Fitt. Indeed, when looking for a chirpy slogan that might cheer up those who are attending the games but are in need of a rain mac in August, we have simply settled on one Scots word that says it all—drookit. I also welcome the fact that North and South Lanarkshire Councils are hosting a health and wellbeing conference, which will be held in conjunction with the games for the first time. Not only will our young athletes enjoy the cultural exchange that the games bring, but we will be examining and celebrating the sporting benefits for young people. When I reflect on my early experience, I know that our culture surrounds us in every aspect of our lives. I grew up attending 7:84 and Wildcat theatre productions, and I recognise that Scots culture is defined and shaped by our politics, our history, our struggles and conflicts, and our immigrants. Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s “Sunset Song” is a classic example of culture that weaves the themes of Scottish national identity, peasant and rural struggle, and modernisation and technology, and it can be read as an analogy of our nation’s transition from the pastoral to the industrial era. In culture, whether that found in a petri dish by Alexander Fleming or that which inspires and entertains us, we are indeed a rich nation. Maya Angelou once said of our bard Robert Burns: “His spirit was a humanitarian spirit, he was able to love human beings, and his imagination was vast.” I once heard Maya Angelou being interviewed on Radio 4 by James Naughtie. Ms Angelou took none too kindly to being introduced as one of the most renowned black authors in the world. Much to the embarrassment of Mr Naughtie, who had meant no offence, she asked why he needed to use the word “black” as she was simply one of the most renowned authors in the world. Maya Angelou’s fear was that the use of the word “black” diminished her achievements and recognition for her work. I fear that in some instances and by some organisations the use of the word “Scottish” has diminished and pigeonholed our own cultural achievements. James McAvoy, Brian Cox and Sean Connery are world-renowned actors who happen to be Scottish; Annie Lennox, Evelyn Glennie and Biffy Clyro are world-renowned musicians who happen to be Scottish; and Ian Rankin, Irvine Welsh and James Robertson are world-renowned authors who happen to be Scottish. We must build on Scotland’s past and ensure that from this point forward the word “Scottish” is a mark of excellence and talent and a benchmark for creative achievement throughout the world. The Scottish Government has come a considerable way in establishing that identity with the inception of Creative Scotland, which seeks to increase the number and range of people using and enjoying the creative arts. In addition, Creative Scotland seeks to identify, support and develop talent and excellence in the arts and, in doing so, to realise the benefits, both economic and otherwise. Supported through the Scottish Government’s Edinburgh festivals expo fund, the made in Scotland project has placed a diverse programme of high-quality Scottish work firmly in the spotlight. I look forward to the expansion of those funds and plans to make Scotland’s talent available to a wider international audience. I also look forward to greater engagement with the Scottish diaspora and welcome proposals for the National Library of Scotland and the National Archives of Scotland to increase the availability of family records and boost our ancestral tourism. The soundtrack to the film “Sex and the City”—I wager that nobody thought that that would come up this afternoon—includes Scots folk duo The Cast and their hauntingly beautiful rendition of “Auld Lang Syne”. I was lucky enough to see The Cast in the Rowantree folk club in Uddingston many years ago, when singer Mairi Campbell treated us to an impromptu Scottish step dance. Mairi teaches Scottish step dance and is considered an expert in that area, but she had to attend the Gaelic College of Celtic Arts and Crafts in Nova Scotia to learn her craft because so much of it had been lost in Scotland. In re-engaging with Scots and those of Scots heritage around the world, we enrich and reinvigorate our own culture, and I welcome a second homecoming in 2014.

I am delighted to speak in the debate as we examine the plans for broadcasting in Scotland and the proposals to establish a Scottish digital network. In 2008, the Creative Scotland Bill sought to establish the structure and organisation through which Scotland could promote the understanding, appreciation and enjoyment of the arts and culture for all people in Scotland. Creative Scotland seeks to increase the number and range of people who use and enjoy the creative arts. In addition, it seeks to identify, support and develop talent and excellence in the arts and, in so doing, to realise the benefits—economic and otherwise—of the arts and culture. There can be no doubt that the achievement of those objectives would be greatly helped and underpinned by the establishment of a Scottish digital network. Such a network would consist of a dedicated television channel that would be available to all and supported by a large range of content on broadband. A dedicated channel for Scotland could inform, engage and entertain Scottish viewers, but that would not be in a parochial way. It would open an opportunity to establish Scotland’s culture, sporting achievements and participation, business and civic life in a European and world context. In doing so, it would showcase our talents in all those areas. A Scottish digital network could be of the highest quality of public service broadcasting. It would be independent of the Government and impartial, and it would offer an alternative to the BBC, but would not diminish the BBC as an organisation. For our culture, we could envisage greater coverage of our festivals, not least of which is the Edinburgh international festival. In sport, we might have more coverage of events such as the Melrose rugby sevens or local coverage of the Fort William mountain bike world cup. The network would offer an opportunity that was not previously available to showcase the likes of handball and sailing, in which Scotland excels but which rarely receive coverage. In news broadcasting, we could see greater emphasis on reporting from a Scottish perspective. National reporting frequently fails to place news items in their Scottish context, which leads to confusion among the public about devolved issues. In an earlier debate today, Marco Biagi suggested that news items should come with the warning, “Not for viewers in Scotland”.

I agree that the broadcasting opportunities that a Scottish digital network would bring would allow far more of those kinds of events to be covered and to be accessible to the public through their televisions and online. Only yesterday morning, I watched a report on BBC’s “Breakfast” on proposed increases to the Humber bridge tolls. After saying that, if accepted, they will be among the highest in the UK, the reporter then listed toll charges throughout England and on the Severn bridge, which links Wales with England. During this breakdown of what were described as “UK figures”, no one mentioned that tolls in Scotland had been scrapped by an SNP Government, or presented that model or the buyout of bridge contracts as an alternative perspective. It is inconceivable that a Scottish public sector broadcaster would have failed to establish the Scottish context of that report and I believe that on that occasion the BBC let down every viewer in the UK. A consistent finding of the research that was commissioned by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission in 2008 and the Scottish Government in 2009 is that Scottish viewers want more choice; indeed, since 2008, there has been consensus in the Parliament on the need to establish a Scottish digital network. The results of that research will come as no surprise when we look at the figures. Although in 2008-09 Scottish licence fee payers accounted for £300 million, of the total only £140 million was spent in Scotland, which demonstrates a substantial shortfall in investment.

Of course I welcome that; indeed, the cabinet secretary has highlighted the progress that has been made in such areas. However, we still have some way to go. In such challenging economic times, the funding of the Scottish digital network will be key to when it is established and I agree with the recommendation of the Scottish digital network panel that was established by Blair Jenkins, that it be funded through an allocation of the licence fee. As the cabinet secretary has pointed out, the Welsh broadcaster S4C is to receive £76 million annually; in Germany, the regional public service broadcaster for Hesse, which serves six million people, receives £170 million of public funding; and in the Spanish region of Valencia, the public service broadcaster, which serves five million people, receives £150 million. The amounts that we are looking for are quite in line with those that are being allocated in the rest of the Europe. Given that Scotland had no voice in the negotiation of the current settlement, I urge the BBC to revisit the six-year licence fee, which will run until 2017. If that is not possible, the potential funding gap could be filled with a share of the proceeds from the sell-off of the cleared spectrum following the digital switchover. In 2010, Germany raised £4 billion from a broadly similar auction. I support the motion.

I am delighted to be making my first speech in the chamber alongside Drew Smith, Humza Yousaf and George Adam. I thank those chaps for setting the bar so high for those of us who are following them. The closure of Ravenscraig brought me to the cause of Scottish independence. I knew that my home area would be devastated by its loss, and my community is still bearing the burden of unemployment and poverty. Since I learned that Motherwell was the constituency that first returned an SNP member of Parliament—Dr McIntyre—in 1945, I have always been proud of the part that my home town has played in our party’s history. It was therefore poignant for me to witness the returns for the SNP in the Ravenscraig regional sports centre. The constituents of Central Scotland voted overwhelmingly in support of the SNP, and in doing so changed the political map of Scotland. I am humbled by their faith in me and my party, and of course I look forward to representing the constituents of the region to the best of my ability. North Lanarkshire Council, Ravenscraig Ltd and sportscotland funded the spectacular £34 million regional sports facility that heralded a new era for Ravenscraig. I am glad that the cabinet secretary for finance approved the tax increment financing model that will secure the future of the Ravenscraig site and bring new hope and prosperity for the first time in 20 years. I hope that I am not being too parochial as a new member, but I want to speak about what is in my ken as a local Wishaw councillor. In 2007, I was invited to be a member of the international children’s games organising committee, which is a joint venture that involves North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council. Together, those councils cover seven of the nine constituencies in the Central Scotland region. The international children’s games are the world’s biggest youth sporting event. In August this year, Lanarkshire will play host to 1,500 competitors aged between 12 and 15. We have worked with our schools and sports clubs in establishing development squads, and youngsters from throughout Lanarkshire have been given an opportunity to participate in expert coaching sessions. All our squad have completed the cardiac screening programme at Hampden Park, which helps to identify those who are at risk from rare sudden cardiac death. That programme is vital for young athletes. For the 80 or so athletes who are selected to compete in the games, it will be a unique and life-changing opportunity. The athletes will be able to take to an international sporting stage, and in doing so will experience new friendships and cultural diversity. I assure my Edinburgh colleagues that Lanarkshire will offer the warmest of welcomes to their city’s team, as we will to the teams from Daegu, Macau, Baghdad, Nairobi and the other teams from the 71 cities that are taking part. The games have provided a wealth of resource for the curriculum for excellence throughout North and South Lanarkshire. The local authorities have run design competitions for ICG calendars and cards, a competition to compose a song or tune to celebrate the games and a competition to design the torch. They have also developed an ICG-themed Scots language project. Such is the vision of both councils that, for the first time, and in parallel with the games, we are running a health and wellbeing conference to celebrate the way in which sport and physical activity can enhance young people’s lives. The conference is supported by a plethora of partners, including the International Sport and Culture Association, NHS Lanarkshire and Glasgow Science Centre. It is hoped that the conference will be taken up as part of future ICG events and will be part of the legacy of the Lanarkshire games. Ravenscraig regional sports centre will feature in the games as one of the eight venues, hosting the badminton and judo. The centre, which has played its part in securing the 2011 European city of sport award for North Lanarkshire, is run by North Lanarkshire Leisure. As a board member of that trust, I welcomed the publication of the independent social impact evaluation that was conducted by Baker Tilly, which concluded that, for the £10 million that was invested in the trust, the economic impact in the surrounding area was £41 million, with the NHS being the greatest beneficiary. I am sure that those figures will be of interest not just to our sports minister but to the cabinet secretaries for finance and health. I will finish by highlighting the ethos of the international children’s games, which are the concept of physical education teacher Professor Metod Klemenc, a Yugoslavian who suffered enormously as a youngster during the second world war. He did not want that suffering for future generations. He knew that by breaking down cultural and geographic barriers and by nurturing mutual respect and understanding, he would go some way to tackling the problems that blighted his life. The children’s games motto is “Together, all friends”. How very like those Scottish values that Robert Burns expressed: “That Man to Man, the warld o’er, Shall brothers be for a’ that.” The first games were held in 1968 in Slovenia, which was then part of Yugoslavia. I trust that it will not be too long before Scotland takes her place alongside Slovenia as a small independent European nation.