7. To ask the Scottish Government how it is promoting national libraries day 2014. (S4O-02883)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that libraries provide an essential foundation to our local communities, and that events such as the love your library programme, which is being held throughout Midlothian in the week including 3 to 8 February, are crucial in promoting library services to the general public?

The Scottish economy is one of the most fundamental issues that underpins and drives the need for independence, especially when taken in the context of the performance of the UK economy as a whole. The Scottish recovery, which is strongly influenced and guided by the Scottish Government, has its roots in long-term, sustained growth, unlike the rather shaky and uncertain economic management that Westminster has applied in recent years. This week, the Chancellor of the Exchequer has stated that the UK requires £25 billion of further cuts. Needless to say, he is yet again targeting the most vulnerable in society through shifting the burden of cuts on to the welfare state: half the cuts are expected to come from the welfare bill. Surely that will result in more socially unacceptable measures, such as the deeply unpopular bedroom tax, which, as we know, will be eliminated under an SNP Government in an independent Scotland. Early December saw the Institute for Fiscal Studies pick apart the chancellor’s budget. The reluctance to implement scheduled increases in fuel duties, combined with factors such as the creation of marriage allowances in the tax system, will add an extra £7 billion of spending in the period from 2015 to 2016. Members will note that that date is after the general election. Cuts in public service spending are expected to accelerate from 2.3 per cent a year in 2016 to 3.7 per cent a year from then until 2019. Meanwhile, the IFS warns that £750 million of free school meals in England and Wales will be unfunded from 2015. Perhaps Mr Osborne expects not to be chancellor at that point and is leaving that as a problem for the next UK Government to solve. In contrast, the Scottish Government will be introducing properly budgeted and funded free school meals for Scottish schoolchildren in primaries 1 to 3. The recent increased growth forecast, the IFS states, is merely anticipated growth arriving sooner than expected. In effect, the growth is already forward discounted. That coincides with the British Chamber of Commerce’s report that growth will be hampered in 2014 if the UK Government does not encourage corporate lending. Present artificial blockages on lending to small and medium-sized businesses are restricting essential investment in the likes of new plant and machinery.

The points that I am raising from what the IFS has to say are interesting, because it is very critical of what the UK Government is doing. I would like to focus on the key successes in the Scottish economy in recent times, which must be considered in the context of Scotland providing 9.9 per cent of UK taxes but receiving only 9.3 per cent of public spending in return. As recently as yesterday, the latest Bank of Scotland business monitor reported a surge in business activity that continued from the summer through the autumn. Thirty-seven per cent of businesses reported rising turnover, while volumes of repeat business continued strongly over the period. To quote Donald MacRae, the Bank of Scotland’s chief economist, the recovery was “accompanied by high expectations for the next six months”. When the facts are examined we can see that our economy is fundamentally healthy and strong in its diversity. Our construction industry employs 170,000 people and provides more than £21 billion to the economy, and our tourism industry employs almost 300,000 people and provides more than £11 billion to the economy. Between 2011 and 2012 we generated £1,700 more tax per person than the UK as a whole, and that has been the case for the past 32 years. We know that Scotland’s deficit is lower than the UK’s, as it stands at 5.4 per cent compared with 8.5 per cent of GDP. Furthermore, our public spending stands at 42.7 per cent of GDP compared with the UK’s 45.5 per cent. That shows that our public finances are in better order than those in the UK as a whole. An independent Scotland would have the opportunity to start oil exploration off the coast of south-west Scotland, a move that the Ministry of Defence blocked because it would interfere with operations of the Trident nuclear weapons submarine fleet at Faslane. Surely it is more prudent—indeed essential—to boost local economies ahead of dumping in Scotland outmoded nuclear weapons that Scotland neither wants nor needs. That is all in the context of a deeply imbalanced and unequal UK economy, presided over by Westminster politicians who do not care to dwell on the real issues and instead continue to implement and maintain austerity measures that do nothing but increase inequality and hardship. Only by taking Scotland’s economy and future back into our hands can we realise this country’s potential. The alternative is stagnation and further fracturing of our society.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to revitalise Prestwick airport. (S4O-02683)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that bringing the airport into state ownership could improve the Scottish economy through increased business and tourism?

The inquiry has in some respects been difficult for the Education and Culture Committee. I for one hoped that, somewhere among the wealth of information and evidence provided, a magic bullet would be found that would point to a clear and simple solution, but alas that was not the case. What is clear is that successive Governments have rightly placed a high priority on children in care. Considerable resources have been channelled into this area and a multitude of groups and organisations have come into being over the years, with the laudable aim of providing much needed support, yet the fact is that improvement has been glacial. I believe that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will make real progress and create a more consistent approach. It should help to create the environment in which solutions can flourish. It helps point the way in a more cohesive and focused manner. It is not a magic bullet, but it moves us in the right direction. At the end of the day, solutions still lie with people and how they respond to the opportunities that the bill will create. The committee’s report highlights many of the key issues that surround the decision-making process. From an organisational perspective, the evidence points to the fact that, at present, no joined-up approach is in place across Scotland and there are therefore major inconsistencies across the board. Decisions are made through a mixture of processes that involve a wide range of stakeholders, from social workers to courts to children’s hearings. Beyond that, each local authority has its own assessment process to handle risk assessment when deciding whether to take a child into care. When all those factors come into play, it may well be the case that what should be the true focus of the decision—the welfare of the child in question—is, in effect, put to one side. It must be clear that, in any such decisions that are made, the rights of the children and parents are carefully balanced. At no point should we underestimate the fact that this decision-making process is potentially the most difficult that local authorities must undertake. I believe that the committee has been sensitive to that. Many competing viewpoints have to be taken into consideration, as a potentially wrong decision might result in further neglect or abuse, or worse. In order to improve the process, one could make the case that earlier intervention provides the potential for stability or permanence to be put into effect as early as possible to minimise the potential for harm. Indeed, many of the young people with experience of the care system who spoke to the committee indicated that they felt they should have been taken into care earlier. However, it has not always been proved that early intervention will produce the desired outcome for each family, especially given that circumstances will almost certainly differ from case to case. One size does not fit all. Fundamentally, early intervention should be seen in the context of whether it will lead to fewer children being placed in care over the longer term and whether those children will enjoy better outcomes as a result. In pre-birth cases, it must be considered whether providing parenting support would provide a positive outcome. If, as the Scottish Government proposes, early intervention is introduced in tandem with early permanence, we should see fewer young people remaining in long-term care. The role of social workers and the support that they receive need to be carefully examined. The evidence that was supplied to the committee indicates that, at present, social workers lack confidence in their own knowledge and assessment skills. It has also been suggested that they take an overly optimistic approach, which can result in an unwillingness to remove children from potentially harmful or neglectful situations. Beyond that, we have been told that their evidence in court is not treated with the same legitimacy as evidence from other professionals such as doctors and psychologists. If social workers’ opinions are not given credibility, it is no surprise that the profession suffers from a lack of confidence. That could be remedied in the training that is given to social workers by, for example, expanding the social work degree to allow for more specialisation and making post-qualification training and career development more focused and targeted. I understand that the Scottish Social Services Council is reviewing the degree and I look forward to seeing its conclusions. That leads me on to the provision in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill of a named person for those in care, the response to which has been overwhelmingly positive. However, one or two questions still remain. For example, if the named person is to be a teacher, it is assumed that the add-on costs will be minimal. What will happen during school holidays? Such decisions are in the hands of councils, but the bill indicates that the Scottish Government is taking the lead on implementing solutions. It is also important that we do not forget parents with learning disabilities. International research suggests that two out of every five children who are born to parents with learning disabilities are permanently removed from their care. Although the statistic might not specifically refer to Scotland, the figure is unlikely to be significantly different here and, as a result, those cases need to be considered very carefully. There is evidence that prejudicial attitudes—for example, that people with learning disabilities are incompetent—have been the reason for removing children, but I would like to think that a modern, independent Scotland is capable of much more compassion and understanding than that. To that end, the Scottish Government has set up the child protection and disabilities ministerial working group, which will consider the needs of children and young people in families where disability affects a parent and will, I presume, also study the level of support that such parents or carers require. One key issue is that the voices of children and parents must be heard throughout the decision-making process. The committee met young people who had recently come out of the care system and found their feedback to be exceptionally enlightening and thought provoking. Indeed, it provided us with a uniquely different perspective on the situation. The reactions to the children’s hearings system, for example, indicated several shortcomings with the current set-up. The committee heard that the hearings can be intimidating with too many people present, including professionals such as psychologists who could provide an opinion but had not necessarily seen the children regularly. There was also concern that some children who were reluctant to speak out in front of their family were unaware that they could speak to the panel on their own. It is not surprising that young people had better experiences at these hearings when there were fewer people present and when they genuinely felt that those responsible were listening to them. That truly is the crux of the of the issue for children being taken into care. Throughout the process, they need to be listened to and their feedback needs to be properly considered in order to ensure that, when decisions are made on taking children into care, the voices of those who are affected most are those that are given the highest priority. The newly established children’s hearings improvement partnership will, I hope, take this feedback on board, to improve the process. The Scottish Government is working to strike a balance on permanence decisions and, while results might not be immediate, and we rely on the responses of other individuals and organisations, I believe that we will have a bill that results in a much more considerate and empathetic care system for children who are taken into care.

How will the new national qualifications enable young people to develop the skills that they need for moving into further education, employment or training?

I am delighted to speak about the bill. I am a member of the Education and Culture Committee, so I have been very much involved with the bill. As Stewart Maxwell said, the committee agreed on the basic principles of the bill, and it is evident that there is widespread support from children’s charities and public bodies. Barnardo’s Scotland, in its written submission to the committee, said: “This Bill has the potential to be one of the most far-reaching and influential bills considered in this session of the Parliament. At the heart of the Bill is a vision that Barnardo’s strongly shares—making Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up.” I think that we can all subscribe to that. We must ensure that we do not lose sight of the fact that the bill is about protecting vulnerable children. We must put that at the heart of all our arguments. I have been struck by the level of support that the named person approach received in the Government’s consultation. I note that 72 per cent of respondents supported the idea of providing a named person for all children and young people under the age of 18. It is also worth looking at the evidence from a survey that Children 1st carried out, which received 117 responses from kinship carers and support groups. Children 1st found that 90 per cent of respondents thought that every child in Scotland should have a named person, and that some 78 per cent thought that having a named person would have been beneficial to them and their families. In this instance, we have a ready-made example to look at. In 2010, Highland Council successfully put the named person approach into practice as part of its getting it right for every child approach. In its evidence to the Education and Culture Committee, that council highlighted the fact that the named person approach has led to a clear process for ensuring that relevant information is passed to the correct person, in contrast to what happened under the previous system, in which information was bounced around various agencies in the hope that it would get to the relevant organisation at some stage. The consequence has been earlier support to, and more effective intervention for, children. Getting that support to a child usually means that a successful outcome is more likely. We therefore have irrefutable proof that the named person approach can be successful if it is done right. It has the evidence to back up its success and it has widespread support, and it is an important element of the bill. On childcare, I fully support an increase in free nursery provision from 475 hours to 600 hours for three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. That will benefit 120,000 children throughout Scotland and will mean an increase of 45 per cent in free nursery hours provision since the SNP came to power in 2007. Perhaps Cara Hilton should reflect on that fact. I feel that there is more to be done on that issue, but the Government has, with the powers that it has, acted and provided more support for families than any Government here to date has. I cannot help but consider the countless other things that could be done with the powers of independence. With those powers, we could work to ensure that there is further support for parents and their children. Scottish Government estimates suggest that Westminster welfare reform will put 50,000 children in poverty by 2020. It is time that we took control of our own affairs in order to protect our young people from Westminster. I particularly welcome the First Minister’s statement at the SNP conference. He said: “I believe a transformational shift towards childcare should be one of the first tasks of an independent Scotland.” I also noted with interest his announcement that the Council of Economic Advisers has been asked to analyse the social and economic implications of raising levels of childcare in an independent Scotland. I want to highlight the issue of kinship carers. The kinship care order, which is included in the bill, will provide great support for kinship carers. I am pleased to note that the Scottish Government is currently reviewing the financial support for kinship carers in order to address inconsistencies across the country.

Again, I refer to the Children 1st survey, which shows that 60 per cent of kinship carers thought that a kinship care order would be a good thing. A further 27 per cent wanted more information. It was no surprise that 60 per cent said that they would apply for a kinship care order. We must remember that, before the SNP’s election victory in 2007, there was no support for kinship carers in Scotland and that, since 1997, successive Governments at Westminster have failed to consider the needs of children in kinship care through the benefits system. I am proud that, in the previous parliamentary session, the Government launched the Looked After Children (Scotland) Regulations 2009, which allowed local authorities to give vital financial support to kinship carers, but I am deeply concerned that the Westminster Government is threatening to undermine the support that the Scottish Government provides. I am running short of time, so I will go quickly to the end of my speech. It seems to be self-evident that being proactive is always better than being reactive. Preventative spending will help us to ensure that our children get a better start in life right from the beginning, and it provides added benefit in that it helps to ensure greater value for the public purse. Spending now should always reduce spending later. The bill is an important milestone in achieving better outcomes for our children. I commend the Scottish Government and my colleagues in the Education and Culture Committee for the huge amount of work that has been done and for bringing the bill before Parliament.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it had with the new US ambassador to the United Kingdom on his recent visit to the Parliament. (S4O-02574)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that maintaining strong external relations is fundamental to the success of an independent Scotland?

9. To ask the Scottish Government when it will implement its plans to abolish corroboration in criminal cases. (S4O-02510)

Why does the Scottish Government consider it important to abolish the requirement now?

Coal is certainly no stranger to my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, where a proud tradition of coal mining goes back centuries. Coal was the economic lifeblood of the area until the 1980s, when Margaret Thatcher destroyed our coal industry and devastated our coal communities. Over the years, I have spoken to many ex-miners and listened to their always interesting and sometimes hair-raising tales of what life in the pits was really like. After a while, I can almost begin to believe that I have experienced the undoubted camaraderie and the ever-present danger of the day’s work. Coal mining was never a safe occupation, as the risk of injury and even death was a constant companion down the pits. Today’s debate is on the opencast mines that are the successors, as it were, of the old deep pits, although it sometimes seems that we are moving backwards many years in time to a period when shallow opencast was common. Inevitably, much of today’s discussion is on liability for the restoration works at the end of the life of the opencast mine, but there are also other aspects to consider. First, I congratulate the minister on the work that has been done so far to protect and preserve employment. In these days of recession, every job is a prisoner. The work of PACE in particular appears to have been very effective. I have no doubt that every opportunity has been taken to save jobs in what were exceptional circumstances, but we must look forward to the future to ensure that the jobs are still there in 20 or 30 years’ time. How to preserve a sustainable coal-mining industry in Scotland for the long term is a formidable challenge, particularly pending the implementation of real clean coal technology, including carbon capture. The key issue in considering the sustainability of the industry is the glut of cheap coal on the international market. The economics surrounding what is a relatively inefficient and crude means of extracting fuel from the ground are at the moment uncertain. Coal can be produced much more cheaply in Poland and South Africa. Most recently, the collapse of the coal industry in Scotland is linked to fracking in America. The resulting surplus in energy supplies has caused a collapse in the demand for coal and the flooding of the UK market and others with cheap American coal that the Americans cannot sell in their home market. Fracking is in the process of being licensed in the UK by the Westminster Government, which controls the licences. My understanding is that a general licence to frack in the North Sea is in process. Leaving aside my particular dismay at that development, let us continue to focus on the economics of coal. Fracking destroyed the viability of the coal industry in America by flooding the market with relatively cheap fuel. Can fracking in the UK have a different end result? Will there not also be a flood of cheap fuel into the UK market? Longannet might close in 2020, so where will the coal industry sell its bulk product in Scotland?

I am not saying that cheaper energy is a bad thing for the economy in general, but we are discussing the coal industry and its future. Clearly, the price of energy is a key factor in that discussion. There are uses for coal and its by-products other than as a bulk product for Longannet power station, but nothing that would support the cost of opencast pits. To survive, the coal industry needs a long-term plan that goes beyond looking at its current extraction opportunities. I am pleased that the minister is realistically engaging with stakeholders to find a viable way forward. Another important issue to consider—or, more correctly, other important stakeholders to consider—is the local communities in which such developments operate. In my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, there is widespread and well-organised opposition to opencast coal mining. I have to say that I am sympathetic to the arguments against having such projects close to communities. Another real challenge for the industry and the planning authorities is to reassure communities on the well-documented health concerns. Considerable evidence exists to show that people living in the close vicinity of such a development suffer from a higher level of respiratory ailments than those elsewhere. Studies in Douglasdale between 2004 and 2009 showed that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in affected areas affects 2.7 per cent of the population compared to the UK average of 1.5 per cent. That cannot but be a concern, and it needs to be addressed as part of the engagement. Many of my colleagues in the Parliament share my concern about the threat to the restoration of opencast coal sites. In my constituency, I have an example of a well-restored site at part of the Shewington works, but I now fear that the remainder of the site will not receive the same treatment. Like many, I am shocked by the possibility that companies might be able to walk away from the liability to restore worked areas, given that planning permission and community support were conditional on such works taking place. It is difficult to believe that the courts would support a proposition that is so little in the public interest—

I will be, Presiding Officer. That proposition might well create an unwelcome precedent. Let us hope that the appeal that was heard last week reverses the decision, because otherwise the impact will be—

Very well, Presiding Officer. The action that the Scottish Government has taken to create the restoration bonds working group is genuinely welcome. In the long term, such restoration works will undoubtedly create employment and do a creditable job. However, the documented shortfalls in the bonds that have previously been provided by opencast operators leave cause for concern that local authorities, communities and the Government might be left with an unwelcome and expensive legacy of the opencast coal industry. There is no doubt in my mind that the industry needs better regulation, for its own sake as much as for the communities within which it seeks to operate. Better compliance monitoring at sites and, for once, an enforcement policy that has teeth would make a huge difference. I firmly believe that the Scottish Government is doing the right thing by engaging with the industry and other stakeholders to preserve jobs and to consider a sustainable future for the industry. For my part, I want to see a continuing and flourishing coal industry in Scotland that respects and works with local communities. I commend the minister and the Scottish Government for their work on the issue to date.

Changes in the baseline data mean that Scotland is now trying to cut emissions by more than was the case from the original baseline when we passed the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. What can the Scottish Government do to highlight to our neighbours in the EU that Scotland has actually increased its ambitions for tackling climate change?

I am concerned that Mr Findlay’s amendments 25, 26, 28, 30, 60 and 61 remove the stated intention regarding staff representation on the board of assigned colleges. Mr Findlay proposes to increase the number of members of the board who are elected by trade unions to two while alternative representation from teaching staff and non-teaching staff seems to be eliminated. In some colleges, now or in the future, there might be more than two trade union or staff associations represented, while in others there might only be one. In such cases, how will the proposed trade union representatives be determined? It also seems to be entirely possible that, under the existing proposals, staff representatives could well be trade union or staff association members. Nothing seems to exclude that possibility. I struggle, therefore, to see the need for Mr Findlay’s amendments.

What opportunities are there to focus on and develop the transferable skills of workers who are affected by the collapse of Scottish Coal?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage over-25s who are unemployed to pursue further education. (S4O-02137)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming the latest employment statistics, which show headline employment rising by 54,000 in the three-month period January to March 2013? Does he believe that the biggest risk to rising employment is Westminster?

Will the minister join me in welcoming the fact that youth unemployment has fallen by 27,000 over the past year and has remained lower in Scotland than in the UK? Does she agree that there is evidence that the Scottish Government’s action on youth unemployment is having an impact?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to improve the treatment of type 2 diabetes. (S4O-02085)

What steps are being taken to ensure that there is a consistent approach to the treatment of type 2 diabetes across Scotland’s 14 health boards?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact it expects the increase in air passenger duty to have on the coming tourist season. (S4O-02065)

Does the minister agree that it is perfectly clear that only with full control over our economy can we hope to manage important potential tax barriers to tourism, such as air passenger duty?

I apologise for having a rather croaky voice, Presiding Officer. The bill is important. I believe that the education sector is taking a serious view of the proposals and is engaging positively with the Scottish Government in seeking an effective outcome. There are still matters to be clarified, as Stewart Maxwell highlighted in his speech, but that is to be expected with such a comprehensive and necessary piece of legislation. There is clearly a requirement to cut costs in the light of Westminster’s proposed budget cut, but it is clearly possible to create efficiencies that will deliver better and more targeted services to students. That is rightly where the bill’s focus is: positive steps to create positive outcomes for students. For me, one of the bill’s most important elements is that it will widen access for students from disadvantaged backgrounds. As someone who could have benefited from that, I welcome it. Progress has been too slow to ensure that students from poorer backgrounds attend university. In the past nine years, participation by students from disadvantaged areas has increased by only 1 per cent, which is a clear indication that the current process is not working as it should. The bill will ensure that all universities will make progress on widening access, with £29 million funding each year and 1,700 extra places.

That is a good point by Margo MacDonald. Indeed, I think that she, I and others have benefited in the past in that regard. The NUS Scotland president, Robin Parker, told the Education and Culture Committee: “A year ago, it would have taken 40 years if things had carried on at the current rate.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 1988.] He also stated that the “legislation must happen”. I would be shocked if Opposition parties wished that proposal to be put at risk. I am pleased that a cap for RUK tuition fees is being put in place. That will help to manage the existing and inevitable marketisation of the education sector, and ensure that students are not disadvantaged and do not face fees that are above the level of the tuition-fee loan that is available to them. I note that the universities have indicated that fees are substantially lower in Scotland than they are in the rest of the UK. Governance, both in universities and colleges, has been carefully and fully explored by the Education and Culture Committee. Liz Smith in particular made a number of thoughtful and useful contributions in that regard. Concerns have been raised about the subject of responsible autonomy and whether the Scottish Government might seek to erode the independence of education institutions. However, the bill is not about the Government taking control of universities. A Scottish code of conduct is being developed that will be given legislative support and will recognise the important principle of responsible autonomy. We are investing record amounts in the higher education sector, so it is right that we demand the highest standards of accountability. The bill supports and reinforces plans to reform the college sector. Quite simply, regionalisation makes sense, and most education institutions support the bill. It is perhaps appropriate to quote a few of the comments that have been made in that regard. Adam Smith College stated: “The Board ... of Adam Smith College ... generally supports the reform programme as it applies to Further Education”. Edinburgh College stated: “We are supportive of the aims of the Bill.” North Highland College stated: “Broadly we support the regionalisation agenda.” Edinburgh University Student Association welcomed “much of what is included in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill.” Families Outside said that it “welcomes the aims of the Bill”. East Dunbartonshire Council said that it welcomes “the bill’s intention that educational provisions would be delivered at the local level as part of a coherent regional offer.” From those quotations, it is clear that although some stakeholders were looking for clarification on aspects of the bill, its aims and broad approach have been welcomed and supported. I believe that the Scottish Government’s support to colleges, despite unprecedented budget cuts by Westminster, is commendable. The 2013-14 budget will deliver an additional £61 million over two years, thereby setting the funding floor of £522 million, which colleges must welcome in the current tight financial situation. The Government is investing £2 billion over the four years to 2014-15. College resource budgets are higher than they were in every year under Labour. The fall of 4.4 per cent in the college budget in 2012-13 and 2014-15 is hugely less than the fall in comparable budgets in England, which have suffered a 15.7 per cent fall. The scaremongering by Labour over so-called college waiting lists is reprehensible. Labour’s playing politics with our education system is wholly unjustified. Labour claimed that there were some 21,000 students on college waiting lists, despite the cabinet secretary clearly setting out the issues to do with data collection. Last week, the audit of college waiting lists that the cabinet secretary requested found that only 4 per cent of the 21,000 students are on waiting lists. The Scottish Government is to be congratulated on introducing the bill. I look forward to the bill’s progress.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it will strengthen the shift towards sustainable and renewable energy use in the manufacturing sector. (S4O-01951)

Does the minister agree that clear benchmarks are essential to measuring success in transitioning to energy efficiency? Has the Scottish Government considered the type of measurements that should be used to track positive shifts towards clean energy?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it will take to improve the quality and consistency of sentencing and enhance the availability of prisoner rehabilitation programmes. (S4O-01900)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the levels of recidivism among male and female offenders are too high and that there is a need to be open to more innovative methods of rehabilitation in order to decrease the likelihood of reoffending?

What policies will be brought into place to ensure that NHS boards will share good practice on enhancing performance reporting to monitor patients and waiting lists?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what events it will hold to promote the year of natural Scotland. (S4O-01796)

Does the minister agree that having themed years, such as the year of natural Scotland, the year of creative Scotland and the year of homecoming, brings greater interest to Scotland from the international tourism market?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the results of the Bank of Scotland’s December 2012 survey of purchasing managers. (S4O-01724)

I was pleased with the news of positive growth to start the new year.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, despite the negativity of the no campaign’s rhetoric on an independent Scottish economy, companies are still actively investing in Scotland?

I frequently listen to the Opposition parties seemingly minimising the impact of Westminster budget cuts on the Scottish economy and the consequent pressures that are placed on the Scottish budget. The Scottish Government’s ability to maintain spending levels across the board at the same levels as hitherto is simply not possible. We cannot spend more than the allowance that we receive from Westminster. The Opposition parties make a lot of noise when there is a reluctant reduction in funding for sometimes otherwise worthy projects, but they give no serious indication of where they would propose to impose cuts to retain any particular service above another. Today’s contribution by Labour has been no different—clearly, it is simply a press soundbite. Like most MSPs, I abhor the approach that the Westminster Government has taken to imposing budget cuts on the Scottish economy. Taken alongside the so-called welfare reforms, budget cuts will have the long-term effect of draining liquidity and prosperity from the Scottish economy. The massive reduction in spending power that affects the Government, councils and private individuals hardly creates an environment in which private enterprise can flourish and generate the jobs that we very much need. We are all going to be very much poorer when this long period of badly-thought-out austerity eventually ends, following a yes vote in 2014, but no doubt we can consider that financial legacy a dividend from the union. It is hard to contemplate the extent of the economic illiteracy of the Westminster Government, which seems not to be prepared to listen to either domestic or international wisdom. This will undoubtedly end in tears. Returning to the Scottish financial situation, I commend the Scottish Government for producing, against all the odds, a budget that is focused on jobs and economic growth above all. I am particularly pleased that a strong emphasis has been placed on housing. The Government promised to build 30,000 affordable homes during this term of office. The allocation of an additional £50 million in the budget promises that that pledge will be delivered. The three-year housing budget has increased by almost £200 million over the past year, with additional investment increasing by 30 per cent the funding set out in the 2011 strategic spending review.

Yes. According to the figures that I have, the three-year housing budget has increased by almost £200 million, with an increase in the additional investment. While I applaud the Scottish Government’s efforts to stimulate growth and create jobs, I can only regret that it does not have the powers fully to manage the economy. Those powers, alas, remain in the hands of a Westminster elite that does not seem to understand how to use them to the benefit of the United Kingdom economy. I believe that responsibility for every Scottish job that is lost, every Scottish company that closes down and every shop that vanishes from our high streets lies firmly in the hands of Westminster. A number of other countries are gradually coming out of recession. We are not, and we now appear to be heading for a triple-dip recession, which will create further hardship and distress. I am appalled at the prospect of austerity measures continuing until 2017-18, which represents a historically unprecedented eight years of cuts. No one knows what the end result will be. All I know is that the most vulnerable in our society will suffer the most and bear the heaviest burden. I frequently listen to the Labour Party here in Parliament calling on spending to be maintained or increased in certain areas, despite the serious reduction in funding that we have sustained. That always seemed a rather odd position to take, given that it is well understood that the budget cuts are from Westminster and the Scottish Government has to reduce spending as a result. However, when Labour announced its cuts commission, I realised that it proposed to fund the additional commitments with the reintroduction of prescription charges, with the abolition of concessionary bus travel, by charging students for education and apparently by pursuing charging for some universal services, including personal care. The Scottish Government’s commitment to maintaining education free at the point of delivery shows a singular commitment to maintaining the strong Scottish tradition of making education available to all people, regardless of whether they can afford to pay. As we well know, education forms a significant part of the path out of poverty. I am probably a typical example. I took full advantage of the free education that was available. My father was a hospital porter and money was a fairly scarce commodity in our house. The long-term economic and social benefit to Scotland of an educated and skilled population should not be underestimated. Between 2007 and the end of the spending review period, the Government will have invested £5 billion in colleges, which is some 45 per cent more in cash terms than in the two terms of the previous Administration. Turning to the health part of the budget, I note that health board funding will increase by 3.3 per cent in real terms in 2013-14, which means some £9.1 billion in that year, while £390 million will be invested in improving NHS buildings and equipment. There will be £80 million for the integration of health and social care services and £133 million investment for sport and the Commonwealth games in 2013-14. Labour’s love affair with PFI has left this Government and local authorities throughout Scotland with a legacy of debt that our children will inherit—another Gordon Brown success story. I have touched on only a few key points, but it is clear that this budget is the best that can be achieved given the resources being made available to us by Westminster. Until we have full control over our own affairs and can manage our own economy there will always be a limit on the Scottish Government’s ability to reach its high aspirations for the people of Scotland. I commend the Government for this budget.

Let me begin by stating the obvious: water is a basic commodity that is perhaps taken for granted by most residents in Scotland. I certainly have the expectation that, when I turn on the tap, water will flow. There are some people whom I know who take the view that water, by its very nature and origin, should be free and that the imposition of charges by Scottish Water is somehow immoral or improper. However, the water still has to be piped to our houses, the network of pipes and pumping stations has to be maintained, and sewage needs to be piped and treated. None of that would happen without our paying for it to happen. We are fortunate that our major water supplier remains in public ownership, unlike the situation south of the border. It is my belief that that represents a distinct advantage to the residents of Scotland, given the anecdotal evidence that I read about shortages and the failures of the privatised industry in England. The introduction of the bill will help to develop and strengthen Scottish Water’s position as our major supplier of residential and commercial water and the provider of sewage services, and the bill’s vision of Scotland as a hydro nation is an inspirational one. Scottish Water already delivers one of the UK’s biggest investment programmes, against a background of charging the lowest household bills. I am very happy with the Scottish Government’s commitment to keeping this successful and innovative corporation firmly in public ownership. It is worth considering some of the scale and background to the bill. More than 300 companies support the sector in Scotland. In 2008-09, the water supply and waste sub-sector in Scotland was estimated to have a market value of £709 million and to employ 6,200 people. Every day, Scottish Water provides 1.3 billion litres of drinking water through 29,762 miles of pipes and takes away about 839 million litres of waste water through 31,477 miles of sewer pipes—imagine all those pipes under our feet. Scottish Water serves 2.4 million households and 152,000 business premises across Scotland. It must be clear that Scottish Water is a high-performing business by anyone’s standards. That is not a statement that can often be made with confidence in relation to utility companies. It is worth looking at some of the key indicators that support that statement. Drinking water quality is at its highest-ever level—99.86 per cent of samples comply with strict quality standards. Leakage has been reduced by 70 million litres of water a day. Real operating costs have been reduced by 40 per cent since 2002. Can any other company in the water industry approach that? In 2011-12, Scottish Water achieved the highest-ever customer satisfaction score of 83 per cent. In 2011-12, Scottish Water delivered £491 million of investment and, over the past 10 years, £5.5 billion has been invested across Scotland. In 2012-13, the average household annual charge, at £324 per annum, will be £52 lower than the average in England and Wales. That is quite a turnaround—and an improvement on 2002-03, when the average charge was £30 higher than in England and Wales. Those are achievements to applaud and the proposed bill must—and does—support the development of Scottish Water across a number of critical areas. Importantly, the bill places a general duty on the Scottish ministers to actively ensure the development of our water resources. It gives Scottish Water power to control large-scale water abstractions and an obligation to develop its assets, including the generation of renewable energy. The bill allows Scottish Water to place conditions on trade effluent consents, which should improve and control the quality of trade effluent. The bill prohibits the dumping of fat, oil or grease into the public sewer system—we would think that that would be fairly obvious—and it gives additional powers to monitor raw water quality. It allows the Scottish ministers to lend money directly to subsidiaries of Scottish Water or for them to borrow from other sources. It also creates a new system for dealing with temporary water shortages. Those points and the other content of the bill are key to the continued development of a vigorous and modern Scottish Water. I will return to the hydro nation concept that I touched on previously. Scotland could play an increased role internationally. Water scarcity and access to clean water and sanitation are matters of global concern: people in China and India alone make up 50 per cent of the global population without sanitation facilities. The Scottish Government has launched a £3 million climate justice fund to support nations that contribute the least to climate change but feel the worst of its effects. That is all part of our increasing international engagement. In considering all the aspects of the bill, it is clear that the Scottish National Party Government has the vision to make Scotland an effective player on the world stage by using innovation and the resources that our nation has available. This Government extracts the maximum value from our resources while still ensuring that the environment is protected and that individual consumers receive the high-quality service that they have come to expect. We have a beautiful natural heritage, which will be preserved by this Government. Scottish Water has faithfully served consumers as a publicly owned corporation since 2002, lowering the cost to my constituents and the rest of the nation of clean water provision and sewage disposal. The bill better prepares us for the future. Although there were floods in Musselburgh in my constituency last year, I am grateful for the provisions in this bill that will help to manage droughts and water shortages. We never know what the future will bring, but this bill is focused on the future and, most importantly, it ensures that we get the most out of one of our most valuable resources.

What gives the minister greater confidence that we are in a safer position than the Department for Transport?

I am pleased to have been given the opportunity to speak about Skills Development Scotland, and especially the my world of work website. That is an innovative and modern approach to career advice. I enjoyed visiting the website and taking the visual my DNA quiz, which described my aptitudes. I am glad that there are still some options open to me. We never know where we will end up in this fast-moving world. Skills Development Scotland is best placed to make effective changes after successfully delivering 26,427 modern apprenticeships and supporting 165,578 young people through face-to-face careers services, 54,082 active learners through individual learning accounts, and 13,017 individuals dealing with redundancy. That is quite a formidable record. SDS is the key organisation that is driving the modernisation efforts. The availability of professional career guidance, information and advice to anybody who desires it is tremendously important, and the ground-breaking skills website is one of the many ways in which SDS will continue to provide exceptional service. Most important, my world of work, along with the contact centre and face-to-face interviews, will allow SDS greater flexibility in supporting youths and tailoring guidance to the specific needs of individual young people. The modernisation of careers services will assist SDS in providing both quality and quantity of support. Any young person will be able to request a face-to-face appointment with a careers adviser, but it will no longer be the quick, 10-minute appointment of past days. Services will be personalised and focused. No two young people are alike, and planning for their future should not be a cookie-cutter service. Some individuals will need thorough and intensive support. The new range of support options will allow for singular needs to be met. My world of work is available for 24 hours a day, seven days a week. I am always impressed that young people are becoming ever more technologically savvy. Having a cutting-edge careers system—many of our young people have cutting-edge information technology skills—is essential. In fact, it is the only thing that makes sense. I mentioned my visit to the my world of work website. The quiz that I took was only one of many services that are available. Users can plan their careers by looking at a range of information about various training opportunities, including video clips. The site even includes ways to find a job using social media. I imagine that that will appeal well to the Facebook and Twitter generation. Access is increased not only by the site’s being available all the time, but because it allows SDS to reach more people in remote locations. As I said, a higher quality and greater quantity of service will be provided. I have met many young people in secondary schools in my constituency who are determined and have bright futures, and I believe that most young people are like those I have met. That is why the traffic light system makes sense. There will be young people who have a plan in mind and who will use the my world of work tools to further develop their ideas and career goals. The traffic light system enables SDS to provide different levels of support as required. Again, the system has been designed to tailor services better to the needs of individual young people. Any individual can request a face-to-face meeting with a careers adviser, but those who are in the red category and those who are most at risk will receive the attention that they desperately need. No student will be stuck in one category for ever; they are not permanently fixed. Careers services need to be triaged. Those in most need should receive the most personal support, but I doubt that those who are in the red or amber category will have backgrounds that create an environment that enables them to make swift or confident decisions about their future. As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I was pleased to have the opportunity to hear from Skills Development Scotland. It is clear that the new approach is better placed to give everyone the opportunities to succeed. The programme was rolled out only in September this year and, by 31 October, there had been 134,629 registrations, over 70,000 of which were by young people aged 12 to 19. A month later, the total had risen by 11.6 per cent to 150,240 registrations. The programme is in its infancy and, although the number of registrations will certainly increase in the coming months, the success will not be determined immediately—it will be measured by the ability of young people to achieve their desired careers. A record number of pupils—87.2 per cent—are moving on to positive destinations and the Scottish Government is doing everything in its power to tackle youth unemployment. Although our situation might not be as bad as that for our neighbours, such as Spain, where unemployment among under-24s is running at 55.9 per cent, we can all agree that it is too high. The Scottish Government’s opportunities for all initiative gives young people between 16 and 19 a training or education opportunity if they desire one. Between 2007 and the end of the current spending review period, the SNP Government will have invested £5 billion in colleges. The SNP promised to deliver 25,000 modern apprenticeships per year in the current session of Parliament. The target has been exceeded, with 26,427 modern apprenticeships being delivered. Fifty-five per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds are employed, compared to the national average of 51 per cent. Completion rates for modern apprenticeships are at the record level of 75 per cent. The Government is dedicated to providing careers advice and guidance that ensures partnership with organisations that will give high-quality services across a range of careers. That is made evident in the single outcome agreements, which involve working with employers and supporting SDS. It is no longer the case that individuals will be in only one job for a lifetime. We are in the midst of an era of opportunity when changing one’s job stream is the trend, rather than the exception to the rule. Our careers services need to be prepared to help individuals to track their careers through their lifetimes to unleash their potential. SDS and the Scottish Government are doing just that by modernising the current system. I look forward to visiting the schools in my constituency and speaking to young people about the resources that are available to them. I will definitely advise them to take the my DNA quiz, as I have done. I commend it to my fellow MSPs, who might gain an insight into alternative opportunities for the future.

Will the cabinet secretary outline how the draft budget will invest in the college estate in 2013-14?

Will the cabinet secretary outline what impact the public health supplement has had on businesses and how the proceeds from the supplement will be spent in the coming year?

I am happy to be given the opportunity to speak positively about what the Government is doing to protect our further education in the face of Westminster Government cuts. Let us consider some of the positive indicators. The SNP Government has increased baseline college student support by 25 per cent since 2006-07, a rise of £20.5 million from £63.7 million to £84.2 million in 2011-12. The Government is clearly committed and determined to maintain support to further education students, and its actions over the past six years certainly evidence that. In the 2013-14 budget, an additional £11.4 million has been allocated to the student support budget to maintain support at more than £95 million. That is 40 per cent more than during the previous two Administrations. The 2013-14 budget also includes a commitment of an additional £17 million for student support and college places. Of that £17 million, £11 million will be devoted to student support and the remaining £6 million will be for college places. This Administration is protecting student numbers for further education. The Scottish Government will put in place provision for more than 116,000 full-time equivalent students in 2013-14, again maintaining the same numbers as in 2011-12 and 2012-13.

I do not think that anybody is denying that there is an overall budget pressure on further education; in the points that I am making, I am trying to draw out the positive aspects in which the Government is taking specific action to protect students. This year, the Scottish Government has taken major action to reform and improve Scottish colleges. The Government is committed to improving the structure, funding and training opportunities that colleges provide. Our colleges play a vital role in building up people’s aspirations for the future by providing them with crucial life and work skills, and they contribute hugely towards Scotland’s performance in education and, importantly, the economy. To maintain and build on the colleges’ importance, the Scottish Government has set about the structural regionalisation of colleges. Regionalisation within defined regions across Scotland is the best way to achieve improvements in college funding and the quality of our colleges, the provision of high standards of education and training opportunities, and improvements in colleges’ accountability. One of the first examples of a successful merger is that of the newly formed Edinburgh College. I would like to take a moment to praise the previous Jewel and Esk College, which existed in my constituency since 2008 and is now a member of Edinburgh College. I have been very impressed with the efforts and teaching at Jewel and Esk, and I look forward to its continued development as part of the merged college.

I have not spoken to the college unions, but I can quote Jim Ewing, chair of the Edinburgh merger partnership board. He said in The Scotsman: “Working together as one college will provide more opportunities for students, staff and the community, and reflects the growing desire of the Scottish Government for colleges to work together to deliver a smarter, more economical model going forward.” The three combined colleges all agreed that a merger would create more opportunities for Edinburgh and the Lothians by delivering efficient services to students and opportunities for the new college as an employer across the region. Edinburgh College will develop a broader and deeper curriculum to better support individuals, communities and businesses. The proposals and guiding principles that the Scottish Government has put forward for post-16 education reform have been strongly supported by the three individual colleges and are now supported by Edinburgh College and its stakeholders. Those who are truly involved in the reforms have confidence in the Government, regardless of doomsayers.

I think that I have taken enough interventions for the moment. Edinburgh College is now the largest further education institution in Scotland and among the largest in the UK. It is better placed to serve the economic and skill needs of the growing Lothians population, and it will be no surprise that the first of the new college’s key principles is to put students first. The Scottish Government, too, puts students first. The opportunities for all initiative is now fully operational, offering 16 to 19-year-olds a place in education or training. I am eagerly anticipating the progress that Edinburgh College will make, and I am pleased that it is leading the implementation of the necessary reforms. The Government has continued to support further education, despite the unparalleled cuts from Westminster. The regional reforms are specifically designed to make colleges more efficient and responsive to the needs of students and those who will eventually hire them. Colleges will also be able to focus on how they can improve the local economy in these times of UK cuts and fiscal austerity, creating business innovation centres and working with local businesses to forge close links and ensure relevance of outcome from the colleges in terms of students having relevant courses and training to fit them for the commercial world. Political point scoring at this point is not helpful, when we are dealing with the fall-out from Westminster-driven cuts. [Laughter.]

Regardless of what some people might think, the situation is the result of Westminster cuts. I am sure that those who are involved, whether they are teachers, students or college staff, are tired of negativity. I applaud the cabinet secretary and the Government for doing a remarkable job protecting Scottish further education in a situation of ever-reducing resources.

As a business tourist for 30 years, I can say that I have considerable experience of business tourism. In fact, given the amount of business travel that I undertook in the past, I could easily have qualified as a secret shopper. As for how pleasurable my experience as a business tourist was, I have to say that things were very mixed. Perhaps I can share with the chamber some of the key factors that I and my then colleagues valued on a visit. Given that no one wanted to waste any spare time, which was always precious and at a premium, we first of all preferred a hotel in the centre of town but not too far from the airport for better access to facilities. Secondly, we liked to have quality restaurants and pubs nearby. Thirdly, we liked tourist attractions to be available. It was really good if they were close by, so that we could take a few photographs to prove to our spouses that we had actually been there. Fourthly, we looked for availability of tourist shops or shops with local content, because we needed to bring back some tourist tat for spouses and family. As that was often done somewhat hurriedly, a good choice was important. Scotland would have been a popular choice for a visit, as it ticks all the basic boxes. It is really unfortunate that only once in all those years did I attend an event in Edinburgh—and, alas, as I was already living here, it was not the same. Business tourists tend to spend more money than leisure tourists. Because they are on expenses for accommodation, transport and food, they feel less inhibited by costs. They also tend to be less discriminating because they have less time to look around and to decide on purchases or which local destinations to visit. As a result, it is not surprising that the spend by business tourists is more than one and a half times that of leisure tourists. Scotland benefits from business tourism by £878 million per annum, which is up an impressive 8 per cent on 2010, and such tourism itself amounts to 20 per cent of the total tourism spend in Scotland. Given that, it is important to understand the drivers behind business tourism, if Scotland is to continue to grow and benefit from the sector. After all, sustainable tourism is a key growth sector for the Scottish Government. To my mind, business tourism has, broadly, two key elements, the first of which relates to conferences and conventions. We need to sell Scotland as a great place to have a conference on the basis of price—given the constraints on company budgets during this period of financial austerity—and on the basis of the personal preferences of those organising and attending. The second element relates to business travellers, who typically extend their visits by a day or two to look around or, at the very least, squeeze out time during the working day to view very local sights. We must invest in both elements, particularly in the main cities—Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen—where business tourists end up. In both key elements, we need to invest in our tourist infrastructure, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government is doing so. I will give some examples. Historic Scotland offers its historic facilities for hire as event centres. That has been happening for many years, and business tourism has been targeted since 1998. Historic Scotland has consistently invested in those facilities. VisitScotland promotes Scotland as a venue for conferences and conventions and, in 2010-11, generated business to the value of £121 million. It has also benefited from the new conference bid fund that Fergus Ewing announced in March 2012. The fund offers £2 million over the next three years and aims to make Scotland more competitive in the international conference market. EventScotland promotes sporting and cultural events and invested £3.7 million in the events industry in 2010-11. That generated some £57.5 million in additional revenue for our economy. Scottish Enterprise gives advice and support to more than 100 key tourism businesses. I welcome the investment and effort that are being focused on what is an important sector. I have already touched on the fact that we are in the midst of a period of financial austerity. Despite that, it is encouraging to see some indications of continuing recovery in the business tourism market—even if it is slow and a little uneven. There is little doubt that the recovery may remain fragile until such time as the general economic situation shows more solid signs of improvement. Cost may remain a key factor and margins may suffer as a result. Therefore, it is important that the Scottish market’s stakeholders continue to provide good value for money and to invest in the sector. We have many competitors in the market—the rest of the UK, the USA, Germany and Spain are the main ones. However, Scotland can and will compete successfully. Our track record in the tourism industry is second to none. When times are hard, there are challenges, but there are also opportunities. If we continue to keep a strong focus on the important business tourism sector, Scotland will continue to prosper and expand as a destination for conferences, conventions and business travellers in general. Scotland has a great deal to offer delegates and business visitors. It has world-class venues, spectacular scenery, food and drink that is of fantastic quality, historic sites, golf and much more. I commend the work that has been done and is being done, and look forward to seeing the success that those efforts deserve.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when the economic benefits of minimum pricing of alcohol will be evident. (S4O-01363)

Last year, nearly £5 million was spent in Midlothian alone on social care as a result of alcohol-related harm. Does the cabinet secretary agree that minimum pricing—while essential—is only the beginning in tackling the binge-drinking pandemic in this country?

Youth unemployment in Scotland is running at 24.3 per cent, which is clearly far too high a level. It is little comfort that we are doing better than some of our European neighbours, such as Spain, where under-24 unemployment is running at a painful 53.27 per cent. The recession that is the primary cause of unacceptable employment levels represents a threat and an opportunity. There is an opportunity, because the recession forces us to align our training so that what we do produces the outcomes that are anticipated—the key outcome being a productive job. The Government says in “Working for Growth” that the employability partnerships that were created in 2006 have advanced hugely and are a key element in efforts to develop employability. The approach has been strengthened through the use of single outcome agreements, sustainable procurement and community benefit clauses. More use could be made of community benefit clauses in public sector contracts to secure local training and employment. Since 2008, when the Scottish Government introduced those clauses, great progress has been made but, from my experience as a councillor, I do not think that some local councils are sufficiently confident about the details to make full use of the opportunity. The UK’s Government’s austerity budget is working against Scotland. With full fiscal powers we could increase capital investment, which would boost job availability, and the Scottish Government has repeatedly called on the UK Government to increase capital investment to grow the economy. That view is supported by a growing list of eminent economists, who are also calling for capital investment. I cannot understand why the UK Government lacks basic economic competence in that respect. There has never been a recession in which a country has budget-cut its way back to prosperity. That approach failed in the early 1930s and it is failing again. We need to introduce capital projects and help our economy back on to a firm footing.

The cuts that we are suffering in Scotland are instigated by the Westminster Government. As I clearly said, no country that has had its budget cut has been able to grow its way back into prosperity. We need capital projects that put us back on a proper footing and enable us to expand our economy. We need to grow our way back into prosperity. The finance secretary’s draft budget has made provision for £180 million of investment in construction, skills and the green economy, with an additional £18 million for skills training support for 10,000 opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises and £17 million for college education. There has clearly been some success in the Scottish Government’s strategy: in 2010/11, a record 87.2 per cent of pupils leaving school achieved positive destinations, compared with 85.2 per cent the previous year. Modern apprenticeships are also at a record high, with 26,427 delivered at a cost of £72 million, against a target of 25,000 for each year of this parliamentary session. The Scottish Government’s opportunities for all initiative guarantees training or education opportunities for all young people between the ages of 16 and 19, should they need one. A key way to achieve the necessary outcomes is the involvement of business, both local and national, in designing and implementing training and educational courses. With that approach, we can be confident that our young people will receive appropriate training and education that is meaningful to getting a job. There are encouraging signs that the partnership between businesses and those delivering training and education is increasingly productive and successful although, as always, more needs to be done. Scotland’s economy benefits from improving productivity growth through innovation. There is a strong culture of collaboration and knowledge exchange between universities, colleges, and businesses. I am excited at the prospect of innovation centres being extended across Scotland. I recently had the pleasure of attending the launch of such a centre at Queen Margaret University, where the university has worked in partnership with East Lothian business gateway to set up the centre. I look forward to watching the centre’s progress in the months to come. It is clear that there is no one road to successfully achieving employability. Much depends on the individual and their personal goals and abilities, and on the market. However, it not just young people who need support to improve their employability; there is a major job to be done in helping women into work. Childcare plays a major part in that and the Scottish Government is committed to transforming childcare. The children and young people bill will increase the amount of free nursery education from 475 to 600 hours for three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. That is the best free nursery package in the UK, but it should by no means be the final aspiration. We must seek nursery provision of a Scandinavian quality; unfortunately, we are unlikely to reach that level without having control over our own affairs or the management our own economy. Female employment figures are encouraging: between May and July the number of employed women increased by 12,000; that coincides with a 7,000 fall in female unemployment. There are many strands to employability: there is provision for training and education, which the Government can achieve; there are delivery mechanisms, which universities, colleges, schools and a variety of training facilities can achieve; there are partnership and co-operation initiatives, which business can achieve; there is flexibility and a willingness to succeed, which the prospective employee can achieve; and, most important, there are shovel-ready projects totalling £300 million, which the UK Government can and must agree to, so that we can make real progress on all fronts.

Even for someone who is a climate change doubter, creating a cleaner and healthier environment for ourselves and our children must be a commendable goal. Likewise, we are all acutely aware of the fact that fossil fuels are not a long-term solution to our energy needs. The green bus fund is investing in public transport while delivering jobs for the green economy and lowering carbon emissions. The SNP has adopted an ambitious climate change target to reduce emissions by 42 per cent by 2020. That is not going to happen without investment in the industry, which is exactly what the green bus fund is achieving. Low-carbon buses produce 30 per cent less greenhouse gas emissions than equivalent diesel buses do. Indeed, Lothian Buses confirms that the double-deck hybrids that it purchased using the fund are producing a 56.7 per cent improvement in fuel efficiency compared with the diesel vehicles that were previously used. So far, the green bus fund has allowed for some 74 eco-friendly buses to be purchased by operators, and the third round of the fund will allow investment in a further 40. The third funding round of £3 million for the green bus fund was launched in August 2012. The Government’s support is enabling further developments and improvements to technology at Alexander Dennis Ltd, which is a world-class company that manufactures these vehicles. The current hybrid buses show fuel and CO2 savings of around 60 per cent, but it is expected that the next generation of hybrid buses, which are scheduled to be introduced in 2013, will show fuel and CO2 savings much nearer to 70 per cent. That is good news for the bus operators, whose overheads are reduced, good news for the environment and good news for jobs and the economy. It is also good news for commuters. Most of us have stood at bus stops, breathing in the fumes from diesel buses. Those fumes will now be reduced and our health—and our children’s health—can only be improved. The good news for commuters also lies in the fact that new modern buses are being introduced to replace older, less comfortable and less efficient buses. Road transport is one of the biggest producers of greenhouse gases and any initiatives that help to reduce its emissions must be a move in the right direction. The First Minister has stated that the green economy will be the “source of Scotland’s reindustrialisation” and it is clear to most that it is indeed being that. Some of the greatest opportunities are appearing as a result of developments in the green economy. Low-carbon and green jobs now number 77,700 in Scotland, which outstrips the motor trade and the telecommunications sector and challenges the leadership of the finance sector, which delivers 86,800 jobs. Scottish Enterprise has estimated that jobs in Scotland’s low-carbon sector could grow by 4 per cent per annum between now and 2020, which would mean that the number of people employed in that industry would rise to 130,000. All of that is good news for Scotland. The green bus fund fits well with other green initiatives and forms part of the larger green investment package, which will invest £30 million in energy efficiency to tackle fuel poverty. Perhaps at this point I can make the case for my old favourite, geothermal power, to form part of the green mix. I have previously raised the opportunities that we have to significantly increase the use of geothermal energy. Across much of Scotland we have flooded mine workings, which are regarded as a threat. In fact, they represent an opportunity in our old industrial communities to develop alternative energy sources, using a tried and tested process that needs little in the way of development to deliver benefits to local communities. I know that the Scottish Government is looking into those possibilities. The transition into a low-carbon economy is absolutely necessary, but it can be painful, even when it is adopted with enthusiasm. In that, Scotland is already leading the way. We may be a small nation, but we are ambitious. In the grand scheme of things we may be a tiny producer of CO2 and greenhouse gases—China, America and India, for example, dwarf us in production of polluting gases—but each and every one of us has a responsibility to work towards the low-carbon economy goal. To quote an old Scots saying, mony a mickle maks a muckle. By taking the lead and tackling the challenge now, we are laying the foundation for Scotland as a competitive 21st century economy, which will be all the sounder and stronger for having taken hard decisions early and will gain the advantages of having done so while other nations catch up. The Scottish Government is to be congratulated on its progress and its commitment, as represented by the green bus fund.

Does the cabinet secretary intend to continue the living wage arrangements for the duration of the spending review? Will he uprate it in line with the living wage campaign’s recommendations?

Although I welcome Labour’s motion on rail investment, I am frankly surprised at its content. It appears, quite simply, to be inaccurate and misleading. Which part of the 2011 infrastructure development plan has not been understood? That plan estimated that the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme would cost £1.1 billion, and specified that the programme would be delivered in phases. That seems to be perfectly clear to me. Why, then, is there astonishment when the current investments come in at £650 million? That forms part of a £5 billion programme of investment in Scotland’s railways for 2014-19.

I repeat that the 2011 infrastructure development plan was quite clear that the programme would be delivered in phases. The SNP record on rail investment is one of which we can all be proud. Despite the savage budget cuts that were imposed by Westminster—even Labour would agree with us in condemning those cuts—the Government has invested £2.6 billion since 2007 and has funded 30,000 extra seats every day. More people than ever are using the railways and punctuality and reliability are at record highs. Surely we can all celebrate the successful projects that have already been undertaken, such as the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link, which was delivered on time and on budget in 2011, and is the longest new rail line in Scotland in a century. What about the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which opened in 2008? Passenger levels are now at 400 per cent of the original estimates, with some 400,000 passengers. What about the seven new stations that have been completed since 2007? What about investment in 38 new electric trains, which add 7,500 passenger seats to the network each day? What about the Glasgow to Kilmarnock infrastructure improvements, which is a £28 million project that was delivered on time and within budget in 2009? In 2012-13, the Government will invest more than £1 billion on public transport and other sustainable transport. We are focused on rail transport, but other initiatives complement that investment. Over the past two years, the Government has invested £8 million in electric vehicles and infrastructure, thereby allowing the public sector to purchase around 270 low-carbon vehicles. There is also the £50 million future transport fund, which will support cycling infrastructure, electric vehicle infrastructure and continuation of the freight facilities grant. Concessionary bus travel has been extended to disabled veterans. I state emphatically that the rumours that are spread periodically about abolition of concessionary bus travel are complete nonsense and cause unnecessary worry to our senior citizens. In 2011, the Government awarded grants through the Scottish green bus fund that amounted to £4.4 million, which allowed five bus operators to purchase 48 new vehicles. In 2012, a further £1.8 million will allow the purchase of a further 26 new vehicles. There are also the new projects that are coming along as part of rail 2014, including the £30 million station investment fund to build new stations and improve existing stations, £100 million to secure and develop the sleeper services, and £0.25 million for wi-fi on trains, primarily between Glasgow and Edinburgh.

Yes.

I do not recognise the changes that the member seems to think have occurred to the EGIP project. It is clearly being delivered in phases. There is every proof that the Government is committed to public transport in general and to rail transport in particular.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact on the economy would be if the shovel-ready projects proposed to the UK Government were approved. (S4O-01253)

In my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, even a small proportion of the work related to the £300 million of shovel-ready projects would help to kick-start the local economy, which relies substantially on construction-related projects for its prosperity. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Westminster Government are significantly failing the people of Scotland in refusing to back the Scottish Government’s efforts to maintain employment, jobs and prosperity in Scotland?

It is clear that the policies of the United Kingdom Government are failing to deliver the economic benefits that the chancellor, George Osborne, anticipates. I am appalled at the lack of basic economic literacy that underpins the extraordinary assumption that cutting budgets year after year means that the private sector will magically become an engine that, on its own, will pull our economy out of recession and back into growth. The failure of the UK Government to competently manage the economy is in stark contrast to the efforts of the Scottish Government, which despite its limited powers—

The IMF has suggested that the Government should focus on temporary tax cuts and greater infrastructural spending. That is exactly what the Scottish Government has been attempting to do. The Government has done all that it can to boost growth within the means of a budget that has been savagely cut by Westminster. It has been remarkably successful in that effort. However, the austerity agenda in London is harming Scotland. The Scottish budget will fall by 11 per cent between 2011-12 and 2014-15. That is a significant decrease, which will impact on the Scottish Government’s ability to respond to the needs of the economy and of the people of this country. It is clear that no one will escape Westminster’s cuts, or at least not until 2014. Why did the Prime Minister ask last February for a list of shovel-ready projects when nothing more has been heard? Those projects are worth £300 million and each £100 million would support 1,400 jobs across the Scottish economy. That in itself is hardly a radical plan B, but it would be a start. I return to the UK Government’s austerity budget. When the Office for Budget Responsibility started in June 2010, it predicted growth of approximately 2.8 per cent as a result of the austerity measures. That has since been reduced to 0.8 per cent. The OECD has also downgraded growth, predicting that output would fall by 0.7 per cent in 2012, compared with its previous forecast in May that the economy would expand by 0.5 per cent. In August, the Office for National Statistics reported that UK GDP fell by 0.7 per cent between April and June this year. In July, the IMF downgraded the 2012 growth predictions to 0.2 per cent. The ONS figures show that in July the UK borrowed £600 million additional to budget due to lower tax receipts. That is hardly a resounding affirmation of success. We have only to look at the history of recessions in the recent past to know that budget cuts do not defeat a recession or close a yawning gap in tax receipts. Only sustained economic growth can do that, and typically that economic growth is kick-started by bringing forward capital projects scheduled for the future in order to boost growth across the economy. The alternative to that as a means of recovery is to create fiscal drag by allowing increased inflation to erode public and private debt, while increased inflated tax revenue will gradually close the budget gap. I do not believe that any sensible person would welcome that version of events, but the longer that the chancellor refuses to consider changing his policies, the closer the risk of that outcome is. Next week the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will set out the Scottish budget. I am sure that that will seek to protect employment in Scotland, particularly in respect of capital spend, but how frustrating it must be not to have the full powers of an independent country and not to be able to manage the whole economy. An independent Scotland could decide to invest more in capital spending, allowing projects to happen sooner and thereby underpinning an economic recovery. The harsh reality is that life within the union continues to hold us back and to delay our recovery. However, Scottish Government actions have resulted in positive results. In Q4 2011 and Q1 2012, the Scottish GDP shrank by 0.1 per cent, while the UK GDP shrank by 0.7 per cent in the same periods. Construction was down 17 per cent from pre-recession levels, although in the past year it is encouraging to note that output from the production and service sectors had risen by 2.5 per cent and 1 per cent respectively. The Scottish Government has switched £700 million from resource spending to increase capital spending over the period 2012-13 and 2014-15. That again highlights the importance that the Government places on boosting our capital spend as an engine of recovery. With a pipeline of £2.5 billion in NPD investment, that forms the largest programme of its kind in Europe. Additionally, in June 2012, a £105 million stimulus programme was announced with a broad range of benefits. Youth unemployment in Scotland—indeed, across Europe—is far too high, and the importance of that was marked when Angela Constance was appointed Minister for Youth Employment. The Government is to be commended for major initiatives such as opportunities for all, which ensures that all 16 to 19-year-olds not in work, training or education are offered a learning or training opportunity; the education maintenance allowance, which has been scrapped south of the border, has been maintained; and a record number of apprenticeships has been delivered this year—26,000, with a further 25,000 for each year of the parliamentary session. It is true to say that with all those initiatives and more, the greatest threats to Scottish jobs and family security are the economic policies of a floundering UK Government that is unable or unwilling to admit that its policies are mistaken. I commend the Scottish Government for the efforts that it is making to combat the recession and its effects on families.

The cabinet secretary has previously invested funding in green buses, which has brought fuel bills down for bus companies such as Lothian Buses. Can he confirm that there will be further investment in green buses this year, and that it will be open to the new East Lothian Buses to bid for that?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made regarding the development of the new Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh. (S4O-01170)

Understandably, there has been public concern that the Royal hospital for sick children should progress as quickly as possible. The construction of the new facility is sorely needed. Although I understand the complexity of the negotiations with stakeholders, I ask the cabinet secretary whether she has any broad timescale for the completion of the project towards which the national health service is now working.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to redevelop the Sheriffhall roundabout and achieve grade separation. (S4O-01122)

Sheriffhall roundabout continues to be a congestion nightmare for my constituents and those travelling to my constituency. It also remains a safety hazard for drivers, cyclists and pedestrians. Does the cabinet secretary agree that some form of grade separation is urgently needed as part of a solution to the problem? Does he agree that in order to resolve the chronic congestion, urgent action is needed?

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to reassess the effectiveness of acceptable behaviour contracts. (S4O-01092)

My first-hand experience, as a councillor and then as an MSP, seems to indicate that there is a small but significant and disruptive hard core who have little regard for ABCs or, indeed, antisocial behaviour orders. Will the minister consider a review to determine how we can strengthen the ability of local councils and the police to deal more swiftly and effectively with extreme antisocial elements that blight our communities?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and commend the Scottish fuel poverty forum for its report. Fuel poverty is a significant issue in my constituency, where there is at least one death each year from hypothermia. A major contributory component is the failure of many people on low incomes, particularly pensioners, to claim the benefits to which they are entitled. Although those benefits are in part reserved to Westminster, what steps can and will the Scottish Government take to encourage higher uptake?

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to introduce legislation regulating the use of air rifles. (S4O-01032)

With frequent reports of attacks on members of the emergency services such as fire brigade and ambulance staff, among others, does the minister agree that there is a need to control better who can possess those potentially lethal weapons and to introduce some form of licensing without delay and as soon as the intended devolution of the power to do so makes that possible?

When one hears the words “welfare” and “reform”, the assumption is normally made that something positive is intended, such as new measures to improve opportunities for our more socially deprived communities or radical new thoughts on how to tackle some of our more intransigent social problems. Alas, in the case of the UK coalition Government’s Welfare Reform Act 2012, there was no such positive intention; there was merely a determination to reduce the cost of providing welfare by £18 billion. There has been no adequate consideration of the direct impact that that will have on those who are dependent on benefits and zero assessment of the broader social impact. In addition, I regret to say, there is little sign of compassion and little indication of caring about the outcome or the consequences for the lives of individuals, families or their communities. It is estimated that some £39 million is to be drained out of my local economy, which will have obvious consequences for businesses and communities. An immediate example of the coalition Government’s crude grab for cash without logic or consultation is what has happened with housing benefit. I welcome the fact that, in effect, responsibility for housing benefit is being devolved to Scotland. It costs £400 million to provide that important support to the most vulnerable in our society. As someone who has spent the past five years as a councillor dealing with housing benefit issues, I know how important housing benefit is to so many people in my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, in particular. Despite that, we found that Westminster had arbitrarily lopped 10 per cent off the £400 million, so that Scotland would receive only £360 million. That was done without any adequate discussion or negotiation and with no adequate reason, other than to save cash. I am pleased that the Scottish Government, working with COSLA, will make up that shortfall. The pensioners and those on low incomes will also be pleased. Without that intervention, they would have had to shoulder yet another impossible financial burden imposed by Westminster. However, that £40 million had to be found from somewhere, given the cuts that the coalition budget has made to the Scottish budget, and there is no doubt in my mind that the money would have found a good home elsewhere. Choices are hard in the current financial situation and Westminster seems to excel in making bad situations worse. From April next year, most in-work and out-of-work benefits will be replaced with the universal credit. The intention is supposedly to simplify the whole system—if only that were the intention. The changes that are being made impose penalties on the most vulnerable in our society. Simplification of the welfare system is to be applauded, as is any proposal to make work pay and to lift people out of poverty. The UK Government’s proposals will result in deep and damaging cuts to benefits and services that are a lifeline for the most vulnerable in our society. We know that the Scottish Government has made strenuous representations to the Westminster Government and that it is working hard to mitigate the impact of the Westminster act, but a limited amount can be done because, for the most part, welfare is a reserved matter, over which the people of Scotland exercise little influence. Without the tools being placed in the hands of the Scottish people so that we can make our own decisions and determine our own priorities, we simply have to do as we are told. That is not democratic and it is not acceptable. The Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill is intended to help mitigate the worst effects of the Westminster act. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Parliament is seeking to manage some of the worst aspects of Westminster’s legislation. Unfortunately, the Scottish bill will only help the situation, not obviate the consequences. One of the most serious impacts of the Westminster act is on how we support the most vulnerable people in their homes. Here, the pace of the change and the technical complexity of the change, coupled with a lack of detail, create a considerable challenge. The intention to uprate the local housing allowance rates by reference to the consumer prices index decouples increases in that allowance from the housing market, which is more accurately reflected in the retail prices index. That means that theoretical rent increases will be linked to general inflation only, which creates the danger that social rents will become increasingly divergent from the market in which they must operate and will perhaps become unsustainable in the long term. The decision makes no economic sense and is clearly simply a money-saving exercise that has been conducted by someone who does not understand economics and is distanced from social reality. A major assumption in the 2012 act is that claimants will be forced to accept smaller accommodation, which will be cheaper for the Government to pay for. Accordingly, penalties are introduced where the property is deemed larger than the occupant needs. Again, I question the understanding of basic economics of the people who make that assumption. On paper, it appears reasonable. However, it does not take a PhD in mathematics to work out that, between the social landlords and the commercial landlords, the range and type of housing stock that is envisaged simply does not exist.

The member is absolutely correct. There are many examples of councils contracting to private landlords at a far higher price simply in order to find housing for homeless people. In Midlothian, the major part of which forms part of my constituency, there are around 4,500 people on waiting lists for houses. Of those, 40 per cent, or 1,800 people, are single people of all ages. There is virtually no prospect that either studio flats or one-bedroom properties are going to be built on the scale that is needed to alleviate that problem. For many of those people, the only prospect is to be accommodated in current housing stock as it becomes available, which means waiting for many years before they have an opportunity to have a settled home. The Westminster Government is again proving its lack of economic sense by trying to fit a round peg into a square hole.

Where the Westminster act falls short is in allowing for the needs of individuals. Newspapers talk a lot about people being paid thousands of pounds in benefits, but they are talking about a tiny number of people. The vast majority of payments are well within limits that are being laid down at the moment. The likelihood of individuals falling into serious debt—perhaps with loan sharks—and the risk of rent arrears due to the new system for allocating income support and benefit are high and much increased under the Westminster act.

I cannot exaggerate the potential consequences or the negative social impact of Westminster’s recklessness. I believe that the bill will help to ameliorate the outcomes and uphold the principles of social justice.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken to encourage the establishment of farmers co-operatives to promote local produce. (S4O-00989)

I have an example in which meals on wheels are flown frozen from Wiltshire to Glasgow and then trucked a further 120 miles via a Scottish depot to my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is patently absurd and that encouraging local produce through local purchasing makes good sense?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government on welfare reform and what impact this will have on people in Scotland. (S4O-00916)

In my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, around 8,000 residents who are already on low incomes will be adversely impacted as a result of the imposition of Westminster’s welfare reform. An estimated £9 million will be lost to the local economy, threatening the viability of some local businesses. The matter is reserved and Westminster cuts constrain what can be done. Will the cabinet secretary advise whether there are any steps that the Scottish Government can take or has taken to help shelter the lowest-income segment of society?

My constituency, Midlothian North and Musselburgh, has suffered disproportionately as a result of the decision by First to cut the number of routes that it runs. I deplore that decision, because communities that are already considered deprived areas will now suffer from additional disadvantages due to the lack of a bus service. People will have difficulty reaching hospitals, whether as patients or as employees. Shift workers will no longer have adequate bus cover. Transport to supermarkets and stores will become difficult and, for the less able, impossible. However, it is not just the loss of services that will affect my constituents—200 people are to lose their jobs in Dalkeith, with more in Musselburgh. That is tragedy enough for the employees and their families, especially those with mortgages and other commitments that they will now struggle to meet. Just as important is the loss of spending power in the community, for example to the local sandwich shops and others that provide for and support the First workers. The first step to helping commuters is to establish how many of the First routes Lothian Buses in particular is able to pick up, or to accommodate by modifying its existing routes. I hope that information on that will be available shortly to enable us to focus on those routes that may be unattractive to a commercial bus company but which have social imperatives. For example, it is unacceptable that the village of Cousland should have its only bus link to the outside world cut off. In the last election, the Labour Party floated the idea of reregulation of bus services. In hustings and in local leaflets, it extolled the advantages of that, apparently believing that bus operators could be controlled in that manner. The fact is that, however attractive reregulation may seem at first glance, it is no panacea for our current problems. Indeed, I believe that the cost of reregulation, including buying out the bus companies, would cost nearly £1 billion—hardly a practical proposal at this time of financial stress. The Labour Party has focused on the idea that bus routes are being withdrawn largely because of the Scottish Government’s decision to reduce the bus service operators grant. That is astonishing and naive. It can be only an element in the commercial decision by First to withdraw its services. The grant is spread across some 300 operators, big and small.

I said that the cut in funding is an element in the decision; it is certainly not the major element. In the case of First, the support amounts to barely 1.9 per cent of turnover. First withdrew its services because it was not making enough money. The reasons that it gave are principally fuel prices and competition over some years. I would contend that the reason why it was not making enough money is that it failed to invest and failed to manage its operating costs. Quite simply, it has been running elderly stock for years. It recently brought up aged double-deckers from Wales to replace already-old stock that it had used in my constituency. Among my constituents, there was a clear preference to use Lothian Buses because its buses were cleaner and more reliable. The result was that passenger loading dropped because the product offered was of lower quality than the market demanded. Coupled with that were much higher running costs due to the higher maintenance costs for old vehicles. More modern buses can be as much as 50 per cent cheaper to run, based on fuel usage. The SNP policy on introducing a fuel duty regulator, which would provide relief to bus operators, motorists and haulage companies, might have prevented that situation arising. However, the UK Government has consistently refused to listen. I repeat that lack of investment, leading to stock that is out of date and expensive to maintain and operate, leads to a classic result. That should surprise no one. The reduction in the bus service operators grant clearly results from the cuts being experienced elsewhere within the Scottish Government, arising from the Tory-Lib Dem coalition Government’s inappropriate policy to cut spending, to the detriment of the economy and the people of Scotland. The Scottish Government has not been slow at coming forward to help, but there is a difference in approach that I must highlight. When I spoke to the SNP-led East Lothian Council, I was assured in no uncertain terms that no community in East Lothian would be left cut off from a bus service. I was engaged in ideas about forming a local bus company that might pick up some of the routes or develop new routes—not a short-term solution but a longer-term opportunity that could be brought to fruition with energy and vision. I saw community commitment and leadership. I contrast that with the minority-run Labour administration in Midlothian. I say “minority-run” because it has rather carelessly lost two of its councillors, one due to the arcane selection—or, should I say, deselection—process of the Labour Party, and one due to an immoral cash grab to acquire a public pension and a public salary simultaneously. No decisive leadership was shown by Midlothian Council, yet council officials claim that they have not ruled out any solution. There is complete confusion and contradiction there. We are in a position in which we must await details of what Lothian Buses can do to fill the gap that has been left by First. Only then will we know where to focus our efforts. Labour’s motion is not helpful and contributes nothing to a solution. I commend Keith Brown’s amendment.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to promote culture and creativity abroad in the year of creative Scotland. (S4O-00889)

To what extent do existing British diplomatic and educational facilities overseas support and promote Scottish culture, especially the events of Scotland week? Does the cabinet secretary agree that the promotion of Scottish creativity and culture abroad is best handled by the Scottish Government and that current UK Government outlets may not be the most cost-effective and efficient means of such promotion?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to change the law to ensure that new businesses, particularly those in recycling and renewables, maintain environmentally sound practices from start-up. (S4O-00853)

In my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, there have been incidents in which, for newly established recycling businesses, adequate monitoring has not been put in place over a lengthy period because of timing conflicts between planning conditions and Scottish Environment Protection Agency licensing. Does the cabinet secretary agree that planning legislation needs to be updated to ensure that standards relating to health and safety and antisocial behaviour are maintained at all times?

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that the curriculum for excellence places sufficient emphasis on preparing young people for a career in business. (S4O-00776)

It has become evident in the Midlothian part of my constituency that schools are reducing the teaching of business-related subjects. That must affect employability and, ultimately, our economic competitiveness. Will the cabinet secretary consider whether it would be appropriate to introduce guidelines to preserve important core subjects?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to combat the dumping of vehicle tyres in rural areas. (S4O-00730)

The dumping of tyres in the rural areas of my constituency is endemic. It is not unusual to encounter 30 or 40 tyres distributed along a rural road. Does the cabinet secretary agree that measures for the better control of safe and appropriate disposal of old tyres need to be put in place, which would also allow the tracking of individual tyre disposal?

12. To ask the Scottish Government how the national health service is increasing access to the Scottish care information gateway referral pathway for local specialised practices. (S4O-00718)

Midlothian Physiotherapy in my constituency has been attempting to gain access to the SCI gateway referral pathway for more than 18 months, but has made extremely slow progress, to the frustration of all those involved. Does the minister agree that quicker action must be taken to ensure that local practices become part of the referral system?

There is an inescapable logic to locating the green investment bank in the capital of a country that has such laudable ambitions to be the renewables centre of Europe. Although the number of jobs—around 50 to 100—that come with the bank is relatively small, they will come at a time when jobs are scarce and banking jobs even scarcer. However, it is not just about jobs, but about the correct decision being made for the right reasons. In terms of equity assets, Edinburgh is the fourth-largest financial centre in Europe, and it is home to the headquarters of more FTSE 100 companies than any other UK city except London. The expertise and the skills that will be needed to run the bank and make it a success are readily available locally. In particular, skills related to project finance are represented by major banks that are present in Scotland, and many advisers have a capability in green infrastructure. Edinburgh has strong capabilities in structured finance. The city has an enviable record in investment management—it is home to around 13 per cent, or approximately £750 billion, of total UK assets under management—coupled with expertise at the high-risk, early-stage end of the green infrastructure sector. In terms of advisory expertise, Edinburgh boasts a network of specialist advisers, particularly in the green infrastructure sectors. Significantly, Edinburgh operates globally as an international financial services centre—the only location outside London to do so—and 80 per cent of the world’s major banking companies have a presence in the city. All of the above means that the green investment bank will be able to access locally the expertise that is necessary to deliver its analytical and appraisal functions. I mentioned earlier Scotland’s ambitions in relation to renewables. Edinburgh has a proximity to levels of green infrastructure development that are not found elsewhere in the UK. It would be fitting if Scotland’s drive towards a new future in energy resources was to be endorsed by the location of the green investment bank in Edinburgh. That drive has resulted in Scotland becoming a key part of the UK renewables targets. About half of the UK’s renewable energy capacity is in Scotland, and Scottish Renewables has highlighted that almost £750 million of renewable projects started last year and that there is a £46 billion pipeline of Scottish projects. Inserting the green investment bank into that environment can have only a positive and beneficial impact on the bank and on the industry in general. Around 32 cities and towns throughout the UK are submitting proposals to host the bank, but only one—Edinburgh—is in Scotland. That reflects the reality, which is clearly seen in Scotland, that Edinburgh has the expertise and the ability to host the green investment bank, and that, although other centres in Scotland may have legitimate claims as renewables centres, Edinburgh brings together all the diverse elements that are needed to give it a commanding position in the bid to host the bank. Locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh will place that bank close to a major clustering of renewable energy businesses and initiatives. That will in turn result in a greater economic impact for the UK as a whole, which will improve the UK’s efforts to deliver on its low-carbon objectives. It is not just Scotland’s ambitions in relation to green energy that qualify Edinburgh above all others. Time and again, Edinburgh has been highly rated for quality of life, most recently in 2010 when it was rated as the top city in the UK and the eighth in Europe. I am not sure whether the trams project was taken into account, but the city came out well anyway. As a location for work and recreation, Edinburgh remains second to none, with easy access to all areas of Scotland. Culture and the arts are well represented and available locally, and the world-famous Edinburgh festival brings life and vitality to a city that is steeped in history. Edinburgh is also a UNESCO—United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization—world heritage site. Families locating to Edinburgh have a wide range of housing options and internationally renowned schooling on their doorsteps, all located in an enviable environment. Uniquely among major cities, 20 per cent of commuters walk to work and around 7 per cent cycle. The city is easily walkable due to its compactness, and that encourages networking and informal meetings, which are easily facilitated. The city is surrounded by academic and research capabilities, with no fewer than 11 universities within an hour’s journey from Edinburgh. Such facilities would complement and strengthen the breadth of resources that would be available to the bank and its clientele. International transport links are first class. Rail, road, and air links are easily accessible. Edinburgh is one of Europe’s best-connected cities. ICT and broadband links are excellent. Office space is readily available and rents are highly competitive, with the City of Edinburgh Council offering the first three years of accommodation rent free. Salary and related costs are less than the UK average. For example, managers’ salaries are at 82 per cent of the median and 57 per cent of the London average. Employee salaries are 90 per cent of the UK average and only 53 per cent of the London average. The bid has mustered support from a wide spectrum of Scottish businesses and from across the political parties. Significantly, despite the global downturn and the increasingly fierce market for foreign investment, Edinburgh has continued to attract top companies. Foreign direct investment in Edinburgh was up 72 per cent in 2010 and has more than doubled since 2008. Edinburgh does not sit on its laurels, but has a proactive, energetic and supportive pro-business attitude that major companies that move into the city appreciate and benefit from. Scotland is the only nation in the UK that has a zero waste strategy, which results in policy-driven solutions nationally and within local authorities. The risk of not choosing Edinburgh is that the bank would be located in a city that either lacks the breadth of resources to support the work of the green investment bank or does not have the commitment to developing renewable energy sources that has been evidenced in Edinburgh. A failure to be close to renewables businesses would simply not make sense and would dilute the bank’s impact on the very sector that it seeks to support. I strongly support Edinburgh’s bid and fully support the motion.

4. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made in building international business connections. (S4F-00407)

I welcome both those developments. Does the First Minister agree that Westminster politicians should support the Scottish Government’s efforts to attract investment to Scotland instead of pettily fearmongering that there is uncertainty about the referendum—a claim for which they have been unable to produce a single shred of evidence?

There was a time when education was considered to be the cure for the great ailment of society—poverty. That ill remains with us in too many places, including in my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh, but I believe that it remains true, to this day, that education defeats poverty, so improving learning outcomes for our young people should be one of our highest priorities. Youth unemployment is a serious by-product of the current recession. In Midlothian, some 20 per cent of under-25s are unemployed. That is not an acceptable outcome, so I welcome the appointment of Angela Constance as Minister for Youth Employment, which will bring to bear a more intense focus on the problem. Likewise, I fully support the Scottish Government’s emphasis on early intervention linked to preventative spending. That adoption of a long-term view and a policy of investment must have a significant impact on outcomes for our young people. In the past year, despite the recession, there has been a marginal but important increase in the proportion of school leavers going on to positive initial destinations. The figure has gone up from 87 per cent to 89 per cent. However, everything that the Scottish Government might seek to achieve would fail if not for the army of dedicated and effective teachers who guide our young people towards positive personal outcomes when they come to leave school. When I visit schools in my constituency, I am always impressed by the quality of what I see, whether it is achievements in sport, visual and performing arts, music or the many other subjects that challenge and develop our young people, in addition to the more traditional academic subjects. Curriculum for excellence has certainly played its part. Professionals to whom I speak seem to be pleased with its flexibility and the outcomes that are made possible through it. I expect even greater outcomes to be achieved as it develops. Less is said about the environment in which education takes place, but it, too, is vital. Looking at some of the statistics, specifically those that relate to my constituency, I note that there is some evidence that young people in good-quality schools that have a modern, bright and light environment perform better than their counterparts in older and more run-down schools. It is human nature that people respond to their environment. At this point, I come to an unashamed plug for the Midlothian part of my constituency. The cabinet secretary has said that there will be an announcement shortly on the criteria and timeframe for bidding for some 30 new schools. In Midlothian, Newbattle community high school occupies a rather decrepit 1960s-style building and considerable work and huge expenditure are required to bring it up to a modern standard. It serves two of the most socially deprived communities in Scotland, but it has shown over a period of years that it can raise the learning outcomes of the young people who attend it. Those raised learning outcomes have come from a very low level. Let me give an example. Scotland-wide, the proportion of students who achieve five qualifications at SCQF level 5 by the end of S4 is 35 per cent. In Midlothian, the figure is 31 per cent, and at Newbattle high school, it is 20 per cent—although that represents a steady 33 per cent improvement between 2008 and 2011 while the wider average figures have remained static. Schools such as that, which are helping themselves and making good progress, are deserving of support. I am impressed by the quality of staff and the huge improvement in outcomes across the board, but more work needs to be done. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider seriously the application that will be made for Newbattle community high school to be replaced. There is cross-party support for the project on Midlothian Council. Midlothian is up for it and the students at the school deserve a quality and fit-for-purpose learning environment. I will continue to lobby for a new school facility at every opportunity. In turning again to the more positive trends, I note that 99 per cent of P1 pupils are now in classes of 21 or fewer. In 2006, the average figure was 23.1, but by 2011 it had improved to 20.5. Since 2007, the Scottish Government has provided almost 300,000 training opportunities, and a further 25,000 modern apprenticeships are planned for every year of the current session of Parliament. In the past four years, £110 million has been allocated to improve our social services workforce. We should remember those trends and many more. What has been achieved so far has resulted in a huge improvement in Scotland’s educational performance. We are above the national average in reading and science, we are at the international average in maths, and overall we are now at the same level as England and Northern Ireland and better than Wales. It is clear that we are moving in the right direction and I commend the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government on the progress that has been made.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to ensure that small to medium-sized businesses have fair access to the procurement portal and what share of the available business they obtain. (S4O-00289)

In Scotland, we spend £9 billion a year on third-party goods, works and services, but only 30 per cent of the spend is with companies that employ fewer than 100 people. Will the minister consider what further measures can be taken to ensure that smaller companies, which form the backbone of our economy, receive a more equitable share of the procurement allocations, in order to better protect jobs?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether there are any indications that United Kingdom Government policies are resulting in stagflation in the Scottish economy. (S4O-00149)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that UK input prices overall rose by 18.5 per cent over the 12 months to July 2011? Significantly, imported food prices rose by 13.8 per cent, imported metals prices rose by 22.1 per cent and oil products prices rose by 45.4 per cent. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, with UK economic activity stagnating and serious inflation at our factory gates, Scotland—more than ever—needs the political and economic power to manage its economy?

I welcome the publication of “The Government Economic Strategy”, with its positive and clear approach to sustainable economic recovery. It remains disappointing that the strategy is not matched by a responsible approach from the UK Government that slows the public expenditure cuts to a manageable level. That would reduce job losses and business failures while still achieving the aim of bringing finances into equilibrium, albeit over a longer period, and it would be based on the more certain premise of economic growth. With UK economic growth stagnating, public sector borrowing in 2011-12 is expected to be £122 billion, or 7.9 per cent of GDP. That is even after tax increases and spending cuts have been implemented. The figure is well up on the £33.7 billion of public sector borrowing in 2007-08, which ran at 2.4 per cent of GDP. In 2007-08, UK national debt sat at £527.2 billion, or 36.5 per cent of GDP. The projected national debt for 2011-12 is £1,046 billion, or 66.1 per cent of GDP. To that can be added £200 billion or so of quantitative easing. On top of that is the hidden public debt that has been acquired by cash-strapped local councils that are desperately capitalising everything that they can. One factor out there that can impact on all the Government’s plans is inflation. We all see the obvious measures—the retail prices index at 5 per cent and the consumer prices index at 4.4 per cent—yet we do not as readily appreciate that input price inflation ran at 18.5 per cent in the year to July 2011. Within that, inflation in imported metals was 22.1 per cent and in oil products was 45.4 per cent. That contrasts with output price inflation figures that run at an average of 5.9 per cent. It is clear that the difference is being absorbed into the supply chain, but that cannot continue for ever. Sooner or later, those price increases will have to be passed on to the consumer. What is emerging is that a perfect storm of stagnating economic growth coupled with commodity and product price inflation is building up and is ready to surge. It is essential for the chancellor in London to listen to the need for a plan B. The economy is the only engine that can drag us out of recession and—more important—out of the serious risk of stagflation. Some might argue that inflation benefits the public finances—that is similar to what the Tories did when they came to power in 1979 and found that the public finances were out of control. They struggled for a couple of years and then allowed inflation to surge to a peak of about 23 per cent in the early 1980s. That reduced the national debt in real terms. The budget deficit was eliminated by means of fiscal drag, which arose from the increased tax take from inflated corporate profits and inflated personal income. Personal debt was similarly eroded by inflation, which allowed the public to begin borrowing and spending again and thus increase economic growth. In the short term, inflation created economic growth and stimulated expansion by pumping additional funding into the economy and boosting demand. However, in the longer term, inflation is pernicious and eats at the value of assets. Pensioners and those who are on fixed incomes invariably suffer, and savers are punished. Those with mortgages feel the pinch as interest rates increase, although the value of a debt is eroded. That is why the London chancellor must modify his approach. If he fails to do so, the consequences may be dire. The example that the Scottish Government has shown, which has resulted in a shorter and shallower recession in Scotland than elsewhere in the UK, is to be commended. With lower unemployment, higher employment and lower economic inactivity, we have proof that the Scottish Government’s approach is successful, but it is important not to underestimate how vulnerable the Scottish economy is to decisions that are taken by the chancellor in London. Instead of cutting capital expenditure budgets—by nearly 40 per cent in Scotland’s case—Westminster should be increasing them. This is the time to gain better value for money in public contracts and therefore drive down the costs of undertaking necessary public works that will have to be undertaken eventually in any case. Targeted public works will create and protect jobs and boost economic activity to see us through the current economic recession. That is the normal pattern for extracting the economy from economic doldrums. In essence, the solutions to the recession are no different from those that have gone before. Such action would boost consumer confidence, and encourage people to plan beyond their next pay packet again and perhaps to start to spend again. That will help to take us out of the recession. The Scottish Government has emphasised the importance of re-establishing business and consumer confidence. Without that essential confidence, the economy will not resume its growth or generate the tax revenues that we need to pull us through the current problems. There is no economic benefit or advantage to be gained from brutal cuts to public services and spending coupled with the creation of high unemployment. If all our trading partners are doing the same, the only result will be that all nations will be united in their misery. The risks of sovereign debt default, not merely in one country, but across a choice of possibilities, are already sufficient external threats to economic recovery without our adding artificially to the risk that we face. I welcome the Scottish Government’s determination to continue to press for the powers that are necessary to build on its successful management of Scotland’s economy.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to promote the development of geothermal energy. (S4O-00085)

Is the minister aware that—as far as I can discover—the most recent comprehensive feasibility study on geothermal opportunities in the Lothians was carried out some five years ago? I have no doubt that he is aware that Scotland’s industrial heritage has resulted in a large number of flooded mine workings, including in my constituency of Midlothian North and Musselburgh—

Given the huge increase in energy prices, does the minister consider that there might be an opportunity to revisit the feasibility of that energy source?

I welcome the robust approach to seeking an appropriate level of capital borrowing from the Westminster Government, as outlined by the finance secretary. The question of borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament is complex, but it should be simple, because Scotland should have the full borrowing powers of a normal nation and should not be holding out its begging bowl to Westminster. Along with many other people, I think that the current situation is anomalous. Scottish local councils and even English parish councils have more borrowing powers than the Scottish Government has, and the Northern Ireland Executive can borrow from the national loans fund for capital expenditure purposes only. On funding for capital expenditure, the case for substantial enhanced borrowing powers is compelling, not least because the Westminster Government has imposed a 36 per cent cut in our capital budget up to 2014-15. The finance secretary has repeatedly said that the cuts are inappropriate and Scotland’s needs are different. A fiscal stimulus to our economy through capital investment will provide further benefit, by smoothing the business cycle and helping the country through the recession. Such investment can act as a stimulus, to mitigate the effects of the downturn and support private sector consumption and investment levels. Notwithstanding the limitations on the Scottish Government’s current powers, much that is positive has been achieved by way of offsetting the impact of the recession through capital investment. For example, there has been £350 million of capital spending to stimulate the private sector and safeguard jobs. The non-profit-distribution programme, which the Scottish Futures Trust developed, includes £1 billion of investment in vital transport infrastructure—in projects such as the Borders railway, for example; investment of £840 million for the Southern general hospital; and £27 million for the Commonwealth games. All that investment is part of a £2.5 billion NPD programme, which gives a much-needed boost to jobs and the economy—let us just think what we could do if we had the full range of tools to raise capital and thus make an even more significant difference. As the finance secretary said, it is self-evident that the powers that are proposed in the Scotland Bill leave much to be desired. The proposed borrowing limit would be £230 million, or 10 per cent of the Scottish capital budget every year, with a cumulative limit of £2.2 billion. The facility would be available only from 2013—although the finance secretary has indicated that there is a possibility of modification on that. Borrowing would be subject to HM Treasury consent, on a project-specific basis. Borrowing would be from the national loans fund or—this seems bizarre to me—from commercial banks, I presume on some sort of club-loan basis. The principle is that loans from the national loans fund would be repaid within, say, 10 years. The Scotland Bill Committee recommended a higher limit of £5 billion and a shorter implementation period. Both recommendations are fine as far as they go, but I welcome the finance secretary’s demand for an accelerated timescale for implementation. Borrowing powers will open up a wider range of options and levers for the Scottish Government to deploy in support of our economy. They will enable the funding of major infrastructure projects, which will in turn result in long-term economic benefits that are essential to the driving of economic productivity and competitiveness. The Forth crossing provides a perfect example of the need to modify the current proposals and allow payment over a longer period—20 years, say. That would be more realistic for such a major project, which has a high price tag attached to it and is of national strategic importance. The proposed delay in granting the new borrowing powers until 2013 would not be helpful, given that payments on the Forth replacement crossing will start in 2011-12. Indeed, HM Treasury would still need to consider the project’s eligibility and approve the borrowing. Large-scale projects are expensive. Funding such projects over a number of years through capital borrowing ensures that the cost of financing a once-in-a-lifetime project can be spread. It also ensures that other programmes are not adversely affected by a reduction in expenditure and avoids the need for tax increases within the year in which the asset was purchased. That is basic good management of public finances. It is absolutely realistic for the finance secretary to continue to argue for a higher limit for borrowing for capital purposes. The proposed cumulative limit of £2.2 billion compares poorly with that of Northern Ireland, which has a cumulative limit of £3 billion. Northern Ireland has a population of about one third of ours and a correspondingly smaller economy. Crudely put, on that basis, it could be argued that Scotland should have at least three times the Northern Ireland borrowing limit, which would result in a £9 billion limit on paper. A further reason to welcome additional borrowing powers is that they will finally highlight the demise of the discredited PPP/PFI funding route, which still costs the public purse disproportionately. We will be paying off the debt that was run up through that model for decades to come. Not only that, but the sharp accounting by which the PPP/PFI schemes were to be kept off the national books came to an end when the UK Government was challenged and had to adopt international financial reporting standards as of April 2009. That means that all such assets had to be brought back on to the balance sheet. At the end of the day, we are paying extortionate credit card rates for projects. It is true that public sector borrowing is much cheaper than borrowing from the market, but the Scottish Government should not be restricted in the tools that it can use to raise funding. As far back as 1950, the Exchequer and Financial Provisions Act (Northern Ireland) 1950 allowed the devolved authority in Ulster to issue Treasury bills or any other securities or instruments that it might wish to issue for the purposes of raising capital. There is, therefore, an abundance of examples of devolved Governments possessing wide powers to issue financial instruments independently of the central authority. I welcome the determination of the finance secretary and the Government to continue to press the case for increased borrowing powers to enable better management of Scottish finances, and I look forward to a positive result.