6. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to reduce child poverty. (S4F-01875)

I welcome the First Minister’s answer. Can he tell me how independence would provide further opportunities to address child poverty? [Interruption.]

I refer members to my registered interest as a member of Amnesty International. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I congratulate my colleague and co-member of the cross-party group, Maureen Watt, on bringing the debate to the chamber. Like Maureen, I thank the University of Edinburgh’s Tibet group for its work with the cross-party group. Like many others, back in October I was pleased to see the United Nations Human Rights Council discuss the situation in Tibet. As Maureen Watt indicated, 11 countries at that summit, including the United Kingdom, urged China to make improvements in terms of respecting the human rights of the people of Tibet. It has been only four months since that call was made, so it is difficult to tell whether it has made any impact, but judging by the Chinese Government’s response it has not taken that criticism well. Within days of the summit in October, the Chinese Government accused the international community of trying to politicise human rights and said: “The best persons to know human rights in China are Chinese.” In this war of words, it is essential to be able to see both sides of the story. That certainly does not mean that the Tibetans’ plight is in any way more tolerable, or that there is an easy solution to be found. From the Chinese point of view, Tibet is and always has been part of the People’s Republic of China and China therefore feels that it should have a say in the Tibetan system of government, including the selection of the Dalai Lama, whom Tibetans traditionally believe to be a reincarnation of the previous Dalai Lama. The situation is often portrayed as a battle for Tibetan political independence. That view is mistaken, according to the Dalai Lama himself, who said on Sunday: “A non-violence method cannot have a one-side victory and one-side defeat. Then confrontation will come leading to violence. With this belief, we are not seeking independence from the People’s Republic of China.” The heart of the problem, therefore, is not a simple matter of political sovereignty, but rather China’s oppression of Tibetan culture, traditions and structures of semi-autonomous government. As a highly centralised, nominally communist state, it is hardly surprising that China, pushing for uniformity across its territories, should be accused of an aversion to cultural and political diversity. However, there is never any excuse for the abuse of human rights: established codes that are accepted by a vast majority around the world as basic standards for human decency and compassion. Self-immolation is a horrific and desperate cry for help that those fortunate enough to live in a democracy can hardly begin to understand. When 127 people are prepared to literally set themselves on fire for their cause, other countries must take heed and exert appropriate pressure, whether that be diplomatic or otherwise. The Dalai Lama has called for a non-violent resolution to the conflict. As I understand it, a satisfactory resolution for His Holiness would simply be an end to the oppression and persecution of Tibetans at the hands of the Chinese authorities and respect for Tibet’s cultural, social, religious and political autonomy within China. That is not an unreasonable goal. At this time of significant economic change and political reform in China—a time when China is forging ever stronger trade links with Western countries—we must make it absolutely clear at every opportunity that human rights must be respected. China is changing and it can and should seize the opportunity to change its approach in Tibet. We should all hope that a non-violent resolution to the conflict can be achieved, not just because it is in the interests of the Tibetan people and their right to self-determination, but also because it is in the long-term interests of China. Instead of being seen as a sinister oppressor of diversity, China will become a respecter of human rights and a responsible global citizen with whom the international community will have no reservations about doing business. Respecting the rights of the Tibetan people to celebrate their own culture and organise freely will benefit Tibet and China alike. The first step on that path is an end to persecution. With persistence and dedication, I am sure we all hope that that sensible message will take root in Beijing.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to tackle the effects of excess sugar consumption. (S4O-02851)

I thank the minister for his answer, but he might be aware of research that was published in the British Medical Journal in October that said that a 20 per cent tax at a United Kingdom level on soft drinks with a high sugar content would reduce the number of obese adults by around 1 per cent. What consideration has the Scottish Government given to such measures? What further steps can it take to reduce the health problems that are associated with excess sugar consumption?

Agriculture is vital to Scotland. Three quarters of Scotland’s landmass is used for agricultural ends and the sector directly employs about 65,000 people. According to the NFUS, one in 10 Scottish jobs—that is a quarter of a million—depends on agriculture in one way or another. Therefore, it is difficult to overstate the importance of getting CAP reform right for Scotland. We know that the cabinet secretary, Richard Lochhead, works extremely hard within the current framework to protect Scotland’s interests, but we also know that, within the constraints of devolution, Scotland’s interests are not always put first. Within the UK, Scotland plays second fiddle to the interests of the whole. That is why, last year, there was anger and disappointment when Scotland did not receive its proper share of the convergence uplift, which was funding that the UK would not have received at all had it not been for Scotland’s low average level of pillar 1 per hectare payments. It is also why Scottish farmers have, by a wide margin, the lowest per hectare pillar 2 payments of any member state, big or small, in the European Union. The EU average pillar 2 funding per hectare is €76, whereas Scotland’s rate is just €11. Of course, pillar 1 payments in Scotland are €100 lower than the UK average. Let us not forget Ireland, which has a comparatively sized area of eligible pillar 1 land but which receives double Scotland’s rate. In my view, the UK Government has at times tended to take a somewhat patronising and top-down approach in its dealings with the Scottish Government. Last year, Owen Paterson told the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee: “You must not underestimate the trouble to which I go to keep Richard Lochhead informed.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2383.] That just serves to highlight the fact that we need more than information—we need a more participative approach towards CAP at all levels and not just at the implementation stage. Speaking of participation, I welcome the two consultations that the Scottish Government has published. The new model for the Scotland rural development programme will, I hope, be welcomed for its relative simplicity and accessibility, which are things that the existing programme lacks. As to the rate of modulation, in an ideal world we would have wanted to wait until the consultation was complete before deciding on that, but I accept that the cabinet secretary had no choice in the matter; it was unavoidable. I understand that a wide range of views were expressed in the initial consultation as to the scale of the transfer. Some argued for more pillar 2 funding and others argued for a greater retention of funds under pillar 1. However, the agreed transfer of 9.5 per cent, which will deliver a rural development budget of more than £1.3 billion up to 2020, is a fair and balanced decision in the circumstances. I hope that the cabinet secretary recognises the need to spend those funds efficiently, and that he will take on board the results of the current consultation. I say to the Labour Party that, although that agreed transfer is less than the transfers in Wales and England, it takes account of the overall settlement to Scotland. What would the Labour Party prefer—a bigger cut to pillar 1 and all that that entails? Claire Baker rightly suggested at the end of her speech that the cabinet secretary has difficult decisions to make.

I would not accept that fully. I accept Claire Baker’s final point that there are difficult decisions to make, but I believe that, overall, 9.5 per cent is a reasonable figure in the circumstances. Today’s Government motion implicitly recognises concerns surrounding farm payments and land use. People are right to be concerned about slipper farming. The practice of purchasing the right to claim farm payments on land that is not in production has been around for almost nine years and is totally contrary to what ought to be the purpose of the payments, which is to support farmers who often work long, hard hours to earn their livelihood from productive farms. Slipper farming has been widely condemned by the NFUS, the Scottish Government and members across the chamber, not only because it unfairly rewards inactivity but because it does so at the expense of genuine agriculture. Let us not forget that the change to a single farm payment and the decoupling from production were widely supported in 2003 and that, although the so-called Scottish clause would have helped to eliminate the practice, the Commission has ruled out a link between payment and production. So where do we go now? I heard what Alex Fergusson said about the Scottish clause, and it would help if the cabinet secretary could expand further in his closing remarks on where we could go with a Scottish clause. Another important point on which the Scottish Government is consulting is the division of land into two regions. Is it sufficient to have one for arable farming and permanent and temporary pasture, and one for rough grazing? Is it not a better idea to consider having three, as some, including the NFUS, have suggested? The consultation provides that third option, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will take on board the division of opinion on that point when he looks at the results of the consultation. It is clear that any single payment rate will inevitably benefit low-intensity areas disproportionately, but no matter how Scotland’s agricultural land is categorised by the Government, the total sum available to us does not change. The fact remains that the CAP budget is being reduced. That is where the convergence uplift would have made a difference had the UK Government taken into account Scotland’s interests. I pointed out in October that assigning new categories to different areas of land leaves Scotland with little real choice, given the extent of less favoured area land and the amount of rough grazing. As others have suggested, the slower the transition to a level playing field in 2019, the more protected less active farmers will be in the interim. In conclusion, there is no doubt in my mind that difficult decisions need to be made, and the cabinet secretary has by no means an easy task. However, it is reassuring to note that, at least according to the Scottish agricultural survey, to which Maureen Watts referred, 34 per cent of respondents rate the Scottish Government as good or very good on agricultural issues, which is up from 31 per cent last year.

Can the cabinet secretary add anything on the nature of the consultation process that will take place on the proposals?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Earlier this week on “Good Morning Scotland”, I heard the Labour candidate in the Cowdenbeath by-election say that a hospital in the constituency is running from one crisis to the next and that he had repeatedly written to the health minister on the matter. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that that is the position?

Will Jackson Carlaw give way?

As Neil Findlay did, I begin by referring to Aneurin Bevan, who said in 1946: “No longer will wealth be an advantage nor poverty a disadvantage. Healthcare will be provided free of charge based on clinical need and not on ability to pay.” Those founding principles are as important today as they were then. As members know, the Beveridge report, which was published in 1942, identified disease as one of the five giant evils that had been plaguing society since the Victorian era and even earlier. Few people argue that the foundation of the NHS as a cradle-to-grave service was not a fitting response to that report. Jackson Carlaw referred to the history of the Conservatives and Churchill in relation to the NHS, but my understanding is that, in 1951, six years after the foundations for the welfare state were laid, the Conservative Party regained power and immediately set up a commission to review the NHS and the way in which it was funded through general taxation, under an economist called Claude Guillebaud. The commission concluded that the NHS was a cost-effective and efficient way of delivering public health services and a line was finally drawn under the issue. Times change, however. The demands on the service increase and populations rise. In Scotland, although we have had only a 6 per cent increase in population since 1939, the population continues to rise steadily. Of course, people are living longer, but not necessarily in good health. As “A Route Map to the 2020 Vision for Health and Social Care” acknowledges, in the next 10 years, the proportion of over 75s, who are the highest users of health and care services, will increase by more than 25 per cent. Aside from our desire to respond to patients’ wishes, that is why the move towards integrated health and social care is important. The increasing number of people with dementia presents a real challenge, as do the changing nature of healthcare—the drugs and techniques that we use to treat patients—and the changing nature of the care that patients receive when they come into contact with the NHS. That inevitably means that we cannot stand still. We are constantly having to meet new challenges, and the NHS will come under even greater pressure in the years ahead. It will need to adapt. In Scotland, we are fortunate that our health service is largely devolved and that the current Scottish Government values and protects the founding principles of the NHS. That has meant scrapping prescription charges—an issue that Labour members resigned over in the early 1950s and did not send to cuts commissions to consider. It also means keeping under review measures to improve effectiveness. Since the SNP took office, hidden waiting lists have been tackled, patients are being treated faster than ever before and the incidence of MRSA has plummeted to the lowest level since records began. Let us also look at the trend of positive healthcare. In just one decade, the incidence of coronary heart disease fell by 29 per cent, and between 2007 and 2011 the mortality rate for under-75s with cancer fell by 6.6 per cent. The purpose of the NHS must be to ensure that everyone receives high-quality medical care whenever they need it without ever having to worry about cost. In Scotland, we stick to that principle but other parts of the UK are not so fortunate. The growing consensus south of the border has sometimes been a move towards privatisation of the health service and, indeed, charges for services. If someone in England needs a prescription today, it will cost them £7.85. For some—however few—that means a choice between treating their illness and putting food on the table. In addition, the provision of free personal care remains one of the great achievements of this Parliament. In difficult economic times, it is more important than ever that we protect the services that we value and rely on as a society. We need to maintain an NHS that adheres to its founding principles. That does not mean that it is perfect—challenges continue to arise and we need to respond. Yes, the ageing of nursing staff means that the recruitment of nursing staff must be a priority and that there is a premium on experience. Yes, health is not all about physical health; it is also about mental health. In an age of austerity, joblessness will take its toll, and the comments in the Prince’s Trust briefing make depressing reading. However, when it comes to providing a 24/7 service, I am sure that everyone in the chamber will want to praise the staff of NHS 24, who every year handle 1.5 million calls from the Scottish public at all hours of the day. We clearly need to give some thought to how to improve the consistency of services at different times. For example, we need to ensure that pharmacies and physios are able to provide seven-day care. Yes, we must ensure that we have enough accident and emergency consultants, but we also need to ensure that attention is paid to alternatives to A and E. We must acknowledge the commitment and professionalism of ambulance crews, first responders, the fire and rescue service, A and E staff, surgeons, GPs, nurses and all members of NHS front-line staff, who remain dedicated to ensuring that Scotland has a health service that is accessible and free of charge at any hour of the day or night every day of the year. When we reflect on the need for improvements—and there is a clear need—we must, as the cabinet secretary said, take into account the high level of patient satisfaction across the NHS. In a Scottish in-patient survey in 2012, 85 per cent of patients reported that the service that they received was good or excellent.

What progress has been made on implementing a national commitment on the prescribing of pyschoactive medications in care homes for residents with dementia?

It seems a long time since the Justice Committee took evidence for its inquiry into the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, but it was in fact in March last year. In the short time available, I will make a few points, although I cannot promise the convener the levity that she might hope for. It is common ground that section 53 of the 2003 act does not work in its current form. As Professor Rennie said, “what section 53 may have done is give people enforcement rights in pre-2004 title conditions that they did not have before the legislation.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 19 March 2013; c 2531.] Section 53 was not part of the original Scottish Law Commission proposal but was inserted at stage 2 to cure a particular problem. There might be a lesson for the Parliament in that about consideration of bills at stage 2. Section 53 is unclear and it is virtually impossible for advisers to advise their clients competently on it. I therefore welcome the fact that the section has been referred to the Scottish Law Commission, although I am disappointed that it might be 2015 before the commission can start work on that. I move on to land-owning maintenance companies that manage common parts of estates and the difficulties with removing them. It came out of our inquiry loud and clear that, where the land-owning maintenance model prevails, the rules in the 2003 act to enable a majority of owners to change factors have no practical role at all because, where common areas are owned by such companies, the manager is not technically a factor or manager, as the company manages not other people’s property but its own property. Even if a factor can be changed, while the original factor retains the land, factor 2 will have nothing to manage. Alternative thinking is required if we are to tackle that problem. Some witnesses from the factoring side talked optimistically about changing managers. For example, the witness from Greenbelt Group mentioned its consumer choice programme. However, there seems little evidence of interest in that on the part of house owners. Therefore, with respect, I think that we are likely to need something more radical. The community right to buy was mentioned and is at least worth considering, but we should not pretend that purchasing such areas would have the attractions that purchasing parts of rural or sporting estates would have. Compensation would need to be paid and legal expenses would be incurred, so that approach would clearly not be for the faint hearted. The Government favours a code of practice, although the devil will be in the detail of such a code. However, I am pleased that the Government recognises that the issue needs attention. In relation to the enforcement of demands for payment against property owners in respect of costs that are incurred in maintaining areas of estates, evidence to our inquiry suggested that, depending on the terms of the title deed, such demands might be unenforceable in so far as they relate to a property that does not have a connection to the owner’s property. If there is no right or servitude over the common land, it is possible that the land maintenance company has no right to recover costs from an owner. I slightly disagree with John Lamont, in that I thought that the professors were slightly divided on the issue of enforceability, but they agreed that a test case would assist. Obviously, the land maintenance companies seem to be in no hurry to resolve the issue, so we will just have to see whether the man of straw with legal aid that the convener referred to emerges any time soon. More particularly, I welcome the Government’s acceptance that, in the long term, arrangements for land maintenance should be discussed and reviewed with local authorities, developers, the maintenance companies and, of course, consumer representatives. On the legal expenses that are involved in taking applications to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, ironically, one point that has been expressed in evidence on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill, which the committee is still considering, was about the desirability of keeping any expenses in the Lands Tribunal moderate and therefore in keeping with expense rules in tribunals generally. One point that emerged from our inquiry is that the Lands Tribunal’s approach to expenses prior to the 2003 act was normally not to make an award of expenses against someone who had unsuccessfully defended an application. Of course, that approach was curtailed by the terms of section 103 of the 2003 act. The Tribunals (Scotland) Bill currently allows for the Lands Tribunal to make an award of expenses. It would be appropriate to review the whole issue of the level of expenses when the new system starts operating, if the Lands Tribunal still operates in that new system. That is of reasonable urgency.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to promote the teaching of Mandarin in schools. (S4O-02752)

During visits to local schools, I am aware that they have an advantage when a native speaker comes to take Mandarin language classes. Does the minister agree that foreign language assistants are vital to enhancing language learning in schools and can he advise what action the Scottish Government is undertaking to increase the number of foreign language assistants in Scottish schools, particularly for Mandarin?

I, too, congratulate David Torrance on bringing the debate to the chamber and on highlighting the continuing work of Fife Gingerbread, which works so hard to provide invaluable support to lone parents across Fife. I welcome representatives of Fife Gingerbread to the public gallery and thank the Big Lottery for its contribution to this little matter. Fife Gingerbread provides accessible, approachable and non-judgmental support, advice and information to lone parents—parents of all ages and from all backgrounds and all walks of life. There are times when individuals feel that they are alone and that no one else can understand their situation, but Fife Gingerbread is there for them. It is a vital organisation for lone parents in Fife, and the level of support that it offers could not be achieved without the hard work of both its staff and its volunteers. Fife Gingerbread has long been known for its work with lone parents, but it recognises that some of the difficulties that are faced by teenage parents are unique and that being a young parent is very different from becoming a parent in one’s 20s or 30s. Its teen parent project offers support to young parents aged from 16 to 19, whether they are male or female, in a relationship or single. The project can also be accessed by young pregnant women between the ages of 16 and 19. The Big Lottery Fund grant will help Fife Gingerbread with that project in central Fife. I hope that the project will build on the excellent work that it has already undertaken in Levenmouth, Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes, which has filled in the gap in support that is often created when young parents leave school. It is fantastic that, to date, Fife Gingerbread has been able to help 341 parents through one-to-one and group work. That positive work, which focuses on increasing access to other services and developing skills, has also benefited 316 children to date. It operates by working with other organisations in the community to support teenage parents in establishing good parenting skills, developing group and peer support networks and engaging with other services. Link workers help the young parent through one-to-one support and home visits. They help with advocacy and representation, assist with antenatal and postnatal care, promote health services for the parent and the child and signpost support agencies where relevant. They also assist with debt and housing issues, relationship counselling and parenting and play, through group work and creating peer support. Importantly, they help with confidence building and skills improvement. It is a very big agenda indeed. It is clear, particularly from the case study of Katie in the briefing provided by Fife Gingerbread, that the project’s support is invaluable to those who use it. Katie, who was first referred to the project by her midwife, went from being a young woman who had been taken advantage of by others to becoming a young mother who was able to stand up for both herself and her son. The teen parent project aims to make a positive difference in the lives of young parents and their children by ensuring that young parents are engaged with other services, which will benefit their own and their children’s health and wellbeing, as well as improve levels of physical, intellectual, emotional and social development. The project has already helped young parents to increase their confidence and self-esteem, as well as improve their parenting and self-advocacy skills. Like others, I wish Fife Gingerbread the very best for the future and commend its staff and volunteers for all their hard work. I hope that the debate helps to raise the profile of its work and helps young parents further. I thank David Torrance once again for bringing to the chamber a debate on a topic that affects many families throughout Scotland.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, although the decrease in the number of convictions for violent crimes, excluding homicide, is no cause for complacency, it is a welcome step towards a safer society?

I, too, congratulate John Wilson on securing the debate and Kezia Dugdale on securing her members’ business debate last week. I apologise to members as I may not be able to stay to the end of the debate. It is obvious that the two topics are inextricably linked. As suggested by Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, credit unions can compete payday loan companies out of existence. A key reason behind the debtmas campaign is to entice people away from the high-interest, modern-day Shylocks—if I may use that term—that offer too-good-to-be-true, instant cash deals. We all know the drawbacks associated with companies such as Wonga, whose chief executive admitted in 2010 that their practices would be classified as illegal in some countries and that, on occasions, the company will charge £6.57 to borrow £1 for one day. However, people taking out the loans do so because of an urgent, short-term cash crisis. Regardless of the sum being taken out, it is a zero-sum game for the customer and one in which only the loan company can win, particularly with the exorbitant fees that they charge. Although we would all welcome substantially stricter regulations on those companies, the power to introduce them unfortunately remains reserved to Westminster. However, even if the UK Government acted, there would be no point in doing so in isolation as that would effectively be closing the stable door after the horse had bolted. We clearly need alternative money lending and credit schemes that do not cynically target those in need of help in order to make a fast buck. Although they exist, they need to be more widely advertised and available. Therefore, I am delighted that the Scottish Government has followed up on January’s members’ business debate in which a number of my colleagues asked the Government to support credit unions, and that it has launched its 12 days of debtmas campaign, encouraging people to ignore payday loan companies’ advances and instead consider other options, including the services of credit unions. We all know that money can get tight around Christmas, with extra money spent on heating, presents or perennial nights out. The costs all add up and can leave many families struggling into the new year, when they know that it will be five or six weeks until payday. It will be difficult to combat the multi-billion pound business of payday loan companies—which, as John Wilson mentioned, saw 400,000 of their adverts broadcast last year, with adults seeing an average of 152 and children 70 of them—but it is essential to spread the message that there are alternatives and it is worth while promoting the fairer, cheaper alternative of credit unions. Although I doubt that credit unions run to the same ethos as George and Mary Bailey’s building and loan association in the iconic film “It’s a Wonderful Life”, in which they famously offered people their honeymoon money after a run on the banks, credit unions are undoubtedly a better alternative than those of payday lenders. As a direct result of the debtmas campaign, almost 1,500 people and counting have already asked for details of local credit unions, such as North East Fife Credit Union, which is fully regulated by the FCA and operates out of Cupar and Springfield. Without credit unions, people would face an impossible choice between an unapproved overdraft extension that would incur expensive charges and a payday loan that would also incur expensive charges. I am certain that every member who is present will have been approached by constituents with money problems. I am pleased that I can point my constituents to a local credit union that might be able to assist them, but I am disappointed by the number of people on low incomes who say that banks will not help them. If more organisations paid a living wage and we could ensure that the lending system in Scotland was fairer, far fewer people would struggle for money at Christmas and throughout the year. However, credit unions fulfil a very real need, and I am pleased to support the motion.

While it is true that the Justice Committee drew attention to the fact that the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 does not use the term “victim” in relation to matters that apply pre-conviction, using instead the term “complainer”, nevertheless, for the purposes of the bill, it is appropriate not to be too prescriptive. Moreover, although subsection (1) of the amendment has the victim as a person “who has suffered harm—” including, in subsection (2) of the amendment, “loss or damage to ... property”— the rest of the amendment talks about offences against the “person”, implying, at least to me, that where someone has suffered damage to property alone, he would not be a victim. In my view, therefore, the amendment is defectively drafted and should be rejected.

On Graeme Pearson’s amendment 12, I have difficulty in considering that any guidance that the Lord Advocate produced could be anything other than general. I am also concerned about whether the amendment would place too much emphasis on the Lord Advocate alone and would not take account of the accused’s interests in the process. Would the amendment provide the right balance? I think not. I have some sympathy with Margaret Mitchell’s amendments, particularly in relation to sexual history applications under sections 274 and 275 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. A common occurrence is that a complainer or victim is confused and takes the view that she should have her lawyer, because she does not understand that the Crown represents the public interest and not her. A pilot is entirely the wrong approach and we should not put a pilot in legislation. I have some sympathy with Margaret Mitchell and I think that the Government would be wise to update the research and information on sexual history applications, but the amendments are not the right way forward.

I refer members to my declaration in the register of members’ interests that I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates. It seems a long while ago since we embarked on scrutiny of the bill, which responds to a very real need to improve the lot of victims and witnesses in the criminal justice system. We need to recognise that the impact of crime is deeply stressful in itself without the justice system compounding that experience. The bill serves a useful purpose, as it not only takes account of the EU directive but goes beyond it. In the short time available, I will make a few points. More information for victims is a must. They cannot understand the process if they do not have information. The bill is certainly a step forward in that respect, although with the caveat that any online hub should not replace the human touch and that vital face-to-face support that victims need at what is a stressful time. On decisions not to prosecute, since stage 1 we have had a Crown Office review, which was perhaps encouraged by the European directive and which has given rise to the amendment that was made at stage 2 to enable victims to request a review, with an obligation on the Lord Advocate to set and publish procedural rules for conducting such reviews. That is a step forward, but it would be helpful if the Government could advise on the timetable for the publication of those rules. On automatic special measures, at stage 1 there were concerns that extending the right to special measures was in conflict with allowing a right to object to their use. At stage 2, we sought to differentiate between standard and non-standard special measures, preserving a right to object to the latter, which strikes me as the right balance. The cabinet secretary has outlined an approach to the victim surcharge that might be described as testing the waters, as it will apply first only to cases that result in a fine. It seems sensible to me to give the Government flexibility to respond to changing circumstances and to learn from experience. One issue that needs time for consideration is the interaction between victim surcharge orders and compensation and restitution orders. Earlier, we debated the proposal on legal advice for victims in relation to sexual offences. At stage 2, the Government’s view was that such a measure would result in a major innovation in the law with wide implications. I accept that, and Parliament rejected the amendments on that today, but I cannot but think that the issue will certainly re-emerge in future, and that might benefit from up-to-date research and inquiry. The bill is an important addition to the changing framework of justice in Scotland and will, I hope, provide support for victims and witnesses while balancing the rights of the accused to a fair trial. The aim must be to improve the experience of those who, through no fault of their own, are involved in a system that might seem overwhelming. David McKenna of Victim Support Scotland said in evidence: “There is a widespread sense that the justice system does not provide recognition of the individual’s experience and does not demonstrate respect or treat the individual with dignity.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 16 April 2013; c 2589.] That needs to be a thing of the past.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Civilisations around the world have been using censuses for around 5,000 years and possibly longer. The first known ones were carried out in ancient Egypt and Greece. The practice has continued in Scotland because it provides the most detailed snapshot possible of our nation and its people. As Cameron Buchanan said, we have carried out 23 censuses. The trends and changes that censuses reveal allow us to develop informed policy with a clear vision of what is likely to lie ahead. However, there are limits to their use and they cannot be used as a crystal ball. The Registrar General for Scotland makes projections for future population estimates based on the figures in the census. The standard of the methodology used in those figures is no doubt professional, but let us look at how population projections vary. In 2012, the population of Scotland was estimated at 5,413,000. Just one decade earlier, in 2002, figures calculated using census statistics projected that the population in 2013 would fall to 4,970,000. Even with the most rigorous analysis, the 2002 projection turned out to be half a million people off the mark. For the future, the difference between the 2002 and 2012 projections for the population in 2027 is 814,000. The point that I am making is that although the census is the most accurate head count that we have, trends do not necessarily continue and sometimes vary dramatically. The 2011 census was certainly innovative. It included new questions, for example on language, national identity and long-term health conditions. One of the things that the 2011 census confirmed was that our population is still an ageing one. It is worth noting, however, that Scotland’s ageing population challenge is by no means unique or insurmountable. It is a challenge that faces every country in the European Union, and more around the world, as a result of people living longer, healthier lives. In many ways, it is something to celebrate. Indeed, University of Edinburgh research published in the British Medical Journal this month shows that the demographic time bomb—if I may use the expression—may not be as big a problem as many claim it to be. The researchers argue that the standard way of measuring dependency ratios is inherently flawed. In their view, the ratio of elderly dependants to working-age people is actually falling. According to the research, as the health of older people improves, the prospect of elderly people having longer working lives increases. Therefore, while it is important that we remember not to conflate old age with dependency, the Scottish Government is right to take forward the direction set by the Christie commission through the integration of health and social care, the pursuit of preventative spend policies and an overriding focus on making services work better. The 2011 census results for my constituency of North East Fife were similar to Scotland’s as a whole, with the exception that the proportion of people aged 16 to 29 was considerably higher than the national average, at 22.4 per cent compared with 18.5 per cent across Scotland, while the proportion of those aged over 65 was slightly higher than the national average. However, more generally, the simple fact is that Scotland’s economy would grow if the proportion of economically active people increased. In practical terms, notwithstanding what I said earlier, that means increasing the number of people of working age in employment. There are many levers that could be used to make that happen. I take the view that the increase in the number of overseas-born people in the past decade is a positive and not a negative. I believe that there should be easier access for international students and graduates.

Okay. In the UK, that is unlikely to happen. David Cameron implies that immigrants are a drain on public services. The UK Border Agency’s reluctance to provide visas for international students in Scotland is increasingly a barrier to expanding the number of international students who come to study and work here and who, if they were allowed to come, would spend money and help us to grow our economy. As the white paper illustrates, independence will allow Scotland to take a different approach—one that is more suited to its needs.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate, and I welcome the committee’s stage 1 report. At roughly £4.5 billion per annum according to the 2010-11 figures, health and social care spending on people aged 65 and over constitutes nearly a third of the health and wellbeing portfolio budget. Investment in those areas is not only significant but absolutely essential. It is important to ensure that we fund and design an integrated service that will be sustainable. The consensus surrounding the bill is positive. It should come as no surprise, given that the bill reflects the current international trend towards integration of health and social care. I was delighted to learn that the group that is overseeing Fife’s adult health and social care integration—it is called communicating health and social care integration in Fife—which comprises staff from NHS Fife and Fife Council, was last week shortlisted to be in the final three, out of 130, in the health and social care integration category of The Herald’s society awards 2013. That accolade was dedicated to the council and its NHS Fife colleagues, partners, service users and patients who have helped to support the group’s work. It demonstrates that successful progress is already being made on the ground. It is fair to say that we need to fund healthcare and social care as efficiently as possible owing to the current pressure on public finances, but we need also to work towards having a care sector that offers a career option and which has motivated staff who are working towards providing a first-rate service. We need to strive to improve the standard of care that some patients are receiving as we plan for the inevitable demographic changes of the future. Scotland is not alone in moving towards a joined-up approach to delivering those areas of care. For the past 40 years there has been a movement in that direction all around the world. There are no direct parallels with Scotland, but we can and should always learn from international examples. Nearer to home, England has introduced the Health and Social Care Act 2012. Although the principle is the same, I understand that integration is proving to be difficult to implement, according to some professionals who cite the fragmenting effect of introducing private enterprise into the NHS as an obstacle to success. In Wales in 2007, a primary, secondary and social care strategy, called chronic conditions management demonstrators, was introduced for people with multiple chronic illnesses, which has resulted in considerable reductions in bed days resulting from emergencies. Indeed, there were falls of 27 per cent, 26 per cent and 16.5 per cent in successive years. To see the advantages of a local approach, which the bill provides for, we need look no further than Sweden. In the committee report is a recommendation in paragraphs 43 to 45 regarding the justification for the bill. Some witnesses who gave evidence to the committee suggested that steps could have been taken towards more joined-up care service delivery using existing legislation and guidelines. Some pointed out—rightly, in my view—that legislation alone will not bring about the changes that we want to see. I listened to what Malcolm Chisholm said on that point earlier and agree with it. I have spoken before about the transformational effect of legislation and said that the introduction of legislation can lead to attitudinal changes across the country. Individuals and organisations not only become obliged to observe a set of guidelines; many do so proactively before they are required to do so in order to remain ahead of the curve. I therefore believe that the committee was right to describe the bill as “the momentum needed to make the widely desired progress a reality”. I note that, with regard to the provisions in the bill that relate to the two possible options for delivery of integrated services—the body corporate model and the lead agency model—the cabinet secretary has undertaken to provide more information on the roles and duties that will be involved in those arrangements. I welcome that, and the consensus among relevant organisations and the Government on the basic model behind the proposals, which is that local government and health boards should be jointly accountable. That is also very positive, but it is absolutely clear that we cannot have a system in which health boards and local government are locked in budgetary disputes with each another. Such disputes serve no one in the long term, and ultimately the biggest losers are the patients, who are liable to experience delays and confusing information about their care, as experience has shown. The case for co-operation has been strongly made, and the bill’s provisions that allow a high degree of freedom in choosing the model that is best suited to an area will, I hope, mean that more health boards and local authorities will be able to take forward adapted plans of their own to meet national standards with tailored means to a unified end. To conclude, I commend the committee on its thorough report and look forward to monitoring the bill’s progress as it passes through Parliament.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate and I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing it. I also congratulate the Medical Research Council on its centenary, and I acknowledge the important work that it has done over the years, and the valuable contribution that it will continue to make to science and understanding in the future. Murdo Fraser has given a good description of the history and operation of the MRC and he noted its importance in the discovery of penicillin. I was also particularly interested in his comments on the progress in the treatment and prevention of heart attacks and strokes through the use of a common gout medicine. The motion refers to, among other things, the University of St Andrews. As members will all know, the University of St Andrews in my constituency is the oldest university in Scotland, and is currently celebrating its 600th anniversary. It has achieved a world-class reputation through the highest standards of teaching, student satisfaction and world-class research. Indeed, researchers at the University of St Andrews have led world research in science and humanities for many years. As we speak, researchers at the school of biology at the University of St Andrews are working with colleagues in India to develop the first vaccine against foot-and-mouth disease, an epidemic of which led to the mass slaughter of livestock only a few years ago, and which has cost Scotland’s farming community hundreds of millions of pounds in the past decade. The hand, foot-and-mouth viral infection is particularly dangerous to young children, so progress towards a vaccine should be warmly welcomed. The medical school at the University of St Andrews is highly respected and has produced countless celebrated alumni over the years, notwithstanding the fact that the university does not have the facility to be an end-to-end teaching hospital. Edward Jenner, who pioneered the smallpox vaccine, and Margaret Fairlie, who was the first woman to hold a professorial position in Scotland in the early 20th century, are alumni. The University of St Andrews has, of course, received MRC funding. Eight awards have been made since 2010, largely for research into combating infection, alongside genetics and the immune system. As Murdo Fraser’s motion highlights, the University of St Andrews is receiving a £2.7 million package of on-going support from the MRC, and will share £20 million of funding from the MRC towards the establishment of the Farr institute, the health informatics research institute that will see the collaboration of 19 universities across these islands, including six in Scotland. The Scottish effort will be co-ordinated from Dundee, just over the Tay bridge from my constituency, and a short journey from the University of St Andrews. I welcome the establishment of the Farr institute and the sharing of expertise in the fields of health, social science, technology and medicine, and I look forward to the establishment of the facilities and the organisational structure that will emerge. As the Farr institute demonstrates, successful research depends on the co-operation of different institutions. I do not, however, believe that research should be considered in purely national terms. Research can be carried out nationally and internationally. National boundaries are no barrier to co-operation in the 21st century when instantaneous communication and the sharing of data connect people in almost every corner of the globe. Funding tends to move towards institutions that have a record of success, as the University of St Andrews demonstrates. Funding comes from a variety of sources. For example, the MRC receives a lot of funding from the charity Medical Research Foundation, and other funding that is enjoyed by Scottish institutions comes from business, charity, the European Union and Government. In that connection, it is worth noting the 38 per cent increase in investment by the Scottish Government in research and knowledge exchange activities since it came to office in 2007. Murdo Fraser should therefore rest assured that research is safe in the hands of the Scottish Government. Once again, I thank Murdo Fraser for securing the debate and congratulate the MRC on its centenary.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it will announce the next set of locations to receive superfast broadband. (S4O-02615)

The cabinet secretary will know that a number of my constituents have expressed disappointment at the speed of their broadband. Earlier in the year, Fife Council stated that it hoped that more than half of the deployment of superfast broadband in the area would be completed in the early stages of the project. Can the cabinet secretary advise whether Fife Council’s targets are realistic and confirm that North East Fife will not be left as a technological white space by 2015?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the report of the review of expenses and funding of civil litigation in Scotland. (S4O-02589)

What further consultation is the Scottish Government planning on the proposal to introduce a qualified one-way costs shifting, which would apply to all personal injury claims and would be a departure from the traditional expenses-follow-success rule?

4. To ask the First Minister what the consequences are of his trip to China. (S4F-01683)

Between 2010-11 and 2011-12, the number of Chinese students studying at universities and colleges in Scotland rose by 22 per cent to 8,075. What steps can the Scottish Government take to ensure that Scotland remains an attractive place for Chinese students to study?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I declare my interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. As members are aware, the UK Government has announced that reserved tribunals will not be devolved to the Scottish Parliament, for the foreseeable future. That is disappointing in that it makes it a little more difficult to achieve the bill’s aims of streamlining the tribunals system in Scotland and making it more efficient. However, that is where we are. Notwithstanding that, we need to ensure that the legislation will be fit to accommodate reserved tribunals in due course, but as Jonathan Mitchell of the Faculty of Advocates pointed out, without reserved tribunals, we are dealing with about only 2 per cent to 3 per cent of cases that come before tribunals in Scotland—much less if the Lands Tribunal for Scotland or, indeed, the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland were to be excluded. Much of the bill is technical and to some people—possibly even the convener, who I see has now left—it may appear to be dull, indeed. I accept that repetition may be the order of the day, but there are also a few matters that merit comment. First, given the volume of mental health work and the fact that 332 of the existing 460 tribunal members who are covered by the bill sit on mental health tribunals, it seems to be sensible that the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland should form a chamber of its own. Indeed, the proposals in relation to mental health were well received, with the exception of the possibility that the unique position of the tribunal as a separate chamber might be temporary. I note the Scottish Government’s response on that issue, but I am not sure that it will fully allay those fears. Further engagement with the sector on the issue might be helpful. The second issue is whether the president of the tribunals should be a senator of the College of Justice, a judge or someone without such experience. I was not quite as enthusiastic as other members of the committee about opening up the field to others with relevant experience. If we are to move towards an integrated tribunals and courts system, it is inevitable that a judge—whether appointed or assigned—would be in an advantageous position. The next issue is the absence of a definition of “tribunal” in the bill. Citizens Advice Scotland and others have called for incorporation in the bill of a definition and a statement of overriding objectives, such as that in the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. I note the minister’s comments on that, but I hope that her consideration of the overriding principles will give rise to an amendment at stage 2. I also welcome the statutory provisions that will place a duty on key individuals, including MSPs, to ensure the independence of tribunals.

I am not sure that I have time, to be honest, but I will give way if the intervention is brief.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. As always, Stewart Stevenson makes a very good point. On procedural rules, particularly for the upper tribunal, the evidence said that the new Scottish Civil Justice Council could not deal with that in the short term. As Margaret Mitchell said, the Faculty of Advocates expressed concerns of a constitutional nature that Scottish ministers should not be making rules. Even though, as the minister said, Scottish ministers currently nominally write tribunal rules after consulting relevant parties, I believe that that is a practice that should be ended sooner rather than later, and I would welcome further assurances from the Scottish Government on that. On accessibility, as Iain Nisbet of Govan Law Centre said, tribunals are more accessible than court. They are generally also much cheaper, so our aim must be to preserve that accessibility. I turn to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, the provisions on which remain one of the most controversial aspects of the bill.

No—I need to make some progress. As Elaine Murray mentioned, Lord Gill said in evidence that “The Lands Tribunal for Scotland is a court of law in all but name.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 17 September 2013; c 3195.] I agree. John Wright of the Lands Tribunal for Scotland made the point that it does not really fit in with the unified tribunal system that is proposed. He advised that in England and Wales, in contrast to the position in Scotland, the Lands Tribunal there is substantially an appeals body and therefore seems to have a natural position in an upper tribunal system. John Wright also outlined the variety of expenses orders that currently prevail in the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. There are different expenses rules for compulsory purchase, rating and applications concerning title conditions. Those orders do not fit easily into a tribunals system in which expenses orders are a rarity. The prevailing ethos, at least in relation to title conditions matters that come before the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, is still that the winner gets his expenses. As an aside, in our review of title conditions, the committee expressed concerns about the implications of expenses orders, particularly as they impact on lowly home owners who are up against wealthy developers. The truth is that, particularly in respect of expenses, the Lands Tribunal for Scotland resembles a court. As I have mentioned, the Lord President took the view, in evidence, that expenses orders in tribunal cases should be used sparingly and only in extreme cases. That does not fit in with the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. He argued for the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to be in a separate pillar with a separate administration. Although I accept the minister’s reservations about that and agree that if we were to make an exception for the Lands Tribunal, coherence might be lost, and that, devoid of the Lands Tribunal, the remaining tribunals might look somewhat sparse—I also note the minister’s comments on the appeals provision—I think that the characteristics of the Lands Tribunal are very different from those of other tribunals. It has had the power to award expenses since it started in 1949. Therefore, I believe that continued dialogue between the Scottish Government, the Lands Tribunal and others, even at this late stage, might be appropriate. On the provision of permanent or salaried posts, at the present time I agree with the minister that that is difficult to justify, but I am pleased that the bill will provide for that possibility in the future. I turn to the new interim committee that is to replace the Scottish Committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council, which was not mentioned in our report. The interim committee is to be welcomed, but I am not sure what the long-term solution is. CAS and others are concerned about the issue. They propose that some body should have the function of overseeing administrative justice, as the SCJC has in relation to civil justice. That idea merits consideration, and I will be pleased to hear from the minister on it. Jonathan Mitchell of the Faculty of Advocates described the bill as “fundamentally a good bill” that is “going the right way.” I agree.

I do not know whether the minister has seen the briefing from Inclusion Scotland on the position of disabled people. Does the Government have a view on their position and whether that might be a breach of the Equality Act 2010?

I welcome the committee’s report and the opportunity to speak in the debate, although I am obviously at a disadvantage in that I did not hear the evidence as it was presented to the committee. I will talk briefly about community transport provision in my constituency before moving on to the report. As other members have mentioned, community transport provision is a lifeline to many people around Scotland. It is something that many people, particularly in rural areas, depend on to get them from A to B. It is a service that is of incalculable value to vulnerable people who may not be able to leave their homes anywhere near as much as they would like to without it. In north-east Fife, there is only one main publicly funded community transport scheme in place—dial-a-ride. Members will no doubt be familiar with both the dial-a-ride scheme and the ring-and-ride services. Dial-a-ride is a timetabled service that collects passengers from their homes on request, and allows people who have difficulties in using standard public transport the opportunity, for example, to do their shopping independently. Passengers simply have to phone the service in advance to request a pick-up. Ring-and-ride, on the other hand, is a door-to-door service that is not timetabled and has to be booked in advance. The destination can be anywhere within the local operating area. Sadly, however, the ring-and-ride service in Fife is limited to only four operating areas—Kirkcaldy, Levenmouth, Dunfermline and Glenrothes—and is not available to serve many of my constituents to any significant extent, many of whom live in rural areas such as the east neuk and the howe of Fife. Although general community transport is not readily available in north-east Fife, it is fair to say that the Scottish Ambulance Service’s patient transport service—where that is available—is very well used by outpatients with mobility issues. As with so many things that we discuss in the chamber, it is important that we acknowledge the contribution that is made by volunteers. Their role in community transport initiatives everywhere simply cannot be overlooked. I am in no doubt whatsoever that were more general services available, they would also be used and valued. It is clear that community transport services are an essential part of the transport infrastructure in places where they exist, and they are an enormous boon to all who can use them. However, it is also clear that the picture across individual local authorities, not to mention across Scotland as a whole, is patchy, as David Stewart inferred. On that basis, I welcome the committee’s report, which makes some helpful recommendations, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government’s response indicates a willingness to take forward a number of proposals. As others have alluded to, there are a number of issues that stand in the way of extended community transport provision. Perhaps one of the biggest long-term challenges facing Scotland is that of preparing for an ageing population, as Maureen Watt, the convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, mentioned in her speech. The committee noted some daunting figures that showed the scale of the challenge, as Mark Griffin and Duncan McNeil have indicated. The only point that I emphasise is that, given that average life expectancy is 76.6 years for males and 80.9 years for females, and that health is improving slowly but surely, the forecast rise in the number of 85-year-olds of 144 per cent in less than 20 years is truly food for thought. It is clear that we are experiencing a major demographic shift, which will increase substantially the demand for services such as community transport. It is reassuring to note the Scottish Government fully recognises that and its implications. The committee’s report also identified wider issues facing Scotland’s infrastructure in general. Paragraph 86 stands out: “community transport allows many service users to live independently who might otherwise require supported or residential care.” I therefore hope that the Scottish Government not only recognises that but considers investment in community transport initiatives in the short term to be a major area of preventative spend in the years ahead. I also want to mention the implications of paragraph 87, which goes right to the heart of the debate: “The Committee notes the anecdotal evidence on the reported positive impacts of community transport services upon the lives of users and the wider community. Whilst it considers that these benefits are obvious and clear, the Committee however acknowledges that there is a significant information gap which makes it impossible to make a robust assessment of the total positive impact on individuals and communities of community transport provision.” That theme continues through to paragraph 90, which states: “more qualitative information on the operation of community transport services across Scotland ... might be beneficial.” That information gap is nobody’s fault; it is a natural product of a patchwork system that has grown and evolved over time to meet the changing needs of users. Community transport encompasses many different approaches across the country, as Alex Johnstone suggested. To use the loosest possible definition of the term, community transport encompasses many services, including local authority-run services such as dial-a-ride and ring-and-ride; private limited companies such as MyBus, which operates in north-east Fife; volunteers who drive minibuses or use their own cars; patient transport services; and transport that is provided by residential care homes. I am sure that we all agree that we need to have a comprehensive system for measuring the effectiveness of all forms of community transport, whether public, private or third sector, and that its provision should be kept under regular review to ensure that it is effective. Therefore, I am delighted that the Scottish Government has agreed to commission a new piece of qualitative research. That is a welcome step, and I await the results of the research with interest. I also welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to continue to work with regional transport partnerships and NHS Scotland to implement the recommendations of the short-life working group on healthcare transport.

First, I thank Liz Smith for securing the debate and giving us the opportunity to discuss a direct rail link between Perth and Edinburgh. Liz Smith has, not unexpectedly, made a powerful case for a new direct link. I, for one, am not surprised that the mere hint of the reopening of a railway line proves to be popular with local communities. Rail services play a vital role in connecting people and businesses across the whole of Scotland. We all know that rail travel is an excellent way for communities to reduce their carbon footprint. We also all know that many journeys are being made by car because there is a lack of alternative or more sustainable options. It is clear from the growth in passenger numbers on railways across Scotland that there is strong demand, which can only increase with the expansion of our rail network. I believe that the reinstatement and creation of rail lines, when coupled with an enhanced station network, can provide valuable economic and social benefits to all. Investment in the rail infrastructure of Mid Scotland and Fife is therefore to be welcomed. Clearly, however, we need to ensure that Scotland’s railways are able to compete with the parallel road routes. I know that there are a number of worthy initiatives to improve rail links in the central belt, but we need to ensure that such ambition is shown for routes beyond the central belt, which, when compared with other parts of Scotland, seems already to be well served and connected. Nevertheless, I have some concerns about the potential implications for north-east Fife of a new direct link between Edinburgh and Perth that would bypass Ladybank and Markinch—in the neighbouring constituency—which are both popular commuter hubs for onward travel to Edinburgh and Perth for residents in my constituency. Such a route would undoubtedly have a knock-on effect on the communities that the stations in Ladybank and Markinch serve. Those two stations play a vital role that is clearly valued by those who live in the area. That is evidenced by the volume of commuters who use both stations, which benefit from being on the Aberdeen to Edinburgh and Inverness-Perth-Edinburgh lines. We need to ensure that supporting transport infrastructure in one part of the country is not detrimental to those living in another part of the country, because the purpose of public transport is to connect communities, rather than bypass them completely. I am concerned that if there is a new link between Perth and Edinburgh, residents of north-east Fife could miss out if appropriate investment is not made in the rail infrastructure in my part of the world. I draw members’ attention to the work undertaken by the Newburgh train station campaign and Starlink in St Andrews as examples of the demand for new stations and investment in public transport. Both are very worthy campaigns to establish rail links to Newburgh and St Andrews and both campaign groups are working tirelessly to try to achieve their aims. They have shown great initiative in engaging with transport experts to assess the possibilities of reopening and re-establishing railway links to those communities, as well as in lobbying various public bodies. I acknowledge their efforts and I urge both Transport Scotland and the Scottish Government to give appropriate consideration to their cases. As I said, I recognise Liz Smith’s case, but I believe that the Scottish Government has a strong record in investing in rail so that communities are supported and connected, as well as in aiding them to reduce car use. I hope that the Government will fully assess the potential of rail links that could be created that would benefit all. I thank Liz Smith once again for the opportunity to discuss the matter, and I welcome the debate.

For those of us of a certain age, early debates about the common market were often bedevilled by discussions about the common agricultural policy and its inadequacies. The fact that the policy was designed to benefit poor peasant French farmers rather than efficient British farmers was a frequent claim, but we have not heard much about that in this afternoon’s debate. Today, Eurosceptics on the right of politics seem primarily concerned with the threat to the City of London from financial regulation and from Frankfurt itself. However, in reality we all know that the CAP still swallows up a substantial part of the EU budget and remains an important issue in the European debate. We know of the cabinet secretary’s concern that, although he has had a reasonably high profile in fishing negotiations at European level, his position for agriculture has been significantly weaker. Giving evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee in June, Owen Paterson defended that position. With due respect to Mr Paterson, I think that I can do no better than to quote from the Official Report of the meeting. Mr Paterson said: “Fishing is a bit different because the interests of all four parts of the UK are similar. In agriculture, all four parts are bit different. Also, the agriculture issues are quite contentious. Without being brutal, the sheer physical circumstances of a bilateral mean that, when we are talking to the French or Germans in their languages, we do not have very long. There is not time to go into translation and I get more done by talking to them direct and then reporting back, as I do with Richard Lochhead. If he is there, we have a meeting back in the office of the United Kingdom permanent representation to the European Union and I will tell him what has happened. All the ministers are very busy and there is not time to go into translations with some of them. We have to crack on, have a direct conversation with them and then come back. You must not underestimate the trouble to which I go to keep Richard Lochhead informed.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2383.] Those words say it all. The approach adopted is not so much active participation as—dare I say it—a slightly patronising approach to sharing information. There is certainly not active engagement with Scotland’s cabinet secretary. I am aware that Owen Paterson was generally considered to have had a not unsuccessful time in his previous job as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, but I am not sure that he has displayed that talent in dealing with Scotland in his current portfolio.

I would not say that Owen Paterson was completely neglectful, but I was just highlighting the approach or style that he has adopted. Agriculture remains of vital importance to Scotland, and changes to the CAP need to be properly addressed. Getting CAP reform right is important to the continued success of Scotland’s food and drink industry. Others have drawn attention to the substantial difference that independence would make to pillar 1 funding, but I want to look principally at pillar 2. Over the past seven years, Scotland has received approximately €360 million in rural development funding, which is about €9 per hectare per year as against €15 per hectare for the UK as a whole. We are right at the bottom of the European league, as others have suggested, and we receive much less than the Czech Republic, Denmark and Ireland. I accept, of course, that there may be historical reasons for our position. When the first EU multi-year rural development programme was worked out for 2000 to 2006, national allocations of spending were based on what national Governments spent at the time. In the case of the UK that was very little, especially for agriculture environment schemes and rural development. It is also true that, in order not to impact on the UK rebate, the UK has traditionally been keen on voluntary modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2. Mr Paterson was keen to tell this Parliament in June that the figures were settled and that how they were carved up—including the geographical areas in which they are distributed—was a matter for the Scottish ministers, but, with all due respect, if the pot is not big enough in the first place some of these choices may prove not to be real choices. Given the extent of less-favoured areas in Scotland, how much flexibility is there in that choice? It is to our great disadvantage that the UK failed to negotiate a special uplift or fairer share for Scotland. The negotiations on a transfer from pillar 2 to pillar 1, under which the UK may have the potential for a 25 per cent transfer, might have been a success for the UK—and I accept that Owen Paterson does not favour such transfers—but it is hard to see that it is of benefit to Scotland, quite the reverse. As Rob Gibson said, we know that 16 member states used the need for unanimous agreement to negotiate top-up funds for pillar 2. If it is good enough for Slovenia and Ireland, it is good enough for Scotland. In respect of transition agreements, while I welcome the extension of agriculture environment contracts, the position on forestry payments and the extension of the less-favoured area support scheme, they do not detract from the big picture, which is that an independent Scotland could have done better. I am less than clear on where we are with the LEADER programme. I accept that the Scottish Government has an important role in negotiations and, like many members, I hear criticism of the bureaucracy of the programme, some of which may lie in Scotland. It does, however, represent a very small part of the overall budget for pillar 2 and should not detract from the overall argument that for Scotland’s best interests to be served it should have its own seat at the top table. Our opponents take great delight in talking of the uncertainties of independence—let alone the uncertainties of the in-out referendum by 2017—while failing to acknowledge the certainty that in this area an independent Scotland could do so much better.

The member has not referred to mentoring so far. Does he have any comment to make on the importance of mentoring?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate. Forty years have passed since the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 was put on the statute book. In that time, prisons, the employment market, the nature of crime and attitudes to policing have changed considerably and, in some ways, beyond recognition. It is therefore important that as legislators we review the way in which we deal with offenders. The discussions that were held between the Scottish Government and stakeholders last year revealed a clear consensus that the current act, albeit that it is still relevant in principle, as Margaret Mitchell indicated, is not fit for purpose in modern Scotland. The introduction of an open discussion paper is therefore a welcome step in the process of modernising and updating the 1974 act to reflect the 21st century. As the cabinet secretary said, the 1974 act had the dual purpose of protecting the public and reducing reoffending. The Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament and, in particular, the Justice Committee have done a great deal of work on the latter matter in this parliamentary session, and I am sure that reducing reoffending will remain a priority. I will say a few words about the public protection element of the 1974 act. It is important that any person who works in a position of authority has appropriate background checks. That is particularly true for those who work with vulnerable people, be they children or adults with additional needs. The nature of crime against vulnerable people has changed over the past 40 years; indeed, it has changed immensely over the past 15 or 20 years since the widespread advent of home computers and the internet. It is important that refreshed legislation takes into consideration all the facts of an ex-offender’s background that may be interpreted as legitimate risks to vulnerable people. More generally speaking, it is essential that known ex-offenders who may have served their sentence but still pose a threat to the public are handled in a way that minimises the danger to the public. It is also a question of balance. We need a disclosure system that is fit for purpose in modern Scotland. We should absolutely not have a system that makes it acceptable to brand people as criminals, no matter the severity of their crime, for the rest of their lives. That badge, which is a favourite of the tabloid media, is completely incompatible with the belief that rehabilitation is possible. That brings me to the need to reduce reoffending, not just for the sake of the public, but for the sake of the offender. The Scottish Government is doing a lot to reduce reoffending. There is a widely accepted recognition by many—if not by all—that the criminal justice system cannot simply be about locking people away for short sentences that do not work. Statistics show that 74 per cent of people who serve short sentences in prison will commit an offence again within two years of release. We need to look carefully at what that means for sentencing. The two-and-a-half-year or 30-month period for which sentences are never spent certainly seems to me to have no magic. It will be interesting to see what the consultation reveals in that respect. The Government has, of course, given a great deal of thought to more effective sentencing, including the introduction of community payback orders. At the very least, community payback orders offer offenders the opportunity to turn their lives around by engaging in meaningful activities to the benefit of their communities. I am sure that that will be built on when the Scottish Government publishes its report on the consultation on redesigning the community justice system before the end of the year. We accept the importance of setting offenders up for a better life post sentence and making it easier for them to avoid falling back into crime. We certainly need to remove barriers to employment. It is acknowledged that getting a job is the best thing that any ex-offender can do, and we know that historic research indicates that one in three of the long-term unemployed has a criminal record. Members who have read the “Prejudged: Tagged for life” report by Working Links—which, incidentally, is a company that is contracted by the UK Government to oversee the Government’s employment welfare agenda—will be aware of the numerous and varied barriers that ex-offenders face in moving into work. The research in the report speaks for itself. Only 10 per cent of UK employers who were surveyed said that they would not employ an ex-offender, but only 18 per cent said that they had employed someone with a criminal record. That is despite the fact that the research in the report shows that fewer than one in 10 employers recorded a negative experience with ex-offenders. I am sure that all members will know at least some constituents who come and tell them that, not for want of trying, they cannot find a job. Currently, getting a job is no mean feat, and that is without the baggage that ex-offenders have to carry. Updating the 1974 act presents an opportunity to work around the stigma that ex-offenders face. I have mentioned in other debates the transformative effect that legislation can have. Behaviour and attitudes can change ahead of the curve when new legislation is introduced, partly due to the media and general attention that is given in highlighting the prevailing problem. As a Parliament, we should seize the opportunity to make rehabilitation legislation work better for ex-offenders as well as for the public at large. One matter that has not been touched on in the debate so far is the impact of defamation. Is it right that it should be a defence in an action for defamation to plead veritas without malice, or is qualified privilege still appropriate? I will not provide answers to such questions now, but the Government was right to raise them in the consultation document. Finally, I am pleased that the Scottish Government has instigated this wide-ranging consultation following discussion with the various stakeholders, including the police, employers, Disclosure Scotland and others. I am sure that the Justice Committee—the convener would take note if she was here—will consider the issue in depth before too long and I will be very interested to see what proposals come forward from the process.

I refer to my entry in the register of members’ interests, which shows that I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates. It is clear that Lord Carloway’s proposal on the abolition of the requirement for corroboration remains controversial. We certainly have no consensus on the issue. As Margaret Mitchell indicated, a substantial part of the legal establishment remains opposed to abolition. Of course, many organisations and individuals support Lord Carloway’s proposal, particularly those that regard corroboration as a barrier to conviction in cases in which corroborating evidence is not always available, such as rape or sexual abuse cases. With that fundamental divergence in views, it is unlikely that consensus will ever be found. However, I draw members’ attention to an anonymous contribution on the Scottish Government consultation on additional safeguards: “it is ultimately for juries to decide whether they are prepared to convict on the basis of good-quality, relevant evidence, albeit from a single source. We already allow them to convict on the basis of poor-quality evidence of dubious relevance, but we justify it to ourselves because it comes from two sources. This is a pre-scientific, irrational way of guaranteeing fair trials. The government must make its case more vigorously and must not allow the media lines to be dominated by the narrative imposed by the reactionary institutions of the Scottish legal profession who have, let us never forget, uniformly opposed every sensible and necessary reform of the last five hundred years, from moving divorces to the sheriff court, the introduction of the criminal appeal court and even the establishment of the College of Justice itself.” Although, as a practising advocate, I would not necessarily accept that, it is fair to say that the legal profession is not always on the side of the angels. However, I join others in not being overwhelmed by the Carloway review’s research on the impact of abolition, to which Christine Grahame referred. I am clear that the abolition of corroboration may have little impact on conviction rates for sexual assault and rape cases, but the possible impact on the number of prosecutions is not clear cut. As Lord Carloway agreed yesterday, with a new prosecutorial test embracing a quantitative assessment and a qualitative assessment before an assessment based on the evidence of whether there is a reasonable prospect of conviction, it is not necessarily the case that there will be more prosecutions. However, it is clear that cases that are currently not pursued will be and some cases that currently are pursued will not be. I suggest that that, in itself, may have a positive impact on reducing miscarriages of justice. As Lord Carloway says, inability to pursue a case at all because of the requirement of corroboration may itself be a miscarriage of justice. In the absence of consensus, it is incumbent on the Parliament to consider safeguards very closely. I was pleased that the Scottish Government took that on board and launched a second consultation on the additional safeguards that would be required if the requirement for corroboration were abolished and did not simply accept Lord Carloway’s view that no additional safeguards were required. However, I was rather less pleased by the response to that consultation, particularly on the question whether a single judge should have the power to withdraw a case if he was of the view that no reasonable jury could convict the accused on the basis of the evidence led. Paragraph 182 of the policy memorandum fails to consider the matter critically. It is a reasonable assumption that, if the Scottish Law Commission were asked to consider that issue, it would take the view that it took in 2008 that a single judge should have that power. That perhaps illustrates the point that referring matters to the Scottish Law Commission will not by itself advance them and is no silver bullet. To end on a more positive note, safeguards are precisely the area of policy that requires further scrutiny. The Government amendment and, indeed, the Labour amendment recognise the role of the Justice Committee in that. That is the proper way forward. We also need to ensure that we explore fully the extent to which abolition might raise article 6 issues. The lesson of Cadder is surely that we need to be ever mindful of fair trial issues. That is a more constructive approach than the one proposed by the Conservative amendment, which I hope members will reject.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate and I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on securing it. We have heard of some of the excellent work that the 120 Al-Anon Family Groups do in communities throughout Scotland, including my constituency of North East Fife, which I think is the same part of the world where Stewart Stevenson’s father was a country GP. Earlier in the year, I was delighted to sponsor a parliamentary exhibition for the group, and I know that the vast majority of members stopped to speak to the exhibitors and find out about their work. I know that they were grateful for the support that the Parliament showed them on that occasion. I am certain that few members would deny the scourge that alcohol is on potential in this country. Mark Robinson of NHS Scotland recently announced that, despite an 8 per cent fall in drink sales last year, “we are still drinking too much as a nation”. I am also certain that nobody in the Parliament will be unaware of the damage that alcohol can do, both to those who overuse it and to those who feel the effects of that. Last year, the reduction in alcohol sales, compared to 2009, was the equivalent of 35 million pints of beer. Despite that, as Gordon MacDonald mentioned, alcohol sales in Scotland were higher than they were in 1994. In particular, sales of vodka per person were twice as high in Scotland compared to sales south of the border. Although I welcome the reduction in overall alcohol sales, more needs to be done for those who suffer directly and indirectly. There is a broad range of support and guidance for those who directly suffer the effects of alcohol misuse and it is proper and correct that that is the case. There have been numerous—arguably, too many—high-profile cases of alcoholism negatively impacting on individuals. Those include the author Stephen King, the actor Robert Downey and the former first lady Betty Ford, to name just a few. What those people have in common is that they accepted interventions from their friends and family to help them to combat their addictions, and they all recovered. I am sure that we all realise the strength and courage that are required to carry out those interventions and that their families would have required significant support to help them through the process. Although there is a broad range of support for alcoholics, the effects that alcoholism can have on people’s family and friends is often less clear. Where alcoholics’ families can go for support is also often less clear. That is where voluntary organisations such as Al-Anon Family Groups can be of significant benefit. The relatives of alcoholics do not need just counselling or advice; they need compassion and a level of understanding from people who have gone through what they are going through and who have been negatively affected by another person’s alcoholism. Al-Anon does not offer solutions. As Gordon MacDonald said, it offers understanding, strength and hope as well as support and solidarity. It offers not only a listening ear but an understanding ear. It offers the courage for people to continue the seemingly endless battle against another person’s alcoholism. Earlier, I named three recovered alcoholics who have all gone on to considerable success and to become more famous and wealthy than most of us can imagine. Betty Ford even set up a renowned clinic in her name to help alcoholics and their family members to recover. Before doing that, however, she, just like every other alcoholic, relied on the support of her family to help her recover from her addiction. Her family, like the family of any other alcoholic, saw and felt the worst effects of alcoholism. Although those individuals might not have had the specific support of Al-Anon Family Groups, I am delighted that Al-Anon has a presence throughout Scotland—in Edinburgh, North East Fife and beyond—because without the on-going support of such groups, countless numbers of people would struggle in silence as they watch a family member tear apart their life and the lives of those around them. I welcome Al-Anon’s continued presence, although I hope that one day it will not need as large a presence and that Scotland can finally rid itself of the damaging aspects of its drinking culture and drink-related early deaths.

I understand from my correspondence with the Scottish Court Service that it is setting up transitional planning groups to oversee the transfer of business from courts that are closing, such as Cupar sheriff court. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to assist those transitional planning groups to bring forward plans, including on rolling out video facilities and family hearings?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with the conclusion on page 9 of the review that services should be accessible and that patients should have “greater ownership of their own care”? If so, does he agree that community pharmacies should not be hindered from opening because of what has been described as the glacial process of the national appeal panel?

I welcome the minister’s statement and thank him for the update on what is, by anyone’s standards, the very difficult task of balancing employment issues with environmental issues and the interests of communities that lie in the proximity of opencast mines, let alone with the financial issues at this difficult time for the coal industry. As the minister said, two of the largest mine operators in Scotland have folded within 12 months. The decline of the coal-mining industry in Scotland during the past 50 years has been quite rapid and the events of this year prove that we still have a considerable way to go before the industry can offer any form of security to its employees and other stakeholders. To my knowledge, my constituency of North East Fife has never been home to any collieries, but that is not to say that the industry has not had a significant effect on the area. In the past, tens of thousands of men from around Fife would have been employed in what was the kingdom of Fife’s or, at least, west and central Fife’s largest and best-known industry. The historic age of mining in Fife was brought to life in the film “The Happy Lands”, which was screened at the festival of politics this year and earlier this session. In more recent times, long since the industry’s heyday as mentioned by Helen Eadie, opencast surface mining in Fife alone yielded 171,500 tonnes of coal in the first quarter of this year. That is more than 15 per cent of Scotland’s total output in the same period, and more than 7 per cent of the combined UK total. It also employed 145 workers. It is therefore beyond doubt that the industry remains a considerable force despite clear downward trends during the past few decades. Those jobs would be put at risk by Patrick Harvie and Willie Rennie if their amendment was passed. Most members will have welcomed the minister’s announcement of the creation of the Scottish coal task force following the demise of Scottish Coal. The task force’s remit is to secure employment and to ensure appropriate restoration work. Those tasks are extremely important and I welcome the work that the task force has undertaken thus far, including the way in which it acted as a platform for stakeholders to come together this summer to convince the Office of Rail Regulation that its proposals for freight charges would have devastated the industry in Scotland. Success in making the ORR reverse its decision almost certainly saved hundreds of jobs across Scotland and helped to strengthen the industry for the long term. It is not just jobs that we need to protect, important as they are. As parliamentarians, we have a duty to do all that we can within the powers that we have to ensure that the landscape is protected for now and for future generations of residents and visitors alike. Much has been said about the damage that is often left behind when operations at opencast mines wind up. Talk of scars on the landscape is understandable. It is worth bearing in mind the fact that our landscape is a huge asset. Nature-based tourism is worth £1.4 billion to the Scottish economy every year, and it supports around 39,000 full-time equivalent jobs. According to SNH, 40 per cent of all tourist spending in Scotland is nature related. In addition, we must remember how adversely communities that are in close proximity to opencast mines can be affected when the mine is active and when operations have ceased. As other members have rightly pointed out, restoration is a complex business and there can be no one-size-fits-all approach. Different agreements between operators and local authorities, different access rights and different topography and water tables, to name but a few variables, must all be taken into consideration. I am aware that flooding is a particular issue in Fife and I am pleased to note that Fife Council has been active in working with operators, SEPA and SMRT to look at mitigating flooding effects in the short term, and agreeing on the details of resolution for the longer term. On clean-up costs, the minister and other members have talked about the problems that are so often associated with bonds with local authorities, be it their absence or their inadequacy for dealing with the scale of the clean-up and the costs involved in restoring the mine to as close to its original state as possible through landscaping or the like. That has clearly been a major problem around Scotland, and I am aware of cases in other parts of the country, such as Midlothian and East Ayrshire. I am encouraged to note that Fife’s current post-1998 opencast mines have significant bonds in place, by and large. Whether they are adequate is not, however, entirely clear at this stage. I am delighted to hear that the minister has recognised the need to do something about this in the immediate short term, and the creation of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust to assist and guide the restoration process is a welcome step indeed for stakeholders and the communities affected. Notwithstanding our collective best efforts, there is still a problem that needs to be addressed in the longer term. Across Scotland, we must learn lessons from the bond problem. It seems that for many years—going back decades—bonds were sought but rarely insisted upon. I listened with interest to Claire Baker’s comments on Alex Rowley’s statement on that issue and I also welcome Derek Mackay’s comments on the Scottish planning policy. The case for stronger regulation has been well and truly made and I am sure that the minister’s announcement today that the Scottish Government will shortly be consulting on better regulation will offer a great deal of comfort for all stakeholders in the coal industry, especially those who are affected most when clean-up is put on hold due to a lack of funds. Most of us agree that opencast coal mining remains an important industry in Scotland. Coal is not a clean fuel and work is certainly needed to maximise carbon capture and storage technology, but abandoning the opencast coal industry would be an ill-considered move that would cost jobs. I welcome the Labour amendment to the motion.

I welcome the Government’s pledge to provide £100,000 of extra aid, but will the First Minister encourage the UK Government and the international community to provide support to countries including the Lebanon and Jordan, which will offer refuge to an estimated 3 million Syrians by the end of the year, and support to the estimated 10 million Syrians requiring aid in Syria?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and congratulate Graeme Pearson on bringing it to the chamber. As we know, China is a growing economy—with growth of around 9 per cent per annum, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development—and it continues to grow. Two facts about the Chinese economy stand out in particular: Chinese economic growth contributed to a third of global growth in 2011, and China is now the world’s second largest goods importer, behind only the United States. In recent years, there has been a paradigm shift in international trade. It is no wonder that there are now several graphics circulating on the internet that originate from a variety of high-profile research institutes such as the London School of Economics and purport to show the economic centre of gravity. For those of us who are unfamiliar with geopolitical jargon—I count myself as one of that group—the economic centre of gravity is generally defined as the precise spot on the globe where we can identify the average economic activity. It is worked out based on the GDP of every country on the planet and, although it might not mean much in policy terms, the dot is shifting very quickly. It has travelled east from the mid-Atlantic since the 1980s, and is predicted—perhaps unsurprisingly—to lie somewhere between China and India by 2050. I mention that to highlight the importance of China to Scotland and to the world as a whole, and the importance of our China plan. Over the next 30 years, China will become an ever more important focal point for Scottish business. If we are to meet the China plan’s targets for increasing trade opportunities by increasing the value of exports to China and encouraging investment, we must understand the importance of its formidable economic trajectory. Trade with China is unique. Successful interaction with the country, for business and for Government, depends heavily on genuine mutual engagement. As Stephen Perry, the chairman of the 48 Group Club of UK businesses, has said, we should start thinking of China as a “global partner” rather than just an economy. I stress that successful economic partnerships depend not just on trade deals but on—perhaps most importantly of all—attitudes and perceptions. How do Scots see China? How do Scots do business at an international level? What are our skills and what do we offer as a people? How do we interact with others, and how adaptable are we? The British Council in Scotland has said that we need a new generation of Scots who are “globalised citizens”—that is, people who are ready to interact on the world stage with confidence. However, despite our best intentions, we would all admit that one skill that is lacking in so many Scots, regardless of their qualification level, is the ability to interact in foreign languages. The European and External Relations Committee has been conducting an inquiry into foreign language learning in primary schools, and we have at least some understanding of the barriers to increased uptake of languages such as Mandarin—for example, we simply do not have a sufficient number of qualified teachers. Arguably the biggest long-term barrier to language learning in Scotland is attitudinal: given the choice, many young Scots choose other subjects over foreign languages. With Mandarin, however, there is some cause for optimism. Figures show that young Scots are bucking the trend by opting for Mandarin, where it is available, in greater numbers than for any other language, and uptake among that group is the highest in the UK. Approximately 70 Scottish schools are now teaching Mandarin, including in my constituency a primary school in Leuchars and a secondary school in St Andrews. Last year, 300 Scottish students took exams in Mandarin, in comparison with 100 in 2011. We also need to understand the cultural and historical aspects. Stewart Stevenson mentioned the opium wars, and Jamie McGrigor mentioned the evidence that was given to the European and External Relations Committee by Angus Tulloch, who said: “People should not go into China without understanding the damage that we did during the opium wars.”—[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 2 May 2013; c1175.] On that note I will conclude, and I look forward to hearing the minister’s comments on his recent trip to China.

As the EU reporter for the Justice Committee, I will add a few comments the convener’s. Although our remit is subsidiarity alone, it is often difficult to distinguish between matters of subsidiarity and proportionality. I will explore in a little more detail some of the evidence that we gathered that led to our decision. The UK Government was particularly concerned at the lack of robust evidence from the European Commission to justify the creation of an EPPO with rules of evidence that would apply across the board in all member states, working across the whole union and in all member states. We echo that concern. We also heard from the cabinet secretary that there was no evidence that the Commission had examined alternatives to establishing the EPPO, such as providing support to member states to improve their effectiveness in tackling EU fraud. As the convener has said, recorded fraud amounts to about 0.5 per cent of the European budget, or between £400 million and £600 million. Scottish Government officials told us that, currently, there is only one case of EU fraud in Scotland, and about 25 in the UK as a whole, which suggested to the committee that the EPPO proposal was very much a case of a sledgehammer being used to crack a nut. We were concerned that the EPPO would apply one-size-fits-all rules of evidence to member states, which have their own legal systems. In Scotland’s case, we have our own legal system, although we are not a member state. The proposal could create difficulties in relation to the direction and operation of investigations carried out by the police and other law enforcement agencies. In addition, the one-size-fits-all approach would apply to Scotland without any evidence that the Scottish legal system, or indeed the legal systems elsewhere in the UK, were defective. The committee, on examining the evidence, was unanimous in its decision that the proposal does not comply with the principle of subsidiarity, and would urge the Parliament to endorse that view.

Can the convener of the Justice Committee remind me how much time the SNP members of the committee have devoted to discussing the referendum in any form?

4. To ask the First Minister what economic benefits a direct air link to China would bring to Scotland. (S4F-01500)

I welcome the Government’s on-going commitment to establishing a direct air link with China, but does the First Minister agree that a substantial barrier to securing new international routes and indeed protecting existing domestic links is the United Kingdom Government’s punitive approach to air passenger duty?

Given that—even as Scotland endeavours to reduce its emissions—climate change is impacting on the world’s poorest communities, will the minister update Parliament on Scotland’s role in championing climate justice?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I refer to my register of interests, as I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates. I believe that the bill is a welcome step forward and comprises a package of measures that are designed to ensure that those who find themselves caught up in the criminal justice system obtain effective and efficient assistance from the organisations that they have to deal with during criminal procedure, through to trial and sentencing, and after proceedings have come to an end. We have come a long way in extending the rights of victims and witnesses since devolution began, with the victims’ strategy being published 12 years ago and the national standards for victims of crime being set in 2005. Since then, the victim notification scheme has been extended. Victim statements were introduced for solemn cases from 2009—although, as we have heard, many witnesses do not believe that their statements are accorded as much importance in the process as they would like. We also heard from Graeme Pearson that many witnesses feel quite detached from the process. Nevertheless we have made progress, although we still have a long way to go, as Victim Support Scotland and others have said. In the short time that is available, I will highlight a couple of points. With regard to reviewing the decision not to prosecute, section 3 of the bill provides that victims will be able to request information about a decision not to proceed with a criminal investigation and any reasons for that decision. That is, of course, in line with the EU directive on victims, and offers victims an additional safety net. I was initially concerned by the idea that victims would be able to challenge the Crown’s decision not to prosecute, but I believe the purpose of the provision is simply to request a review, and that it will introduce greater transparency and accountability. I await with interest the Crown Office’s research on review, which has yet to be disclosed. With regard to victim notification generally, the effect on a victim of releasing an offender from prison without providing reasonable notice and giving the victim time to prepare physically and mentally for the offender’s return to their community, for example, can be extremely traumatic. Specifically, in relation to life prisoners who have passed the punishment part of their sentence, and when the only considerations are protection of the public and whether the offender represents a danger to the public, it is right that false expectations should not be raised. Although I recognise the right of victims to make oral representation to the Parole Board, it is also right that consideration be given to allowing legal representation for offenders. The process must be balanced. The Justice Committee recognised that further guidance needs to be developed on the matter. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary and his officials will continue to engage with the Parole Board for Scotland to ensure that appropriate measures are put in place through revised guidance in order that, it is hoped, victims understand the process more fully. I believe also that the revised guidance should allow for the offender to see the victim’s views in most cases when they meet the Parole Board. Again, that would be in keeping with transparency. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s assurance that victims who are currently registered on the victim notification scheme will be kept informed of changes to the nature of the information to which they are entitled. I note the Scottish Government’s position on restitution orders and I have to accept that the focus in relation to the orders should be on the police. However, I also note the flexibility on that issue. On the more controversial area of the extent to which there should be a right of objection to the grant of special measures, although I accept the argument that it seems to be illogical to extend the categories of vulnerable witnesses for whom access to special measures is automatic, while at the same time bringing in provisions enabling objections to be raised, I nevertheless instinctively side with the lobby that suggests that a right of objection needs to be preserved under ECHR. I heard what Malcolm Chisholm said earlier, but I was not quite sure whether he had misunderstood what the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland had said, as he said that there was no reference to the matter in the EU directive. However, I would be happy to stand corrected if what Malcolm Chisholm described is the children’s commissioner’s position. Murdo MacLeod of the Faculty of Advocates pointed out that under the Criminal Procedures Act 1995’s section 271D, which is not being reviewed by the bill, a judge can review special measures at any time, even during the trial itself, although it is unlikely that he would do so, save in exceptional circumstances. I think that we need to have faith in judges. I do not see a perfect solution to the problem, and I note that the Government is consulting further. I hope, however, that some flexibility will be preserved, although I recognise that there are real concerns that objections should not be routinely allowed for automatic special measures for children. With regard to families of road-death victims, although I recognise that we heard evidence from witnesses to the effect that they encountered difficulties in obtaining information from the Crown, I believe that an unfettered statutory right to information would on occasion cause distress—particularly given the content of some photographs of crash scenes. I would therefore welcome a Crown code of practice rather than statutory rights. Finally, I want to mention separate representation for victims in, for example, dealing with sexual history applications. We ought to recognise that the Crown’s interest may not be identical to that of the victim. It is right that the issue is to be explored further, and I welcome the Government’s commitment to engage with the Faculty of Advocates and Rape Crisis Scotland on it.

I welcome members of the support group for customers of National Australia Bank, who are in the gallery, and I thank MSP colleagues who have stayed behind for the debate. I also acknowledge the contribution of Simon Bain of The Herald on this issue. Following the payment protection insurance scandal and the manipulation of London interbank offered rates, perhaps we should not be surprised that the banks are again in the midst of another scandal—interest-rate swaps misselling. The banks certainly have a long way to go to restore their battered image, which is being further tarnished this week by the latest scandal highlighted by The Times. The issue was first brought to my attention by a constituent back in 2011, and I have had a considerable amount of correspondence with the Clydesdale Bank on the matter. It is clear that the product that my constituent was sold is not a straightforward financial product. In the past, many people placed a lot of trust in their long-term relationship with the banks, but the days of the friendly bank manager have long since gone. Sadly, banks today seem to many to be finance shops with substantial sales forces operating on commission, to the neglect of customers’ real interests. Bully-banks has been at the forefront of the campaign to highlight the issue, and has illustrated just how it has affected small and medium-sized businesses across the United Kingdom. At Westminster, the all-party parliamentary group on interest-rate swap misselling has met often to discuss the issue, and I am grateful for the assistance of the Liberal Democrat MP for Ceredigion, Mark Williams, and his caseworker, Lisa Francis, and of the Labour MP, Clive Betts. Some members may be asking what exactly interest-rate swaps are. At the basic level, banks would offer customers the right to fix the base rate on a loan at a certain level, to ensure that a rise in interest rates would not lead to companies’ borrowing costs rising to a level that they would be unable to pay. Customers were routinely advised that it was like a form of insurance or fixed-rate mortgage, but interest-rate swap agreements are highly complicated financial products that are difficult to get your head round if you do not have a degree in economics or finance. The loans were originally devised for sophisticated investors, but the products were subsequently sold to small and medium-sized enterprises. Of course, although the rate swaps were designed to protect customers if interest rates rose, it also cost them dear when they fell, and as we all know we have been living in a low-interest environment for some while. A frequent allegation is that banks failed to give proper advice on the break costs of exiting the swap when customers wished to terminate the agreement. It is clear that most customers were unaware of the complicated nature of the product when it was presented to them by their local banks. Misselling of interest-rate swap agreements has had a devastating impact on the businesses affected, which include bed and breakfasts, hotels and restaurants, among many others. Bully-banks surveys have subsequently identified those businesses as being the key target for the sale of tailored business loans, to which I will refer later. In April 2012, it emerged that the Financial Standards Authority had been told a year before by an industry whistleblower about swap misselling, but it ignored those warnings and the practices used in relation to what it now accepts were “unsophisticated clients”. That term lies at the heart of the matter. A review by the FSA was agreed with a number of banks in June and July 2012, in relation to those unsophisticated clients. The FSA’s successor, the Financial Conduct Authority, has yet to confirm the date on which it will publish its findings, but I understand that it aims to do so in the next six to eight weeks. However, in an interim comment in January this year, the FSA accused Britain’s largest banks of selling “absurdly complex” products, having found that 90 per cent of firms in a pilot study with the big four banks were missold complex interest-rate swap agreements. Current best estimates are that the cost of compensation to be paid by banks may be up to £2 billion in the United Kingdom as a whole. The FSA identified four broad categories of interest-rate hedging products: “Swaps; which enable customers to ‘fix’ their interest rate ... Caps; which place a limit on any interest rate rises ... Collars; which enable customers to limit interest rate fluctuations to within a simple range ... Structured collars; which enable customers to limit interest rate fluctuations to within a specified range, but involves arrangements where, if the reference interest rate falls below the bottom of the range, the interest rate payable by the customer may increase above the bottom of the range.” I said that it was complicated. The FSA emphasised: “An interest rate swap is a separate contract to the underlying loan agreement. It is an agreement between two parties whereby one type of interest payment is swapped for another, such as exchanging a fixed interest rate payment for a floating payment.” As I understand it, since 2001, approximately 38,000 IRHPs have been sold in the UK: approximately 2,000 structured collars, 28,000 swaps and simple collars and 8,000 caps, with approximately 32,000 customers affected. In addition, although this was not part of the agreement with the FSA, in October 2012 Clydesdale Bank agreed that it would review the sale of some tailored business loans whose characteristics were comparable to stand-alone structured collars, simple collars and caps, but it excluded products that included a fixed-rate loan for any part of the loan period and which were deemed to be commercial loans. The FSA and now the FCA’s position is that stand-alone IRHPs are regulated by the FCA pursuant to European legislation, but commercial loans in their own right, including those with embedded IRHPs, are not generally regulated by the FCA. Despite requests to change that position, such loans still do not form part of the review. The FCA advised the all-party group at Westminster at its meeting on 15 May that it is in discussions about products that have similar features to complex IRHPs but which are embedded within commercial loan agreements. No final decision has been taken by the FCA and its position remains that the matter is for the Treasury. The truth is, however, that a customer who has taken out a tailored business loan with an embedded IRSA may be faced with exactly the same potentially large break costs as they would have faced had they taken out a loan and a stand-alone IRHP. Why should tailored business loans be excluded on the grounds of a mere technicality? Loans with embedded or hidden swaps are just as toxic as stand-alone IRSAs, and if the bankers who sell the swaps need to be registered with the FCA to do so, why are the swaps not included in the review? Such loans ought to be included in the review and the decision to exclude them means that fewer than 10 per cent of all tailored business loans—generally those with a structured collar, which Clydesdale Bank and Yorkshire Bank sold—are included in the review and 90 per cent are not. Derivatives experts such as Abhishek Sachdev believe that those tailored business loans should be included in the review and I agree. We need to put pressure on the Westminster Government to ensure that tailored business loans in particular are addressed. I am aware that banking and the regulation of financial services are a reserved matter, but I hope that the Scottish Government can demonstrate its support for those affected by the current exclusion of tailored business loans in particular by making the appropriate representations to the UK Government and encouraging it to ensure that compensation is paid to those affected by missold interest-rate swaps in general.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in filling the equality evidence gaps in the equality evidence strategy 2013. (S4O-02217)

Can the minister advise me what feedback has been received regarding the equality evidence finder website, specifically from disabled groups? Does she believe that further engagement is required with any groups?

One message that has come out of the wider debate is that, if we are to create a socially just Scotland, land reform must play its part. There also appears to be an acceptance that, although the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 was an important step forward, it is quite complex in parts—a point that Malcolm Chisholm might have been implying earlier. The LRRG has made a start, and its remit to enable more people in Scotland to have an opportunity of land ownership and to look at governance, management and use has to be right. However, it must be right to look not only at procedures but at approaches that will work in increasing the diversity of land ownership in Scotland and better land use. We should be proud of the community right-to-buy legislation in 2005. A community in Fife was the first community in Scotland to purchase land under that legislation. I also recognise the value of having a Scottish land fund to support more rural communities to buy land. I recognise, however, that in an ideal world we would want to spend a great deal more than £6 million on that. It would be complacent for us to rest on our laurels as a Parliament. Land policy needs to be reviewed and I am pleased that the Scottish Government will also hold a review of agricultural tenancies. I await with great interest the details of how the farm tenancies review will be carried out. The LRRG has an important job to do, and it has so far travelled widely in engaging with stakeholders. In March, Dr Alison Elliot and others paid a visit to my part of the world, which was warmly welcomed by the east neuk community. I am pleased to say that we have in the east neuk estates a group of landowners who recognise their wider responsibilities to the local community. They were delighted to welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, to the east neuk last month. The east neuk estates group was established in 2008, when six adjoining estates in Fife got together to work strategically to ensure the long-term health of the estates and the local community. They have pooled resources to help the local school, and they contribute to affordable housing and provide employment space in converted steadings. Along with the cabinet secretary, we visited a guitar maker in one such steading. The estate owners also buy from local producers and so increase their combined economic impact. They have been working with Fife Council, and a joint community action plan is being developed under a steering group, which views that model as an exemplar for a new relationship between land, people, economy and the environment. I would not for one minute suggest that those initiatives detract from community right-to-buy proposals or from issues of land ownership, but they should be viewed as part of a progressive land-use mix in modern Scotland. It is essential that people—and especially children—believe that they have more of a stake in our land. For example, understanding food production is a key part of developing a healthy relationship with food. Scotland’s first community-owned farm—Whitmuir, in Christine Grahame’s constituency—aims to get more stakeholders than the small number of landowners who own half of Scotland. The project is truly inspiring, and I hope it will be replicated in other parts of the country, including in my constituency of North East Fife. Until we have the LRRG’s final report, we will not be able to judge matters fully. However, it is clear—judging from the responses that have been received so far—that land reform is an issue that engages Scotland and which deserves to be taken seriously by the Parliament and the Government.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance it provides to local authorities in relation to providing partnership funding for nursery places. (S4O-02145)

Many parents in my constituency have raised concerns that they cannot send their children to their preferred nursery because of a lack of partnership-funded places, and they dispute the local authority’s claim that there are sufficient places in its nurseries in the area. I welcome the minister’s comments, however. Does she agree that parental choice remains fundamental and that local authorities should take account of that and ensure that sufficient partnership-funded places are available in local nurseries?

I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing a debate on the subject. Like her, I welcome the visitors from the Woodland Trust in the public gallery who are here to hear our debate. Those of us in Scotland who want independence for our nation have always said that it is not about flags, anthems and symbols, but that is not to say that symbols have no significance. Symbols can serve to strengthen a nation’s identity in many ways: historically and culturally in particular, or as simple logos. Who could mistake the symbolic eagles of the United States or Germany, which have become unquestionable markers on dollars and the German euro coin respectively? Who could mistake the Welsh dragon or the Welsh leek, and who could deny that the maple tree is inextricably linked to Canada? The Canadian brand and the maple brand complement each other. When we think of maple syrup, we think of Canada, and vice versa. Scotland is one of the oldest nations in Europe, and we have our fair share of symbols. Scotland can be identified by the lion rampant, the thistle, the unicorn or heather, to name but a few. At least three of those things are heraldic symbols that are connected with royalty or privilege, which arguably have much less influence and significance now. In the digital age that we now live in, symbols can be easily transmitted and identified. I certainly do not subscribe to the view that a nation can have too many symbols—indeed, the more, the merrier. There is a good reason for having them. New symbols can bolster identity and a unique brand. We should not shy away from that in a globalised and increasingly homogenous world, particularly when the value of local, non-commercialised produce is being rediscovered by the public, for whom the once attractive mass-produced brand names are losing their charm. It is clear to me that a strong case is being made for Scotland to formally adopt the Scots pine. In my North East Fife constituency, Tentsmuir forest and Tentsmuir national nature reserve border the coast between St Andrews and Leuchars. The area comprises some 50 square miles of woodland, which is predominantly made up of Scots pine and Corsican pine. Tentsmuir is perhaps one small pocket of something that is close to the ancient Caledonian pine forest habitat that once covered enormous swathes of Scotland, but which has sadly—in such cases, this is often inevitable—disappeared due to a combination of natural and man-made factors, most notably the clearance of woodland over the centuries for livestock grazing. Tentsmuir forest is owned by the Forestry Commission, and the reserve is looked after by Scottish Natural Heritage. The area is used frequently by students of biology and geology at the University of St Andrews due to its rich biodiversity and preserved and restored sand dunes. The trees are home to a fascinating range of insects and birds, many of which are found only in Scotland and a few other places. We know, of course, that in other parts of Scotland, Scots pine woodland is home to some of our rarest and most fascinating animals, such as the capercaillie. Without the environment that is provided by Scots pine forests, the capercaillie population, which is descended from birds reintroduced from Sweden, would possibly once again become extinct. It may be a cliché, but the Scots pine is an inextricable part of the rugged mountainous beauty with which Scotland is identified—for better or worse—around the world. I know that the rowan tree has its admirers—some of us will remember the First Minister’s vocal rendition of “The Rowan Tree” on a CD a few years ago. Notwithstanding that, I am sure that adopting the Scots pine as our national tree would serve only to strengthen the made in Scotland brand. Given the prevalence of the species in every part of Scotland, it is right that it should be called our national tree. I hope that the Scottish Government will give the matter further consideration, and I thank Joan McAlpine once again for bringing the debate to the chamber.

When we are talking about good and bad employment statistics, it is imperative that we remind ourselves at all times that the statistics in question are not just figures, but people. Today, as we discuss young people and their contribution to the economy, I am sure that at least most of us would agree that young people are probably the most important demographic in employment. What happens to them now will determine their lives and Scotland’s economic strength for many decades to come. The Scottish Government has recognised the importance of young people and has placed them at the heart of its economic strategy. Scotland was the first nation in these islands to appoint a dedicated Minister for Youth Employment and the first to launch an holistic strategy for youth employment. The 25,000 modern apprenticeships—which include more than 1,600 in Fife—must be welcomed; they are a definite plus. As Iain Gray has just said, the community jobs fund is also really worth while. We know that youth unemployment is lower and that youth employment is higher here than in the rest of the United Kingdom. Youth unemployment in Scotland has fallen by 6.8 per cent over the past year, while the UK rate fell by only 0.7 per cent. We will have to see where the rates go over the next 12 months; we will then be able to see just how true the statistics are. I accept that the rise in the number of people who are claimants for over 12 months is a matter of concern, but as the Minister for Youth Employment said in the foreword to “Scotland’s Youth Employment Strategy”, “this is no time for complacency”. That must be right—there remains much to do. New initiatives are always needed, such as the new links between universities and small and medium-sized enterprises, and the proposed youth guarantee. I listened with interest to what the minister said about that earlier in the debate. It is right that we recognise the problems that long-term unemployment causes for young people. There is a problem throughout Europe, so we need to avoid creating a lost generation. The UK is the fourth most unequal country in the developed world. We also know that a key causal factor of inequality is high unemployment. There is no doubt that Scotland could—as a small, adaptable and more equal European nation—go further in the right direction and could certainly aspire to the lower rates of youth unemployment that some of our neighbours in Europe have. Even then, the rates are quite high: in Denmark youth unemployment is at 14.2 per cent and in Norway it is currently at 9.7 per cent. Let us look at the Norwegian example more closely. The Norwegian education minister, Kristin Halvorsen, has repeatedly identified that one of the key reasons why Norway’s youth unemployment is, relatively, so low is that the Norwegian Government has managed to maintain low drop-out rates from secondary school. Scotland’s secondary, further and higher sectors clearly differ from those in Norway, as do the ages at which young people in our two nations commence the various stages of education. However, as is often the case, there is no doubt that we can learn from the country that the United Nations has described as the best country in the world to live in. We take for granted that low youth unemployment and high employment are good things. It is certainly a good thing for a young person to have a paying job, especially one that is matched to their skills. It is also of immeasurable benefit to society as a whole; the more young people we have working, the more we develop a strong, confident, skilled and experienced workforce, which in turn helps to build and maintain a vibrant, diverse and strong economy. We therefore need to do all that we can do to help young people to get a good start on the career ladder. That is no small task. All members will know of at least one person—a family member or a constituent—who has hit an invisible brick wall and said, “I can’t get a job because I lack experience, and I can’t gain experience because I can’t get a job.” Those words of frustration are uttered all too often by the younger generation. I am therefore pleased that the Scottish Government has introduced the new employer-assessed certificate of work readiness, which will go some way towards helping young people to break out of the experience-versus-work cycle, by offering a meaningful record of employability, even when an employer cannot offer a more permanent position, which is a disadvantage, although a period of employment is certainly better than nothing. The certificate of work readiness will fulfil a key aim of the Scottish Government’s skills strategy, “Skills for Scotland: Accelerating the Recovery and Increasing Sustainable Economic Growth”, and will help companies to provide work experience. I hope that there will be a structured template for the process, with tangible results. The approach will certainly make it less complicated to offer a placement, because there will be a generally accepted procedure throughout the country. Testament to the scheme’s importance is the welcome that it has received from business; CBI Scotland, the Federation of Small Businesses Scotland, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry and many others have expressed support. As I said, and as other members have said, there is no room for complacency. Despite Scotland’s advantage over the UK, youth unemployment remains much higher than any of us would like it to be. As Norway, Denmark and the Netherlands show, wealthy countries like Scotland do not have to suffer from very high youth unemployment, even in times like these. With the right strategies, we can do better. With the powers that are currently held elsewhere, the Government and this Parliament could do better still and deliver more for the young people of Scotland.

Would the cabinet secretary or the Government consider further amendment to the 2009 regulations or, alternatively, to the guidance notes in respect of providing a time limit for appeals?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact will be of the shingles vaccination programme. (S4O-02081)

Further to my question on the matter last year, I am pleased that the vaccine has been introduced. Does the minister agree with Professor Adam Finn of the University of Bristol that we are “getting close to the point where we have the best vaccination programme in the world”?

Recorded crime is at a 37-year low, and the number of first-time offenders is falling. However, around half of the number who receive a short custodial sentence still go on to commit a further offence within a year of their release. That poses serious problems for the justice system and the public purse, for which there are no simple solutions. Notwithstanding the progress that the Scottish Government has made in recent years, there remains a lot of work to do to reduce reoffending further, in respect of which the community justice system must play its part. We therefore need to look at ways of improving the whole system, from the reporting of a crime right through sentencing to release and, crucially, beyond. We know that simply locking people up, particularly for less serious crimes, is not an effective crime prevention solution. Scottish Government research from 2011 shows that community sentences are more effective in reducing repeat offending than short-term custodial sentences—and a great deal more affordable. The average cost of a community payback order is in the region of £2,400, or half the cost of a three-month prison sentence. We should not forget the Scottish Government’s reducing reoffending change fund of £7.5 million, plus the contributions of the Robertson Trust and the Scottish Prison Service. In 2012-13, that enabled projects in Fife that were run by Sacro and Addaction to move forward. I particularly welcome the use of funding for mentoring, the importance of which was underlined by Dame Elish Angiolini and her commission and referred to in the Justice Committee’s report on purposeful activity in prisons. Community justice authorities have, of course, been involved in work on reducing reoffending. In its November 2012 report, “Reducing reoffending in Scotland”, Audit Scotland highlighted the fact that “Many bodies are involved in reducing reoffending.” It said: “Eight CJAs were established ... to develop a more coordinated approach to delivering services for offenders and reduce reoffending.” Its conclusion was: “CJAs have brought people together, but the way they were set up and inflexible funding have significantly limited their effectiveness.” Moreover, it damningly said that CJAs had “made little progress in reducing reoffending.” Change is therefore clearly required. As the cabinet secretary has said, Audit Scotland also identified a need for “stronger leadership at national, regional and local levels”, and recommended that the Scottish Government needed to target money more effectively. That recommendation is clearly important when we remember that, in 2010-11, the SPS, community justice authorities and the Scottish Government together spent an estimated £128 million on reducing reoffending. CJAs dispensed most of the money to local authorities—£37.8 million was spent on rehabilitation, including drug addiction programmes, and £11.9 million was spent on reintegration, including supported accommodation and employment services. Among the other recommendations that Audit Scotland made were the need to be more flexible in meeting local needs and priorities and the need to ensure that allocations are more responsive to changes in demand. As other members have said, three strategic options were identified in the consultation document. In considering that document and the responses to it, we need to ask which options will encourage flexibility and responsiveness. Option A seeks to enhance the role of community justice authorities as a means of reducing reoffending by conferring on them responsibility for carrying out strategic commissioning and procurement of services and ensuring that they allocate funding on the basis of need, thus enabling them to move funds between constituent councils. That seems to meet the test of flexibility and responsiveness. However, option A also proposes that the CJA chairs be appointed by Scottish ministers and that one member of the local health board be included on the CJA board. I am not sure that that is quite so important, but I recognise that it might improve the overall operation. Option A further includes the possibility of transferring responsibility for the operational delivery of criminal justice social work from local authorities to CJAs. CJAs do not deliver services; local authorities do. As Audit Scotland has stated, CJAs lack operational control, and priorities can easily become those of the local authorities involved, not the community justice authority. If multiple local authorities are involved, it might be difficult to liaise effectively with them. Those criticisms are undoubtedly valid. Option B would mean CJAs being abolished, with powers transferred to local authorities, which would have a statutory duty to work with other partners to deliver a statutory plan for reducing reoffending. Local authorities would be required to take account of the strategic planning of community planning partnerships. That all sounds wonderful in principle and certainly more joined up, but I am not sure how much difference it would make in reality. I cannot ignore the irony of the situation in my constituency. Cupar sheriff court has been earmarked for closure, and criminal justice social service work in north-east Fife—in Fife Council’s jurisdiction—receives funding from the Fife and Forth valley community justice authority. Under the new court set-up, it will be necessary to work with a court system that is located in a different local authority area—and, uniquely in Scotland, as far as I can see—in a different CJA area. On option C, notwithstanding efforts to streamline the provision of reducing reoffending services, as outlined in the single-service option, I assume that the single service would be required to produce 32 local plans. I note that the Scottish Government would expect local representatives of the Department for Work and Pensions and further education colleges to be involved in the development and delivery of reducing reoffending plans. I am not sure how that would work in practice. I accept, however, that grouping local delivery around the three federation model, as now employed by the Crown Office and the police, would have some attractions, but a single service led by a national social work service will certainly require significant cultural change. I welcome the consultation, which has just closed, and I hope that the Scottish Government will carefully consider the responses to it.

In view of the importance of the proportionality test in ECHR jurisprudence, what lessons does the Scottish Government think can be learned from the decision in Salvesen v Riddell?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. When times are tough, it is challenging to operate within the confines of a declining budget, as the Scottish Government must do given that its capital budget has been reduced by 20 per cent. In an ideal world, we might hope to follow the model of modern courts with superb facilities for witnesses, jurors and the like. I am pleased that reference is made in the SCS response to purpose-built justice centres, including one for Fife. That is an absolutely admirable aspiration, but it is not one that is on the horizon, I am afraid to say. Instead, we are endeavouring to create a new structure for civil and criminal courts in which cases are dealt with at the appropriate level. It is against that backdrop that the SCS launched its consultation. I must say that I do not disagree with the proposal that sheriff and jury cases be dealt with in fewer centres. However, for significant parts of rural Scotland, the proposals will mean greater expenditure of time in travelling to court, particularly for witnesses. Although the review provided examples of distances and travel times and indicated that comparatively few witnesses may be affected, that may be no consolation for the witnesses concerned. The proposals for Fife are severe. The removal of sheriff and jury work from Kirkcaldy to Dunfermline in the west means that that court will receive more business than ever. While I understand the loss felt in Kirkcaldy, at least people there will retain a court, unlike my own constituents. Although I accept the case for removing the small number of sheriff and jury cases from Cupar, it is difficult to accept the removal of the day-to-day civil and criminal work. That will have an economic impact. The court in Forfar will retain summary business, although, over time, it will lose solemn business to Dundee—it may be 10 years before all the solemn business is lost. For Cupar, the impact will be immediate. I agree with Lord Gill’s proposal for a three-tier system, which he laid out in his “Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review”, as an effective solution in modernising the structure of our court system. The creation of new summary sheriffs to hear summary criminal cases, family cases and lower-value civil business in the sheriff courts is to be welcomed, but a table that was attached to the September consultation on the court structure implied that summary sheriffs for Cupar would be based in Dundee. However, we know that the Scottish Government’s making justice work consultation on court reform, which focuses on areas such as the role of summary sheriffs, is still open. I take the view that the creation of summary sheriffs, as proposed by Lord Gill, would be a great step forward in making court business more efficient, but I see no good reason why, for example, further consideration should not be given to the role of peripatetic summary sheriff. Indeed, paragraph 2.12 of the September consultation document refers to “visiting members of the judiciary” and the sharing of accommodation with other public services. I do not see much about that in the response. Although I agree with the proposal that summary sheriffs should have some concurrent jurisdiction with sheriffs, they will be constrained if there are no buildings in which they can hear and dispense justice in my part of the world, other than in Dundee. One of the arguments—although not the principal argument—for closing Cupar sheriff court was that the Scottish Court Service would make significant savings on the backlog for essential maintenance work, the cost of which was estimated to be some £470,000. The SCS’s chief executive, Eric McQueen, has said that there is a £57 million maintenance backlog across the court estate. That is the anticipated expenditure over a five-year period. Cupar sheriff court occupies part of the county buildings that are owned by Fife Council, which is modernising them—the work will include the heating system. Some of the costs that the council is incurring fall within the £470,000, and no doubt the council will seek redress in the form of a contribution. I am seeking further clarity on that. It is ironic that the police will move into the county buildings in Cupar—which the criminal social work department has occupied for some time—next month, following the completion of work on the heating system. To put the maintenance backlog issue into context, according to SCS figures that I have obtained, Kirkcaldy sheriff and justice of the peace court alone requires investment of nearly £2 million. Even if every penny of the projected £4.3 million is saved, capital receipts of £2.3 million are realised and all of John Swinney’s additional moneys of £12 million are put into maintenance, given that we have a capital budget of only £4 million in 2014-15, we would still face a huge problem. The SCS has indicated to me that Fife Council is the only purchaser that it can foresee for Cupar court, but the council has said that it has no interest in it, so there is a real risk that we will be left with a white elephant. I do not for a moment underestimate the scale of the financial challenges that the Scottish Government faces. Given that the proposed court structure is not optimal, we need to think about ways of improving it for the time being. In that regard, I believe that one of the most important areas for exploration is the use of videoconferencing technology, which the SCS has already piloted, to allow some witnesses to give evidence without having to visit a court building. However, there is little detail on videoconferencing in the consultation, as Consumer Focus Scotland and others have pointed out. It would be helpful if the SCS could outline a detailed plan on the use of such technology; I understand that some planning is in progress. Although I am sure that considerable scope exists for technology to be used to make a modern and more efficient system and for the greater use of written advocacy and witness statements in civil business, there will continue to be a role for oral hearings, and we must look at using buildings other than designated court buildings. For example, why it is necessary to use formal court buildings for family contact and residence hearings? Let us explore local alternatives.

The Justice Committee must look at the impact of the change in the jurisdiction of the sheriff court to £150,000. We must also remember Sheriff Principal Taylor’s review and his remark in his consultation about the low incidence of civil litigation in Scotland, given the size of its population. It is just possible that, under his proposals, the amount of that work will increase.

I cannot pretend that the proposals are good news. They have not been well received. Although I respect the Government’s right to reach an early decision, the Parliament continues to have an important role to play in carrying out further scrutiny.

As a fellow Fife MSP, I congratulate David Torrance on bringing the debate to Parliament and highlighting the work of the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society. I welcome Mike McFarlane and his volunteers and friends, who are in the gallery. I understand that the society has been working hard since 1986 to promote and protect the caves and their unique heritage. That heritage first captured significant academic interest in the mid-19th century, when Sir James Young Simpson—who was renowned for his contribution to anaesthesia—visited the caves in 1865 and recorded the carvings inside. Since then, academic interest has flourished. Local historian Frank Rankin has written extensively about the caves, and his booklet “The Wemyss Caves” is popular with visitors and enthusiasts alike. As well as the expected interest from academia, the caves have captured the imagination of Kirkcaldy-born crime author Val McDermid, who used the caves as part of the setting of her novel “A Darker Domain”. I have not read the book, but I understand that it is a gripping novel of its type. As Murdo Fraser already said, United Kingdom-wide attention was brought to the caves in the summer of 2004 when “Time Team” visited them. The visit was an all-round success, because the team discovered the holy well in the wells cave, which was used by medieval pilgrims. The excavations unearthed deeply stratified archaeological deposits inside the caves, providing evidence of many centuries of occupation. Layers in the sliding, or sloping, cave showed evidence of occupation as long ago as the fourth century AD by the Picts, and provided further evidence of activity during the medieval period by Christian hermits and pilgrims. The society has worked hard since its inception to ensure the preservation of that historically distinctive setting. The caves are an important and valuable part of Fife’s and Scotland’s history, so it would be a great shame not to take steps to preserve such an important piece of our heritage from the effects of coastal erosion, landslips and human interference, as David Torrance and Claire Baker outlined. The caves are at the mercy of the elements, but on a more positive note, the society has worked hard to gain funding so that all visitors can enjoy the unique opportunity to view a special part of our nation’s history. That paid off when the society received £25,000 for a new access path to the caves to ensure safer access. A principal aim of the society is to work hard to obtain funding for a purpose-built visitor and learning centre, as the current museum is less than ideal for its purposes and access to the Wemyss environmental education centre is limited. More important is that there is no appropriate access to the facilities for individuals who have disabilities. The society wishes to offer all individuals, as far as that is possible, the opportunity to explore and learn more about a fascinating part of our history. Any financial cost of preserving and promoting the caves would undoubtedly be dwarfed by the cultural and educational gains that we would receive from such an undertaking. I commend the society’s efforts in that respect, and David Torrance has outlined a lot of the efforts that are being made to raise funding. We certainly need to take more steps to protect and preserve the unique site. We need to ensure that the caves are marketed as a historical highlight on the Fife coastal path, as Murdo Fraser mentioned. The walk is already incredibly popular with visitors from far and near. The history of Scotland is an important aspect of tourism here generally, and it plays a key role in supporting the economy at local and national levels. The caves were already a historical jewel in Fife’s crown, so we could and should do more to invest in their future. It is not only the economy that could benefit from the caves, because they offer a unique insight into the past and provide opportunities for learning at all stages across Scotland. I wish the society the best of luck for the future. I hope that tonight’s debate has helped to raise the profile of its work and of the caves themselves. I am pleased to support David Torrance in bringing such an important part of Fife’s history for debate today.

Although I am not a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the debate. Construction of the replacement Forth crossing is well and truly under way, creating more than 1,000 jobs over the life of the project and many more in maintenance for years to come. The crossing will be an essential link in our national transport infrastructure. The bill lays down a strong foundation for the whole project, which I hope will deliver best value for public money at a time of declining block grants from Westminster. The staff who were employed by the old bridge authority, FETA, will be transferred while retaining their employment and pension conditions. The Scottish Government will take over responsibility for FETA’s assets and liabilities. That is a fair and sensible way forward for the public and the staff. Following its initial consideration of the bill, the committee said that it felt that the bill contains sufficient provisions to allow the Scottish Government to meet its objectives. I do not disagree with that, but it is worth noting that the committee’s report made a few suggestions that I hope the Scottish Government will take on board. The first relates to the consultation process and the simple question of ensuring best practice by consulting as widely as possible. The trade union UCATT was not consulted during the early stages because I understand that only limited stakeholder participation was facilitated. Although I also understand the Government’s rationale for the course of action that was pursued, and I have no doubt that jobs and workers’ rights are protected by the bill, there are surely lessons that we can learn in that regard. Another point is the importance of reassuring the City of Edinburgh Council that it will bear no liability for costs that are incurred during construction. The same should apply to Fife Council, if appropriate, and I would welcome the minister’s comments on that. Perhaps the issue is not relevant but I would still welcome his comments. Formal notification from the Scottish Government would help to remove any doubts about the position of the two local authorities in relation to the major construction project that is taking place within their boundaries. Talking about the legislative provisions in a bill sometimes makes it easy for us to forget what the bill is all about. It is worth remembering how far we have come in recent years. Pre-2008, we had the Fife tax on people who were entering the kingdom of Fife, and people who lived in Fife had no reasonable way of avoiding the bridge tolls when they were on their way home. Today we have a toll-free Scotland, with one of our biggest infrastructure projects in decades under way right now, creating jobs and a precious new vital route connecting the north and south of Scotland. We know that the current Forth road bridge, even if it is not deteriorating quite as we thought, cannot cope with the projected increase in traffic. The effects of a sixfold increase in bridge traffic over 50 years demonstrates why the responsible thing to do is to ensure that the infrastructure is in place to allow us to deal with unpredictable shifts in usage. I am aware that some opposed the building of a new road bridge because they that felt traffic would increase as a result. Others argued that abolishing the tolls in 2008 would lead to a massive increase in traffic. However, the official figures show that the average daily heavy goods vehicle traffic on the bridge was lower in 2011 than in 2003, and the average daily number of cars has remained virtually the same since 2001. The volume of all types of traffic, including public transport, is increasing in Scotland and all around the world, but there are still many communities for which public transport is not a convenient option. Although investing in greener public transport is, in many ways, the right way forward, it would be reckless to abandon motorists by neglecting to secure for the future the infrastructure that they need and depend on. When the new bridge is complete, the existing Forth road bridge will be retained exclusively for public transport, pedestrians and cyclists. I am sure that we all recognise the benefits of making cycling and travelling by bus more attractive. I welcome the bill and the committee’s report, and I am confident that the new Forth crossing will bring enormous benefits to Fife and Scotland as a whole in the next century.

I welcome the work that the Scottish Government has undertaken to date to inform voters about the process that would follow a yes vote, following the recommendations of the Electoral Commission. Can the First Minister confirm whether the UK Government has provided any assurances that it intends to do the same?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage the use of so-called talking therapies across the national health service. (S4O-01933)

I welcome the role that psychological therapy plays in the Scottish Government’s mental health strategy for 2012 to 2015. However, does the minister accept that less than 1 per cent of elderly patients with depression are referred to psychological services and that, more often than not, such patients are prescribed medication? What steps can the Scottish Government take to improve those figures?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing a members’ business slot to bring this important topic to the chamber and I pay tribute to the contributions that have been made so far by Fiona McLeod, in particular, and John Pentland. We cannot underestimate the size of the challenge that Scotland faces from dementia. As Jackie Baillie has pointed out, it is expected that the number of people suffering from dementia will double in the next 25 years. Alzheimer’s Scotland predicts that, by 2031, there will be 127,000 dementia sufferers in Scotland. Any mental illness is challenging to deal with, not least for the sufferers but also for those who care for them—doctors, husbands, wives, children, parents, partners, friends or neighbours. Given its prevalence among the elderly, in particular, dementia poses a whole extra set of difficulties for both sufferers and carers. Carers are the unpaid army of volunteers without whom we simply could not ensure that those with dementia get the support and attention that they deserve. Testament to that were the diverse stories and experiences that we learned about when people from all walks of society came to speak in the carers Parliament a few months ago, including some from my constituency who have sacrificed careers to the greater need of looking after family members. My 92-year-old mother is a dementia sufferer who can live at home with my 90-year-old father only because of the network of support that she has from great care assistants and family members. Dementia is a real issue for all classes of people from all backgrounds. It knows no boundaries. I pay tribute to the work of volunteers such as Tommy Whitelaw and to the new dementia carers project. I recognise that Irene Oldfather has a major contribution to make outwith the Parliament and I wish her well. It is clear that providing the services and frameworks that our health service and unpaid carers need to cope with the effects of dementia has been a priority for the Scottish Government since 2007, but much more needs to be done. As a recent report by Alzheimer Scotland said, service provision needs to be consistent at all times and in all places, not least in increasing the availability of specialist day care that is suited to dementia sufferers; increasing training for professional home carers and allowing them more contact hours with dementia patients; and improving respite options, among other things. If we can build on that, we will improve the lot not only of sufferers but of the spouses, children, friends and neighbours who care for their loved ones. Respite is a key issue for carers. We need to be clear that respite care does not have to mean sending a sufferer to a care home overnight. Respite can be delivered in the home environment, too. We need to accept that dementia sufferers and carers often very much appreciate the relatively low levels of stress that are involved when respite is delivered in a familiar setting with minimal disruption to the lives of sufferers and carers, which is of paramount importance in dementia care. Respite outside care homes accounted for only 2.2 per cent of all respite nights for the over-65s in Fife in 2006-07. That figure is very low, and there certainly seems to be scope for replicating the much higher figures in East Ayrshire and Inverclyde, where approximately one quarter and one fifth respectively of all respite nights are provided outside care homes. I hope that we can do more to end that lottery across the country. I hope that the Scottish Government’s next dementia strategy, which will apply for the next three years—until 2016—will be as innovative as the previous one. We need to maintain the dialogue with all carers, such as Tommy Whitelaw; with patients; with stakeholders, such as Alzheimer Scotland; and with others, such as Professor June Andrews, whom I was fortunate to visit at her base at the University of Stirling a couple of months ago. We need to build on things such as the strong diagnosis rate in Scotland, which is the highest in the UK, and we need to take on board the comments that Jackie Baillie made about that. We also need to meet the important HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target for post-diagnostic support. From the draft strategy, I am convinced that the Scottish Government recognises the importance of the problem. In the whole problem, let us not forget the role of carers. Without carers, the consequences for wider society would be grave indeed.

A number of my constituents have raised concerns with me, too, about the weekend’s events. Can the cabinet secretary provide further details on the strategy for tackling disorderly behaviour in general?

The cabinet secretary will recall her visit to Fife in February to meet representatives of Fife Council, Creative Scotland and elected representatives to discuss the future of the Byre. Can she advise what recent discussions have taken place with Creative Scotland about its general review of its funding approach in Scotland that will be of particular relevance to the future of the Byre?

One thing that was abundantly clear about the 2011 Scottish parliamentary elections was that, despite the Liberal Democrats giving their opposition to a national police force prominence, it was not a vote winner. Notwithstanding that, they opposed the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill all the way from stage 1 in committee to the conclusion in the chamber last year in support of their view that local is best. That debate was comprehensively lost, and it is time that the Lib Dems accepted that and the fact that we have a new structure in which there is a designated local commander in all 14 divisions who will be involved with all local councillors, not just those few councillors on police boards. There will also be a local police plan for each of Scotland’s 353 council wards. Stephen House advised in evidence in November 2012 that those plans would concentrate on the top three concerns in each ward and what the police would do about those concerns in the next 12 months. That really is a local level of police priority. I accept that the issue of democracy and whether there is a democratic deficit in the new arrangements was discussed by many during the passage of the bill. The former Auditor General for Scotland, Robert Back, raised the issue in his evidence; Graeme Pearson has been resolute in his view that the Scottish Police Authority, as designed, did not offer democratic accountability; and John Finnie proposed a sub-committee of the Justice Committee to scrutinise the reforms at an early stage. He, of course, proposed an amendment that would commit Parliament to keeping the act’s operation under review. We are, of course, in the process of setting up that sub-committee and I wish it well in its task. Concerns from the Liberal Democrats about the Scottish Police Authority adopting a service provider role were not evident in debate about the bill. There was discussion about the operation of forensic services and the extent to which the chief constable should have operational control over forensic crime scene examination. That issue was resolved on the basis that the Scottish Police Authority and not the chief constable will have direct responsibility for the forensic service but the chief constable and his command will decide which crime scenes the forensic service goes to—a sensible arrangement. We did not have any real debate about the HR and finance functions and who should call the shots—perhaps we should have. We certainly did not hear about any Liberal Democrat concerns on those issues. However, what became clear in November was that there was a difference of approach between the new chief constable and the chairman of the SPA—a turf war, which is never edifying. Justice Committee members remember the discussion by both parties along the lines of, “I’ll show you my legal advice if you show me yours.” As Alison McInnes will be aware, however, the Justice Committee agreed with the request that neither side’s legal advice should be published. We need to accept that. Speaking as a member of the Faculty of Advocates, I point out that the fact that there were two differing legal views on the legislation is hardly earth shattering. We should avoid accepting the argument that, somehow or other, the answer now is legislative change. If the Liberal Democrats think that it is, they should say why in clear and unequivocal terms. Moreover, those issues have been addressed in the dialogue that has occurred since November. What the police service needs now is not new legislation but an acknowledgement that it is progressing on the road to eliminating duplication and an acknowledgement that it needs to progress the issue of dealing with voluntary redundancies in an efficient and sensitive way, while recognising the necessity to keep communities safe and building on the decrease in crime rates. The contrast between north of the border and south of the border—where the Liberal Democrats are in government—could not be clearer. I have no doubt which model the people of Scotland would prefer.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Scotland is slowly throwing off its “sick man of Europe” tag. Through education and increased awareness of the importance of healthy eating and active lifestyles, we are making progress. Choosing a balanced diet that is high in fresh produce is one of the best choices that an individual can make to improve their health. It is sometimes argued that local produce is more expensive than goods that are imported from overseas. That can certainly be true, but there is no substitute for quality. Whatever the complex reasons behind Scotland’s poor health record, it is certainly not caused by our lacking high-quality produce from our land and seas. As the cabinet secretary alludes to in the foreword to “Recipe For Success—Scotland’s National Food and Drink Policy”, it is a strange paradox that this nation should have such a poor diet-related health record. Scottish produce is world class. Our seas are abundant in many key stocks and, despite the clear need to improve the common fisheries policy so that we get a fairer deal for our fishermen, just under 5,000 fishermen on 2,100 vessels landed £501 million-worth of fish in 2011. In my constituency of North East Fife, fishing plays a major role in the local economy. Communities such as Pittenweem land hundreds of tonnes of fish each year and the industry supports about 165 jobs in fishing, and more in the connected supply chain. In Anstruther, we have a fish and chip shop that is known all over the world. Back on dry land, we certainly have a rich larder. Scotland produces some of the finest beef, lamb and pork in Europe, and with our more specialised products such as venison and haggis and our enormous variety of arable produce, which is made into everything from whisky to jam and porridge, it is fair to say that we are extremely well endowed with natural produce. The value and potential of Scottish produce is enormous, so it is clear that we must capitalise on our assets by supporting policies that encourage a rich and sustainable production chain. Some time ago, I was a little surprised to learn that it is primarily the Mediterranean region and not Scotland that consumes most of the langoustines that are caught in Scottish waters. Indeed, as the cabinet secretary mentioned, 10 million chefs are committed to using Scottish langoustines in cooking contests and restaurants around the world. We should be proud of our strong export levels, but we should perhaps also be a little sad that so much of that delicious product is shipped overseas and away from the Scottish palate. I believe that there is a willingness among consumers and the supply chain to redress that imbalance. We need strategies at both national and local levels that promote the economic, environmental and health benefits of eating Scottish produce. I turn again to North East Fife and Fife as a whole, where there are several independent organisations that promote local produce. The Fife diet, which Claire Baker and Alison Johnstone mentioned, is a consumer network of people who are passionate about local food. It began in 2007 as project to encourage people to commit to eating food from Fife over a year. Participants monitored their progress and were encouraged to share details of their experience. It is well known that the project has won several awards, including the best green campaign award at the 2012 Scottish green awards, and it has become a large network of people who are fighting for increased sustainability and more local sourcing of food. As well as consumers’ improving their diets, producers are looking at new ways of bringing produce to a wider market close to home. Many members have mentioned the revival of once-popular farmers markets; they are now booming. The number of farmers markets around the country increased by 50 per cent between 2007 and 2012. St Andrews and Cupar in my constituency hold their own markets and attract at each event about 30 stalls selling local cheeses, meats, ales, fruit and vegetables and specialist products. That is to be welcomed. I do not have time to mention all the local community organisations that work hard to promote local produce, but there are many of them and they deserve our support. Anything that we can do to shorten or simplify the supply chain is worthy of serious consideration because it benefits everyone. The Scottish Government’s acceptance of the Scudamore review recommendations is to be welcomed. The review recommended an holistic approach to food safety, labelling and nutrition, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government accepted all the recommendations, has set about trying to implement them and has commenced a consultation of interested parties. Random testing clearly has a part to play, but the case for an open and transparent standards agency in Scotland to monitor production and supply, as well as to advise on nutrition, has been well and truly made. We should certainly be grateful that we have not followed the example of the rest of the UK in our approach to food standards in recent years. Whatever the final position in relation to horsemeat, local butchers have reported a significant boost in their business, thanks to their reputation as quality suppliers. Long may that continue. As Tavish Scott did, I congratulate the Scottish Government on the improvement in export performance in the food and drink sector. Long may that trend continue, too. The Scottish Government’s aim to increase the value of exports from the £5.4 billion that was recorded in 2011 to £7.1 billion in the next four years is ambitious, but there is no substantial reason why that cannot be achieved. In conclusion, our aim should be to encourage Scottish consumers to access food locally, at reasonable prices. Certainly, food banks should have no place in a fair society—I note Jayne Baxter’s comments on that. We need to support our farmers, fishermen and manufacturers across the all-important food and drink industry. That includes promoting the “Scottish” label vigorously at home and abroad. Food and drink really is a home-and-away industry, and it plays a vital part in the Scottish economy.

Does the First Minister agree that, were the UK Government to repeal the Human Rights Act 1998 and withdraw from the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, it would set a unique precedent in the developed world, separating the United Kingdom from the other 46 participants in the court and putting the UK on the same level as Belarus?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to improve employment opportunities for older people. (S4O-01875)

I acknowledge the Government’s efforts to help younger people into work. What opportunities are there for the exchange of knowledge and skills between older workers and young people?

It is disappointing that the UK Government has failed to provide the Scottish Government or, indeed, Fife Council with details of the numbers of troops coming to Leuchars. However, it seems likely that the number of personnel at Leuchars will be about 450 less than promised by Liam Fox in July 2011 and approximately 350 less than the Royal Air Force numbers at that time. That will have an economic and social impact in my constituency, and my constituents are disappointed. Does the minister agree that, rather than that being a union dividend for Leuchars, it is more of a union IOU?

Will the minister give way?

With others, I congratulate David Torrance on bringing the debate to Parliament and commend him for highlighting the work of Fife Gingerbread. I add my congratulations to Fife Gingerbread on its quarter-century celebrations last year. It has given 25 years of invaluable service in supporting lone parents across Fife, and can be justly proud. Fife Gingerbread’s remit has remained the same throughout its history. It is there to provide accessible, approachable and non-judgmental support, advice and information to all lone parents with children of any age from all backgrounds and walks of life. Although there are times when individuals feel that they are alone, Fife Gingerbread is there to support them. No one can understand their situation better than the volunteers at Fife Gingerbread. It is a vital organisation for lone parents in Fife, and the level of support that it offers could not be achieved without the hard work of its staff and volunteers. As Jayne Baxter and other members have mentioned, both the staff and the volunteers at the organisation have been working on “Surviving Poverty: The Impact of Lone Parenthood”. That was a study of lone parents in rural communities in Fife in particular, including people in the Howe of Fife and around Cupar in my constituency. That research forms part of the Poverty Alliance’s evidence, participation and change project. The EPIC project aims to enable people with direct experience of poverty and social exclusion to have their voices heard in the policy-making process. The research sought to explore and understand the quality of life in rural communities, and it included a project that involved 10 women as peer researchers, who conducted the fieldwork in September and October last year. Lone parents were contacted through a postal survey of 200 one-parent households, and eight in-depth one-to-one interviews were conducted to explore the issues that were raised in the survey. Both those approaches were carried out in conjunction with the peer researchers. The peer researchers were, largely, lone parents who are involved with Fife Gingerbread. They went through comprehensive research training, which not only improved their research skills but increased their confidence and ability to speak out on matters that are important to them. A fundamental fact that comes across clearly in the report is that a lack of adequate income, whether through low pay or benefits, is the underlying cause of many problems that are faced by lone parents, who have the responsibility of being both breadwinner and carer. As Jayne Baxter and other members said, the report noted that rising costs of food and fuel, in particular, have had a significant impact on lone-parent families. The report also mentioned difficulties to do with debt and accessing mainstream credit, and noted that employment opportunities are difficult to find. An overwhelming feeling of social isolation is all too common a problem among lone parents. It is likely that welfare reform will make the situation more acute. We need to ensure that we are doing all that we can at the Scottish level to help to alleviate the hardship that lone-parent families all too often face. We need a Government that is committed to mitigating the impact of unfair welfare reform. It is important that policy at local and national levels ensures that approaches that are taken to support lone parents take account of individual and family needs. We need to ensure that policy makers are doing all that they can to engage effectively with service users. I encourage all members to read the report and to help to ensure that its recommendations are heard by all. I wish Fife Gingerbread all the best for the future and I thank David Torrance for bringing this worthwhile debate to Parliament.

I welcome the report from Murdo Fraser and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. When the report was published back in November, it was reassuring to note the committee’s central finding that the “renewable energy target for electricity generation is achievable”. That is clearly subject to caveats, but in an international context it is not an exaggeration to say that Scotland is leading Europe and the world in terms of renewable energy and the wider transition to the green economy, as emissions from energy production fall. Turning to the European Commission’s “Energy roadmap 2050”, the Commission’s renewables target is 20 per cent by 2020. In Scotland, we are talking about meeting, or at least coming very close to achieving 50 per cent in the next two years—not to mention the figure of 100 per cent. It is therefore high time that some members of the Parliament refrained from describing the targets as “ludicrous”. It is important to keep an eye on the prize: a Scotland that is virtually self-sustaining in terms of energy generation and consumption. We should redouble our efforts to achieve that. That includes supporting the development and deployment of renewable technologies, which is in line with the “Energy roadmap 2050” and is necessary in order to meet our emissions reduction targets under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. Looking internationally, the Energiewende in Germany—the transition to sustainable energy generation and consumption—is well under way. In the league of large European nations, Germany is more than pulling its weight in the process, with more than 25 per cent of supply coming from renewable sources, according to the latest figures, compared with the UK’s 9.4 per cent and France’s 20 per cent. Despite that, Angela Merkel’s CDU-led coalition has come under serious criticism for cutting back on subsidies for renewables too early, which is putting thousands of jobs at risk and potentially stalling Germany’s impressive momentum. However, Germany’s decision to decommission all of its nuclear reactors by 2022 in response to the Fukushima disaster has been warmly greeted by environmental organisations around the world. Aside from the enormous subsidies that are associated with building and running nuclear power stations, and the astronomical costs of storing waste, the true cost of disasters to the state can be five times higher than the price that the nuclear industry has paid by way of insurance, as the Fukushima example showed.

No. I do not have enough time. There are concerns about the siting of wind turbines. Local authorities must ensure that they fully assess the cumulative impact of plans before making decisions. They need to undertake proper consultation of residents and businesses and to take into account guidance from important agencies such as Scottish Natural Heritage and VisitScotland. That is an important recommendation in the committee’s report because we need carefully to balance the interests of everyone in the planning process. As the committee suggested and as the Government has accepted, we need to make progress in identifying local spatial frameworks. We must acknowledge—as Fergus Ewing has stated—that the national policy on wind turbine development is under review as part of the review of Scotland’s planning policy. We need to consider those things in context. We must take a full view of subsidies in relation to wind farm development, rather than pursuing calls for slashing the funding to the industry while failing to take into account the fact that contracts for difference, as they are proposed, represent a subsidy in relation to nuclear industries—a point that was agreed, with one exception, I think, by the committee. That is not to mention the failure to take account of the substantial nuclear clean-up costs, which is, to say the least, unfortunate. If we were to accept the arguments about reducing funding, we would seriously jeopardise the energy and emissions targets that were agreed by Parliament. At the end of last year I corresponded with and met representatives of a company that is based in north-east Fife that is promoting new and innovative designs for tidal energy generation. It is precisely that kind of sustainable industry that we need to support into the future. We must also recognise that the Scottish Government’s saltire prize is an extremely useful incentive for developers of wave and tidal energy sources, in particular. The debate surrounding energy production and consumption should not be seen just in terms of targets and Government strategies. Individual households and businesses have a role to play in reducing demand by consuming less. That includes proactive measures such as installing more efficient heating systems, replacing boilers through the scrappage scheme, designing new homes and fitting existing homes with the highest levels of insulation to increase energy efficiency, and making simple efforts around the home to use less energy. As for the renewable heat targets, we should take heart from the fact that the interim target for renewable heat sources has been exceeded. Discussions between the Scottish Government and the UK Government on the detail of the renewable heat incentive scheme to be launched this summer could clear the way for more progress towards the 11 per cent target for 2020, which has hitherto been delayed by the UK Government’s failure to act decisively on the matter, which was mentioned by Marco Biagi and is also mentioned in the committee’s report. However, as WWF Scotland says, heat accounts for more than half of energy demand in Scotland, 47 per cent of CO2 emissions and 60 per cent of household energy costs, so perhaps we should consider being a little bit more adventurous than 11 per cent. The committee’s report is valuable and I am pleased to note that the Government is taking it seriously. I welcome this afternoon’s debate.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had regarding the location of the headquarters of the police service of Scotland. (S4T-00237)

Can the cabinet secretary assure me that the new police service of Scotland will not be perceived as having a focus on west central Scotland?

I accept that we can always do more, but we should welcome the many positive things that we have heard today about the progress that Scotland has made across the board in relation to human rights. I welcome the comments that David Stewart and others have made. It is worth noting that the Scottish Human Rights Commission has pointed out that “a number of laws of the Scottish Parliament” have been “cited as good practice in human rights and in their subject field.” However, it is fair to say that, although we have effective structures in place and various actions have been undertaken, including the development of the national action plan, we need to work on our outcomes. The commission says that the influence “decreases the closer to real life we look.” As all students of human rights know, the traditional focus in the UK has been on looking at human rights in terms of political and civic rights. Economic, social and cultural rights have played second fiddle—the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has recognised that point. Despite what Iain Gray said, if we are to have a charter of human rights or some kind of constitutional rights in an independent Scotland, or legislation that encompasses human rights, I think that there is plenty of scope for Scotland to lead the way; I take a different view to Mr Gray. It will be interesting to see whether any British bill of rights that the current UK Government introduces takes up the challenge in respect of economic, social and cultural rights. I guess that it probably will not. In the limited time that is available, I would like to say a little about human rights in the context of caring for the elderly—in particular, those with conditions such as dementia. Article 3 of the ECHR states that no one should be subjected to “inhuman or degrading treatment”. Article 8 makes provision to protect private and family life. When people begin to lose control of their cognitive faculties and become more dependent on their carers, whoever they may be, there is always a danger that their vulnerability might not be adequately addressed. In its report, “Getting it Right?”, the Scottish Human Rights Commission details its views on Scotland’s treatment of the elderly in terms of dignity and care. The report notes the increasing recognition of the importance of unpaid carers, which was demonstrated recently by the event called the carers parliament. It also identifies some areas for improvement; for example, it cites research from 2007 that showed that only half of a sample of dementia patients in hospital had a recorded life history in their medical notes, which the SHRC has described as an important part of social care. Care of the vulnerable and, in particular, the elderly is one area where we can say with cautious optimism that we are making progress in human rights terms. Although the charter of rights for people with dementia and their carers, which was produced in the previous session of Parliament, has no statutory footing, it certainly highlights the need to promote and protect the human rights of those with dementia, and reaffirms society’s responsibility in ending discrimination. That is the human rights agenda in practice. Other members have referred to the impact of welfare reform; it seems to me that the proposed bedroom tax and its impact on, for example, divorced fathers raises potential article 8 issues, at the very least. In its briefing, the Glasgow Disability Alliance raises an important issue on the right to independent living, and the First Minister has referred recently to the rights of the homeless. In addition, I am pleased that the new oath for policemen contains a commitment to human rights. Those are all steps in the right direction. We must recognise that, under existing international obligations, states have an obligation to achieve progressively the full realisation of social, economic and cultural rights. Politicians and Governments everywhere, take note: human rights are not set in stone. The ECHR is a living instrument, and one to which all Governments must respond. I believe that the development of a national action plan is a positive and important step forward and an effective way of ensuring that the human rights of all vulnerable people are embedded in everything that we do. I support the motion and the amendment.

Although a number of organisations believe that they should have a mandatory position on the council, including the Association of British Insurers and the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers, with which I have dealings, we will get into problems if we start to specify one over the other. As we know, the Lord President believes that initially a key role of the council will be technical drafting and I believe that it is right to give him flexibility and not preclude him from appointing whomever he wants to take on this early task. As has been suggested, we can change the mandatory appointments by statutory instrument and, declaring an interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates, I think that it is right that advocates and solicitors are not precluded from any of the LP appointments.

I have a great deal of sympathy for Graeme Pearson’s amendment 23, but we must be fair to all private clients, so I disagree strongly with Malcolm Chisholm. A general principle is at stake. The bill deals with legal aid on its own, so to support amendment 23 would be inappropriate. However, I would like—and hope that I will get—assurance from the cabinet secretary that the issue will be kept under review.

I refer to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. As Annabel Goldie has said, the bill has been controversial, but part 1 is less controversial. We have heard a lot today about the balance between lawyers and non-lawyers in the new civil justice council, but let us not forget that Lord Gill told the Justice Committee in evidence that he envisaged that the bulk of the council’s early work would be the drafting of technical rules. I accept that the balance between lawyers and non-lawyers may need to change over time. However, the Lord President has a big task ahead of him, and I believe that it is right that Parliament has not sought to impose too many restrictions on his powers or to be too prescriptive in terms of his appointments. The Scottish Government has made it clear that it will not preclude a lay person from being the deputy chairman of the council, and I am sure that we all welcome that assurance. I hope and am confident that the Lord President will recognise that his appointments will reflect a wide range of interests, in accordance with the principles set out by the Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland. I hope, too, that the insurance industry, trade unions and others will be happy with the appointments when they are made. As to part 2 of the bill, despite the agreement on the principle in particular that those who can contribute towards their legal aid should do so, the detail has been hotly debated. The cabinet secretary has had a very difficult task in the current financial climate, but what is proposed still compares favourably with the situation in England, where some people with an income below the Scottish threshold will pay their full costs in the magistrates court or up to 90 per cent of them in the Crown Court, where I understand that the minimum contribution, if it is to be made, would be £254. As Christine Grahame has suggested, English legal aid is faring far worse than the 7.3 per cent cut that we will experience in Scotland over the next few years. The Scottish Government has listened and has increased the disposable income threshold for contribution and accepted that the limits will have to be kept under review. It goes without saying that, if there was evidence that the limits were affecting the right of individuals to a fair trial, they would have to be considered further. On collection issues, through discussions before the publication of the bill, the Government accepted that SLAB will collect for solemn or the more serious cases. While it is true that the Government has not moved on the principle of solicitor collection in summary cases, it accepts the need to offer assistance to small firms in the collection process, which was the basis of one amendment that we discussed earlier this afternoon. Some say that the change proposed in the bill is a break from the normal relationship between solicitor and client, but we should not forget that, although it amounts to only £154,000 in total per year, the current collection for ABWOR—assistance by way of representation—for guilty pleas in summary cases has nevertheless to be collected by solicitors. We have heard a lot of anecdotal evidence that solicitors do not collect that money. Mark Harrower of the Edinburgh Bar Association said that one reason for that was because it might create conflict between solicitors and clients. It is never easy to ask for money, but it is stock in trade for solicitors to do so with private clients and that may also cause conflicts to arise from time to time. Such collection is therefore not unique, and to oppose collection without properly testing matters in practice seems to me wrong. We must also acknowledge that, under the new limits, up to 88 per cent of applicants will pay no contribution at all, so let us not overegg the pudding. Let us see how collection works in practice and what SLAB can do to help smaller firms. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s assurance that he will keep matters under review, particularly in the operation of the part 2 provisions. As to refunds, in contrast to the position in England and Wales there is no tradition of reimbursing legal expenses in Scotland in cases where the accused is acquitted, which is possibly due to the absence of private prosecutions historically. However, I sympathise with the view of many Opposition members and recognise that refunds or reimbursement of expenses is something that needs further thought, not just for legally aided clients but for all. As I said at stage 1, that is a much wider issue. I urge the Government to keep the matter under review and not to kick it into the long grass.

Does the member accept that we heard evidence at the Justice Committee that a byproduct of the NHS taking over medical care in prisons was that it gave the potential for an improved throughcare system?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in this debate and to follow so many thoughtful contributions. Mental health is affected by an extremely broad range of factors, many of which are interconnected. The reasons behind the mental health problems that we face as a nation are many and varied. That is why it is clearly right that the Scottish Government launched the consultation to update the strategy. I was pleased to hear from the minister about the strong response to the consultation. I recognise that in the past decade progress has been made on preventing suicide, but we should also bear in mind the academic evidence from the University of Edinburgh and the University of Manchester. Last year, they published research that identified something called the Scottish effect—that is, the phenomenon that causes suicide rates in Scotland to be higher than those elsewhere in the UK. One of the authors of the report suggested that a more prevalent tendency in Scotland to treat symptoms of mental health problems with psychotropic drugs, rather than getting to the root of patients’ anxiety or depression, could be partly to blame, although it was not clear to the researchers whether that tendency was caused in the seeking of treatment or in its delivery. There is good evidence, anecdotal and otherwise, that the use of psychotropic drugs can have seriously unwanted side effects. I am pleased that prescription of antipsychotic drugs for the elderly, particularly those with dementia, is now being actively discouraged. The paper also suggests that alcohol and deprivation play a significant role in the Scottish effect, being responsible for 33 per cent and 24 per cent respectively of the excess suicides —“excess” meaning above the UK average. Sadly, the paper also identifies men as being at a greatly elevated risk. Indeed, the Scottish suicide information database published a report in December 2012 that showed that, according to the latest figures, three quarters of suicides involve men and that 56 per cent of those who committed suicide in 2010 had received mental health prescriptions in the year leading up to their death. The link between increased suicide risk and poor mental health is beyond question. We know that. David Stewart and others have referred to the choose life initiative, and I think that such initiatives are helpful in our attempts to make inroads against the Scottish effect, but we need to keep working at this. Several speakers have referred to the impact of welfare reform and the recession. Clearly, we need to acknowledge the scale of the recession’s impact on mental health. A recent research paper that was published in the British Medical Journal is one of several in recent years whose conclusions suggest an increase in the prevalence of mental health problems, which seem to align with the onset and development of the recession. In fact, several papers that have been published in the past two years appear to indicate a growing problem, and some academics are investigating why it is that men appear to suffer more negative mental health effects than women as a result of the financial crisis and recession. Of course, we all know that women are suffering from the UK coalition’s policies in plenty of other ways. The paper says that further research is needed—no doubt that is the case. We need to explain the effects on men. However, it is also increasingly clear in modern medicine and psychology that issues around gender, age, employment status, physical health and many other variables, demand a mental health strategy that is centred on patient needs. I am pleased that the Government’s strategy contains measures that will help to deliver a more patient-centred approach to treatment. I certainly strongly support efforts in that respect. In our debate in September 2011, I touched on the value of peer groups as a form of independent advocacy. I am pleased that, in commitment 3 of the strategy, the Scottish Government commits itself to a review of peer support. I acknowledge that that is a step in the right direction. I hope that peer support will become much more important in the future. Many speakers have referred to stigma. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to the development of the see me campaign. However, we should bear it in mind that a survey that was conducted by see me last year suggested that 56 per cent of people still would not want anyone to know if they were suffering from a mental illness. Research shows that sufferers are often reluctant to talk about it with others, whether that is because they are worried about people’s perception of them changing for the worse, or because they are embarrassed or do not want to become a burden on family, friends or colleagues. Mental illness has been described as the last great taboo, and we must do all that we can to destigmatise it. There are signs that progress is being made, and we can be encouraged by the international reaction to some of our efforts. The see me campaign has been lauded as an example of best practice internationally, and statistics show that Scotland has progressed a great deal in the past few years when it comes to tackling stigma. As others have said, the perception that depression is a sign of weakness can impede a sufferer’s career progression or make life difficult in a number of ways. It is depressing to note that see me’s survey says that only 35 per cent of people think that it would be suitable for someone to be a primary school teacher if they experienced depression from time to time. Those and other forms of discrimination must continue to be tackled. I think that we are heading in the right direction to change attitudes for the better, but we have a long way to go. On older people, I was also at the recent meeting of the cross-party group on mental health and I can confirm that Malcolm Chisholm is correct in saying that we heard evidence that only 1 per cent—in fact, I think that it was fewer than 1 per cent—of older people with depression were being referred to psychiatrists. We also heard evidence that there were not enough clinical psychologists dealing with non-drug treatments, but that is an issue that goes wider than the issue of older people. We also learned of the frustration that is felt by some elderly folk that mental health services for the elderly concentrate on dementia, without recognising the range of mental illnesses that elderly folk encounter. I am glad that the strategy takes that on board.

We have not heard much so far about the capital estate. At the Justice Committee, we heard that there is a £57 million capital maintenance backlog in the Scottish estate. I am not sure whether the Labour Party supports the additional £10 million that is being put towards the capital estate budget.

The minister will be aware that north-east Fife is a very scenic area that includes a large part of the Fife coastal path. However, it also contains a number of busy commuter routes. How can the existing infrastructure in north-east Fife be improved to increase the uptake and improve the safety of cycling?

Does Jamie Hepburn accept that Mr Rennie’s explanation seems to be in marked contrast to the position of the better together campaign in terms of its demands for more detail on the case for independence?

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson and the Finance Committee on tackling a vital and increasingly complex issue. As we know from the latest labour market statistics for the August to October period, although unemployment and claimant count numbers throughout Scotland may be significantly down, regrettably the number of those in jobs has also declined. As we know from Professor David Bell’s research, which was referred to in The Scotsman yesterday, part-time working continues to rise. Increasing numbers of people are in part-time work because of a lack of a full-time alternative. In terms of assessing employability, that highlights the fact that there may be a substantial financial shortfall, not only to those individuals in part-time employment and their families, but also to the economy as a whole in lost tax revenue. Is that the shape of things to come? I hope not, but it underlines the complexity of the issue. What is clear from that shortfall, and the high levels of unemployment among our young folk and from the evidence of the increasing numbers of 55 to 64 year-olds staying in work, is that there are substantial competing pressures across the board affecting employability. There is a continuing contrast between areas such as my constituency and other parts of Fife, such as Kirkcaldy, with substantially differing numbers of claimants and unemployed people, but let us consider the differences between other parts of Scotland, too. We heard earlier from Dennis Robertson on the situation in Aberdeenshire, so the position is complex. Much more important than statistics are the real people behind them. Ordinary men and women, including a large number of young people, recent school leavers with standard grades or highers, students with skills and qualifications from college or degrees from university, and people with all levels of qualifications and skills, as well as people with no qualifications or skills at all, are finding it extremely difficult to find work. As the Scottish Government strategy for youth employment identifies, the human costs of that challenge are damaged self-esteem, the heightened risk of offending, and the prospect of long-term unemployment and the intergenerational social problems that can accompany it. There may not be one silver bullet to tackle the problems, but what seems clear is that there may be too many agencies involved or, at the very least, that there is a potential for unnecessary duplication of effort between Scottish, UK, local and other agencies, although, as the committee has said, it has not undertaken detailed scrutiny of the issue.

I agree—Dennis Robertson makes a sensible point. It is clear that the Scottish Government recognises the need to ensure that UK and Scottish employability programmes fit together and, in particular, to strengthen local partnerships, especially those between colleges and the third and private sectors. Inevitably, there is always pressure to establish priorities, but given the academic research of Brynner and Parsons on the experiences of men who, in their late teens, had not been in employment, education or training, the Scottish Government is right to focus, in its opportunities for all programme, on the 16 to 19-year-old age group. However, we should not forget that there are substantial needs in the post-20 age group—the committee has taken on board that point. Other issues, such as the difficulties for employers in providing jobs in rural communities, should also not be forgotten, as other members have mentioned. Although I agree entirely with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth’s comments about the need to set parameters for initiatives and a necessity to balance focus and breadth for each scheme, surely something further could be done to consider the needs of those in the post-20 age group. I note what the committee said about community jobs Scotland, but anything further that the Scottish Government can say beyond the comments that were made earlier by John Swinney on the post-20 age group would be helpful. With regard to tackling unemployment, although internet-based support, such as the my world of work website, is to be applauded, let us not forget that for many in the employment market who have been out of work longest, their internet skills are not great and access is not necessarily easy. If we are to make significant progress in tackling disadvantage, we must ensure that the needs of the most disadvantaged are not neglected in favour of those for whom a little bit of extra help may be sufficient to assist them in the labour market. On the financing of employment initiatives, the committee report makes it clear that it is widely accepted that such targeted initiatives are expensive. I am sure that we all agree that, in times of economic crisis, every penny spent needs to be justified. However, we need to bear in mind that, as the STUC said, “the costs of inaction are higher.” I have no doubt that that is the case. Such schemes can certainly be regarded as a form of preventative spend. The Parliament needs to consider how best to evaluate the success of schemes. The committee rightly said: “there needs to be robust, independent evaluation of these initiatives to establish the extent to which they support individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds into sustainable employment.” Notwithstanding those points, let us not forget that in Scotland we have a dedicated Minister for Youth Employment and that the Government is firmly committed to its modern apprenticeships programme and to using £25 million of European structural funding to support young people into jobs. The Government is also committed to better alignment of Scotland’s employability services, which would be made much easier if there were full devolution of employment services, let alone independence. There is no doubt that improving employability is vital for Scotland. We need constantly to review progress so that we understand and build on what works most effectively. As members said, we should never lose sight of the need to consider employability in the overall context of deprivation.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the Secretary of State for Defence regarding the establishment of a multi-role brigade at RAF Leuchars, given the importance of these proposals to the local community. (S4O-01645)

Would the cabinet secretary agree that, notwithstanding the considerable underspend in defence spending in Scotland over recent years, it now seems that the promise of 6,500 to 7,000 Army troops by the then Secretary of State for Defence, Liam Fox, in July 2011 was a considerable overstatement? Moreover, does the cabinet secretary accept and understand that the delay in making an announcement is causing considerable concern in the local community?

4. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the Scottish Government’s submission to the European Union on minimum pricing for alcohol. (S4F-01080)

The UK Government has shown its willingness to support the measure and has launched its own consultation into minimum pricing—showing once again that where Scotland leads the rest of the UK follows. Can the First Minister give an assurance that this Government will continue to promote the public health argument on pricing, based on article 36 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union?

Does the member accept that the fact that many of the Clydesdale Bank’s lending products to small businesses are now the subject of a review by the Financial Services Authority cannot do much good for the bank’s long-term reputation?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the audit of NHS Fife identified no inappropriate behaviour or pressure on staff to hide breaches or manipulate data, although it recognised that there are areas for improvement in practice. Does he agree that that indication of hard work in NHS Fife compares favourably with the discredited hidden waiting lists of the previous Administration?

Given the Opposition parties’ previous, rather obsessive concerns about the ability of the Scottish Parliament to hold a legally binding referendum, only for the Scottish and UK Governments to resolve the issues by a process of negotiation, does the Deputy First Minister agree that an independent Scotland’s continued membership of the EU will be assured by a process of negotiation, too?

Scotland’s participation and the minister’s involvement—half asleep or otherwise—in the United Nations climate change negotiations are very welcome, and they cement Scotland’s importance and growing reputation in global action on climate change. I am sure that we all welcome the news that, despite the problems that the Kyoto protocol has had and continues to face, it was rescued as a result of the negotiations in Doha, aided by the European Union’s work, to take on a new carbon-cutting target under the treaty that runs to 2020. We now have a duty to ensure that the EU continues to press ahead with higher targets. Like other members, I welcome the grudging acceptance by richer, more developed nations of the need to provide funds to the smaller, poorer nations of the world for the losses and damage that have been incurred as a result of the ill effects of climate change. Although it is clear that further discussion is required, the acceptance builds on the agreement that was made in Durban, which adopted the green climate fund’s management framework to oversee the gathering and distribution of $100 billion of finance per year to help the small, poorer countries to develop and adapt to climate change and its impacts. Like other members, I welcome the fact that the fund is still a work in progress. We should not forget that, while Scotland may be pioneering clean energy and a climate justice fund—which, as other members have mentioned, stems from the most ambitious climate change legislation anywhere in the world—other, far larger countries are not yet following that example. Developed countries such as the United States, together with China, are contributing excessive amounts of carbon emissions annually. In contrast, smaller countries such as Singapore and Tuvalu, with populations of 5.3 million and 10,000 respectively and a historically a weak voice on the world stage, are now making a significant contribution. Those nations share membership of the Alliance of Small Island States, which served as a driving force behind the Durban negotiations and once again came to the fore in Doha. The world’s smaller nations are tired of looking on as the world’s largest carbon emitters refuse to take action and responsibility. They are tired of a lack of action and of not being listened to. Those small nations have now proved that they will be listened to on the world stage and that they will hold their own and get what is just. Despite the tens of thousands of miles between our shores, there are a number of similarities between Scotland and Singapore. Each country has approximately 5 million inhabitants, and although there are numerous differences between the two nations—not least in their climates—Singapore achieved its independence from the UK in 1963. Although Singapore has undeniably had problems since then, its average GDP per capita has now risen to be higher than that of the UK. Singapore is now having its voice heard on the world stage, among other small independent nations, and it is driving action on climate change forward. That is what Scotland could do, too. I fully accept that the Scottish Government was represented at the latest round of meetings, and I recognise that environmental charities in this country have praised its work, but we must ensure that our ambitious climate targets are met. As other members have said, talking about climate targets is simply not enough. I fully accept the disappointment of many on hearing the latest statistics for emissions in Scotland. It is clear that more needs to be done, but there will, I hope, be better things to come. It is the responsibility of every nation to ensure that what has happened in Doha and Durban and in other places previously can be carried on in Warsaw next year, when I am sure that the smaller nations of the world will once again lead the way.

6. To ask the Scottish Government—notwithstanding the answer given to Bob Doris earlier—when it will introduce its consultation on the licensing of air weapons. (S4O-01593)

Can the cabinet secretary advise who participated on the Scottish firearms consultative panel and what contribution they made?

I missed the cabinet secretary’s statement last week—I think that we were all consumed by the Leveson saga at the time—so I am grateful to the Parliamentary Bureau for allowing time for a full debate today. Hopefully the report of this debate will not become the chip paper so beloved of Jamie McGrigor. Reform of the CFP must remain a priority. We are once again at an important time in the negotiation timetable, and last week the cabinet secretary rightly referred to an increase in the value of landings by almost one fifth during the past four years at a time of recession. It must be said that this is in the context of a proposed significant reduction in the North Sea cod and west coast haddock quotas, and particularly in the context of a reduction in the number of fishermen who are employed on Scottish-based vessels to fewer than 5,000 last year, which was down 200 on the year. After the poor results in 2010, last year saw an improvement in shellfish landings for east coast fishermen, particularly in my North East Fife constituency, but my understanding is that the situation is much worse this year, even allowing for the North Sea prawn fleet’s success in adopting gear that ensures that unwanted catch is kept to a minimum. There is a shortage of prawns in the North Sea, and that is a difficulty for the industry in Fife especially when, disappointingly, no progress has been made in reopening a previously viable winter sprat fishery in the Firth of Forth.

The member makes a very good point and I take it on board. I move on to cod recovery. We know that a further 20 per cent cut in the cod quota is required in 2013, despite the sterling efforts of Scottish fishermen in assisting the recovery of the fish and the positive way in which they have approached discards. Obviously, it is good news that the cod recovery plan is under review but the dispute over whether plans need to be agreed by the European Parliament as well as the Council of Ministers is neither helpful nor sensible. That needs to be sorted out, and we are right to oppose effort cuts if their impact is to detract from the attraction of the Scottish Government’s conservation credit scheme. I am grateful for the resolute stand for common sense that the cabinet secretary and his officials have made in Europe in that regard. We all know that automatic cuts to days at sea are deeply flawed on scientific and fisheries grounds; indeed, as Tavish Scott implied last week, the science points to an increase in cod stocks—he reinforced that point today. The fact is that the management framework provided by the existing CFP has failed, and discards are an indicator of its shortcomings. The Scottish Government is right to commit to achieving discard-free fisheries and to pursue its innovative discard-free catch quota scheme. We should support European Commission proposals to ban discards altogether by 2016, if not earlier. The CFP is too removed from the communities on which it impinges. We are right to continue to press the case for regionalisation and away from Brussels-based micromanagement. Fishing communities need to be given responsibility for their local resources. I agree with those who believe that that should be bottom up rather than top down. Trading fishing quotas in an international market would only make bad management worse. I am glad to hear that the Scottish Government will continue to oppose those who, in effect, seek the privatisation of the fishing industry. Let us say no to those who favour such a trade. As the Scottish Government suggests, the socioeconomic wellbeing of fishing communities must remain a high priority in the negotiations. For the future, commission proposals for the new CFP to achieve maximum sustainable yield by 2015 are a laudable aim, even with the caveat suggested by Jamie McGrigor. We must all hope that progress can be made in the mackerel dispute between the EU and Norway on the one hand and the Faroes and Iceland on the other. It cannot be right to allow a total catch to exceed the scientific advice by more than 40 per cent and to threaten the sustainability of the stock. Given that the UK has the largest share of the mackerel quota of any EU member state, mainly fished by Scottish boats, we should not sit on the sidelines if agreement cannot be reached. We should press the European Commission to implement its proposals on sanctions with a view to bringing to an end the unacceptable practice adopted by industries in Iceland and the Faroes. However, I accept Claire Baker’s points in that connection. The Scottish Government is working extremely hard to protect the interests of the Scottish fleet, protect our natural stocks and negotiate with neighbours to achieve a genuinely sustainable agreement for all those who fish the seas of northern Europe. However, it is clear that we can have only so much clout if we do not have the full representation of a member state. I would urge everyone in the chamber to reflect on the probability that Scotland and the rest of the UK would benefit from Scotland being an independent member state in negotiations. The new CFP is likely to predate the referendum but can we not imagine that working as two individual states within the EU might be for the benefit of Scotland and the rest of the UK? With 60 per cent of the UK fishing zone in Scotland, and 70 per cent of key stocks held by Scottish producer organisations, no one should doubt the importance of fishing to the Scottish economy. Good luck to the cabinet secretary and the UK ministers in the negotiations ahead.

Apart from meetings of the implementation group, what steps are being taken to increase public awareness of the legislation?

As the MSP for North East Fife, which is home to the town of St Andrews, I am privileged to participate in today’s debate on Scotland’s day of national celebration. I am delighted that this year’s programme of events in celebration of St Andrew’s day is busier than ever before. St Andrews is currently holding the St Andrews festival, which runs until the weekend. That is just one of the major events that are planned for Scotland this week, alongside programmes such as Scotland sings and book week Scotland, which tie in perfectly with the year of creative Scotland. From previous debates, I had understood that there was a general cross-party agreement on having a public holiday on St Andrew’s day, on the internationalism of our patron saint and on the need to put aside political differences so that we can celebrate Scotland’s national day together, as people of Scotland. As has, however, been pointed out several times in the past, St Andrew is not exclusively ours. Other countries, including Russia and Greece, respect him as their patron saint. Despite its further bail-out, Greece certainly needs a patron saint looking after it and its people. The date of 30 November has its obvious significance in Scotland, but it also captures worldwide significance. On that day in 1786, Peter Leopold Joseph of Habsburg-Lorraine, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, abolished the death penalty—it was the first European state to do so. Cities across the globe now celebrate cities for life day in memory of that pioneering act of humanity. In 1872, the first international football match took place in Glasgow between Scotland and England, and in 1934 the Flying Scotsman became the first steam locomotive officially to exceed 100mph. Not least important, in 1982 Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” album was released. All those events may have only tenuous connections to St Andrews and Scotland, but they all took place on 30 November and are all of great importance, in their own right.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that useful piece of information. Cities for life day is an event that does not gather as much interest in Scotland as it does elsewhere. In a country that has not had the death penalty since the 1960s, that may be understandable. However, on the day on which we celebrate St Andrew, I feel that we should all consider the importance and on-going relevance of cities for life day.

It was a 0-0 draw. St Andrew’s day has also borne witness to cultural and historically significant firsts. The first international football match gathered together 4,000 souls as Scotland held England to a 0-0 draw, as I just said. Despite the result, the match helped to invigorate the Scottish people with a love of football, which continues to this day—albeit with little current success. Of more interest than the 0-0 draw is the first 100mph journey by the Flying Scotsman. The locomotive travelled on countless journeys and covered about 2 million miles between London and Edinburgh after that. I rather fear that it will be a long while before we have a new high-speed train in Scotland. Some people may question how those examples are linked to St Andrew’s day. They are indicative of several things: humanitarianism, peace, equality, national pride and links between nations. As I mentioned, St Andrew was renowned for his humanitarianism and egalitarianism. Is not it right that the first international football match brought together on the terraces 4,000 people from different walks of life, in the same circumstances, to enjoy a game? Surely that demonstrates those values. Cannot it be said that a love of Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” album, which just happens to be the best-selling album of all time, brings together millions of people from all walks of life and all corners of the globe in a shared experience? St Andrew’s day is about much more than Scotland and its own history and culture; it is a day for the entire world. It is a day of tolerance, pride and equality. Events that are taking place globally this week reflect that. For example, the Scottish Society of Central Pennsylvania is hosting its St Andrew’s day supper. Over the next few days, St Andrew’s day events will take place in Brussels, Den Haag in the Netherlands, Bermuda and Manila. St Andrews is hosting a 10-day-long festival, which includes a food festival, as part of which a food from Fife dinner will be held at the Old Course hotel in St Andrews on Thursday. There will also be a Fife young fiddlers event, a torchlight parade and many other activities besides. Last Friday, there was a major poetry event in St Andrews, at which readings of the Ayrshire poet Rab Wilson, who wrote mainly in Scots, led a highly successful evening. I wish all the organisers of and participants in those events—which are the first in Scotland’s winter festival programme—every success, and I wish those who are involved in later events in the programme every success, too. I also welcome book week Scotland which, I am sure, Fiona McLeod will talk about in more detail. The internationalism of the day cannot be overstated. St Patrick’s day is renowned internationally for people enjoying themselves and celebrating all that is good about Ireland. The same should be true of St Andrew’s day in relation to Scotland, so I welcome the work that the Scottish Government is doing to promote it within our borders and beyond them. It is clear that St Andrew’s day is very important to the people of Scotland and to the people of the world, so it is right for us, as a Parliament, to hold such a debate. I commend the Government’s motion and Patricia Ferguson’s amendment. I wish, however, that I could understand the logic of Annabel Goldie’s amendment. I see and recognise 300 years of shared history, and I see and recognise a social union, but I do not recognise the narrow prism that her amendment seems to imply.

Tourism is without a doubt an enormous plus for Scotland. Scotland’s natural beauty, history, heritage and leisure facilities and our internationally renowned reputation as a friendly host all play their part. We should look at business tourism in that context, and we should try wherever we possibly can to link those assets with the needs of business. We should continue to encourage visitors to plan extra time in order to experience Scotland outside the conference hall. As Mike MacKenzie mentioned, tourism has continued to grow, despite the economic climate—it grew by 9 per cent last year. Although tourism faces many challenges, business tourism contributes £878 million to the economy, as has been said. I certainly believe that improving the business tourism take as a proportion of the total tourism take to 25 per cent is very achievable. Tourism supports approximately 270,000 jobs, and a high proportion of jobs in rural areas are based on it. My North East Fife constituency is one such rural area. I would like to say a little bit about that area as opposed to north-east Scotland, which Dennis Robertson talked about. North East Fife has an outstanding amount to offer visitors, from the beautiful coastal villages of the east neuk to the numerous golf courses and St Andrews, which some folk say is the jewel in the crown. North East Fife is certainly a destination for leisure visitors, but a great deal is also being done to promote the area—St Andrews in particular—as a business tourism destination. St Andrews, of course, features in the ambassador programme, which is fundamentally designed to spread the word. The University of St Andrews is a key partner in the central ambassador programme, which covers the key areas of aquaculture, sport, medicine and science. On the conference bid fund, it is not only Glasgow that has been successful, of course: St Andrews has been successful in attracting a conference in October 2013. The interactive tabletops and surfaces conference, which operates in the field of new and emerging table-top and interactive surface technologies, is co-hosting an event with the user interface software and technology—UIST—forum. It is hoped that that event will attract 435 delegates and that just under £1 million will be spent between 6 October and 9 October next year. If St Andrews can do it, I hope that other places can, too. We should do our best to promote that fund. The Fife tourism partnership is another organisation that acts as a forum for events and the sharing of resources, principally through a directory, which can be helpful for business in promoting facilities. In addition, the St Andrews Partnership held two-day workshops on 23 and 30 October this year, promoting business tourism in the area. We should also bear in mind VisitScotland’s central Scotland business tourism unit, which exists to provide impartial advice on venues and local services to those who are planning a conference or another event. There is no shortage of premium meeting and conference facilities in and around St Andrews. It is, after all, the home of golf and the hotels around the town—the Old Course hotel and the Fairmont, to name but two—have substantial conference facilities and a wide range of products to suit a business clientele. However, it is fair to say that because a great number of Fife’s business tourism facilities are located in St Andrews, opportunities elsewhere in the kingdom of Fife are relatively limited. The concentration of business tourism facilities in major centres of population is a pattern that is repeated in all parts of Scotland. For the organisers of an exhibition, it is clearly more practical in a logistical sense to gravitate towards centres of population where there are more convenient transport links and services, and the problem is not unique to Scotland. That is why it is important that all the stakeholders involved in the tourism sector take the necessary steps to ensure that the benefits of business tourism are shared as widely as possible. As I said, tourism supports a relatively high proportion of the total number of jobs in rural areas. When efforts are made to draw tourists to a particular town or city, be it St Andrews or Dundee, there needs to be an effective strategy in place to draw conference visitors out of those places into the wider area and to get them to invest their time and enjoyment in the region as a whole. VisitScotland has a role to play in that strategy. It operates a frequent outreach service whereby knowledgeable staff from visitor information centres, where they normally interact with leisure tourists, attend conferences and events around the country to link business tourists with the wider leisure facilities that are available—facilities that they might not otherwise have considered. It is also in the interests of the tourism industry as a whole if we can showcase the diversity of Scotland and encourage visitors to come back again and again, with conference delegates bringing their families along for a second visit, as Fergus Ewing suggested. We already know that Scotland is doing well on business tourism. As a whole, we are an attractive place in which to do business and hold conferences. We have a proven track record of success, testament to which is the fact that nearly a third of international association conferences held in the UK are hosted in Scotland. In terms of strengthening the link between business visitors and leisure, we have a perfect opportunity next year to attract visitors to more rural areas as the year of natural Scotland in 2013 unfolds. As members have suggested, we can be optimistic and build on our success to date. I would be grateful if, in his closing remarks, the minister would address the comments that were made in the recent Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report in relation to the possible disadvantages for rural areas.

Information is power—or, as Sir Francis Bacon said, “Knowledge is power”. I am reminded of that and the Scottish Information Commissioner’s important role every time I visit the north-east corner of my constituency. The commissioner is, of course, based in the impressive Kinburn castle in St Andrews and employs 21 members of staff, and all of them are very welcome in the community. First of all, on the royal exemption, the bill’s policy memorandum makes it clear that the rationale for introducing an absolute exemption amendment to section 41 of the 2002 act is that in respect of communications with the royal family there should be “a common approach throughout the UK to the treatment of information relating to Her Majesty.” At first glance, the proposition seems sensible, particularly bearing it in mind that the absolute exemption applies south of the border as a result—as Gavin Brown’s tortured explanation tried to make clear—of the coalition of Labour legislation being brought into force by a Conservative minister. Nevertheless, responses to the consultation have expressed serious reservations about the necessity for such an exemption. The Scottish Information Commissioner of the time, Kevin Dunion, said earlier this year that he regards the proposal as unnecessary, given the existing provisions in the 2002 act, and sees the amendments as “somewhat regressive, creating a wide-ranging absolute exemption, which will, in certain circumstances, only be set aside after a period longer than the exemption's current 30-year lifespan, regardless of either the nature of the information, or the strength of the public interest arguments in favour of its release.” Unison also suggested that the amendments might be contrary to the overall general direction of FOI legislation and, of course, to the objectives of the bill, the principles of which seek to ameliorate the existing legislation. It is worth considering the wide variety of respondents who do not consider the amendments to be necessary. That said, as was indicated in evidence to the Finance Committee, in practice the existing legislation has had very limited impact in relation to the public interest test. Nevertheless, there is an important principle to be observed, and I am pleased to note the cabinet secretary’s indication that the Scottish Government will carefully consider the Finance Committee’s stage 1 report and provide a view in time for stage 2. With regard to the time limits for proceedings in section 65 of the 2002 act, I agree with the proposal to allow a prosecution to begin six months from the moment that sufficient evidence of an offence is available, with a long stop on commencement of proceedings of three years from the date of the offence. However, it is worth noting that the Finance Committee’s stage 1 report states that, in her submission, the Scottish Information Commissioner did not believe that the three-year long stop would be effective because the possibility of commencing proceedings after such a long gap was very remote, especially as evidence of wrongdoing more often than not became evident within 12 months of the commission of the offence. The Campaign for Freedom of Information took the opposite view on the three-year limit, citing the evidence about Hillsborough that came to light after several decades as a good reason not to impose any backstop. However, I feel that it is in danger of confusing the wider issues with more important issues around criminal and civil liability generally. On the extension of coverage to ALEOs, the increasing outsourcing of public service provision in Scotland over the past decade, which many members have referred to, has raised some pertinent questions about accountability. In its submission to the consultation on the bill, the monitoring body for services, Consumer Focus Scotland, said that continued delay to extending the 2002 act “places significant numbers of consumers at a disadvantage.” I agree. On the question of exercising the powers that Scottish ministers have under section 5 of the 2002 act to add to the scheme bodies and private companies that undertake services for public authorities, I agree with the SCVO for the very good reason that the third sector organisations that provide formal services such as care or maintenance of community spaces should not be included in the extension. However, I agree that an extension of coverage is necessary to reflect the growing use of ALEOs in public service provision. I therefore support calls from local authorities, trade unions and ombudsmen for that extension to be introduced. Although I am aware of the cabinet secretary’s evidence to the Finance Committee that there would not appear to be any advantage in using primary legislation to extend coverage, rather than doing so by order, I hope that, in any event and come what may, early progress is made. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to regular reviews in that respect. The bill seeks to amend provisions in the 2002 act for authorities to issue “neither confirm nor deny” refusal notices in relation to requests for personal information. That was, of course, recommended by Kevin Dunion, and I believe that it is a commonsense suggestion. I welcome the thrust of the bill and look forward to its progress through Parliament.

11. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that families and carers are involved in the policy development and service delivery of mental health services. (S4O-01469)

Does the minister agree that one way forward is to work with service users, their families and carers to develop home treatment centres, such as crisis houses, to offer support to help to resolve a severe mental health crisis in a residential rather than hospital setting—a service that is as yet unavailable in NHS Fife?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when Sheriff Principal Taylor’s report on the review of expenses and funding of civil litigation in Scotland will be published. (S4O-01437)

Does the minister agree that the expenses and funding of civil litigation cannot be considered in isolation from the funding and operation of the courts? Accordingly, can the minister confirm that the Scottish Government will take account of Sheriff Principal Taylor’s findings before final views are formed on the future court structures project?

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on securing the debate. Most of the points that I was going to make have been made, so I will try to be as brief as possible. “You can’t take them with you” is something that we often hear when we talk about organ donation. It is a fundamental truth, nevertheless. Organ donation is an issue that evokes strong emotion. After all, organs constitute our bodies. How much more personal can we get? However, the current position should also evoke strong emotions. When we consider the urgent demand for organs in Scotland, it is a great shame that people are dying without registering to become an organ donor. It is a great pity that many who would be happy to donate their organs in order to save a life did not get round to registering. Reference has been made to the BMA poll. Other polls have found the figure to be much higher. We need to ask why comparatively few Scots are registered donors and, most important, we need to find a system in which the number of people needing organs more closely matches the number of organs available. As ever, we would be well advised to look to our neighbours for some guidance when considering solutions. In Europe, more than 20 countries operate some form of opt-out system. As other members have said, Spain has the highest level of donation in the world. Belgium is a close second but Scotland is a long way behind, with only 13 donations per million in 2010. Nevertheless, there are some positives. We currently have a higher percentage of our population on the organ donation register than any other part of the UK. In 2010, 37 per cent of Scots signed up, compared with 29 per cent of people in the rest of the UK. Even in Scotland, there is significant local variation in the percentage of people on the register. In the Highlands, 47 per cent are on the register, but in the Western Isles it is only 28 per cent. Given the widespread public support for organ donation, the rate of people dying, ultimately unnecessarily, as highlighted in Kenneth Gibson’s motion, is shameful. I agree with other members that we need to look at the issue in a slightly pragmatic way. While I am happy to support the motion, I hope that any future legislative change will strike a workable balance between the strongly held objections of the minorities, particularly those with religious beliefs, and the desperate need of people who are seriously ill in favour of extending their life and improving the quality of their life.

I welcome the members of the Vivarium Trust who are in the gallery for the debate: Hugh Hoffman, Margaret Farrell, Erika Topolewska and Senga Bate. I also thank my MSP colleagues who have stayed behind for it. I am pleased that we are able to have the debate and to bring the work of the Vivarium Trust and the benefits of co-housing to the Scottish Parliament’s attention, following on from the trust’s exhibition earlier in the year. The Vivarium Trust was set up in 2007 to promote co-housing through the provision of information and advice. The trust believes that co-housing offers a new and better way of living for older people. The model involves an affordable, self-managed form of living that combines the autonomy and privacy of individual households with a sense of community and mutual support. The Vivarium Trust plans to establish a pilot project in North East Fife so that it can demonstrate how co-housing works in action, test the practicalities, and offer a new model of housing that it hopes will encourage others across Scotland and the United Kingdom. I am delighted to announce to Parliament that the Vivarium Trust is in the process of setting up a partnership with Kingdom Housing Association to establish its pilot project in the St Andrews area of North East Fife. Members might ask what co-housing is. By way of background, I can tell them that the concept originated in Denmark. The first attempt to build a co-housing community started in the winter of 1964, when Danish architect Jan Gudmand-Høyer gathered a group of friends to discuss housing options. The concept found its feet in Denmark in the 1970s, and today there are many well-established co-housing projects there. There is also continued growth in new co-housing communities, and the concept has been incorporated into the master plans for many larger developments. In the UK there are co-housing projects in Dorset and in Springhill, although they are not specifically for the over-50s. The concept has spread across the globe, with co-housing projects in the Netherlands, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Canada and the United States of America. That is no surprise, because each home is designed for the individual while existing in a community that contains communal facilities, based on the needs and preferences of members. The communal facilities are often in the form of a common house and include areas for leisure and socialising, office space, gardens and workshops. Every co-housing community has different needs, but all co-housing communities have the same characteristics. First, there is the democratic process. Residents lead co-housing projects through the various stages of development and then manage the community through a democratic structure. All co-housing communities are designed for people. The community is designed by and for its residents, and although separate households exist they all share common goals. The central tenet of co-housing is the shared facilities, often a common house that is the hub and heart of every co-housing community. Shared facilities differ between co-housing communities, and communities often open up their common space to the wider community. The co-housing model offers a variety of benefits for people who choose to become involved in a project and it provides the opportunity to create an active community among its members. The Vivarium Trust was set up to demonstrate why co-housing is an important additional living model for older people. Research shows that many of the housing options that are currently available to older people do not meet their needs—and certainly do not meet the needs of an increasingly active older generation, whose members want to retain their independence for as long as possible. In the current financial climate, it is understandable that more and more older people want to retain their independence and require affordable housing. The co-housing model offers older people the chance to minimise their living costs, through energy efficiency measures, ecological design and the sharing of facilities. Projects can maximise their income through social enterprise, for example by selling on surplus renewable energy that is generated. It is important to be mindful of the benefits of co-housing for older people, which go beyond reducing living costs. Far too often, older people feel isolated from their community. Co-housing offers companionship and mutual support instead of isolation. It allows the individual to feel a sense of belonging and community and enables older people to have on-going, active responsibility for their circumstances, which promotes mental and physical wellbeing. The Vivarium Trust is in the process of setting up a partnership with Kingdom Housing Association. The pilot project will be an intentional community for the over-50s, based on the co-housing model. The proposal is for 25 to 30 self-contained dwellings of different sizes, which will be purpose built or adapted on ecological principles. All the dwellings will be designed with ageing in mind. The whole project will be designed with sustainability in mind, in not just the economic but the social sense. That principle will permeate every stage, from the initial planning application to on-going living in the development. The proposed amenities for the pilot include areas for socialising, a kitchen/dining area, a library, an office/computer room, a laundry room and gardens. There is the possibility that the project will have a small leisure facility. In keeping with the principles of co-housing, members of the pilot project will be responsible for every stage of the development. The development will be a demonstration project, to show the general public, young and old, the practicalities and benefits of sustainable living in a co-housing community. The Vivarium Trust hopes that the project will demonstrate how co-housing can be applied in Scotland and the UK. The Vivarium Trust has a committed group of approximately 20 members who are committed to becoming involved in the pilot project and are already looking forward to the design of the common house. Many other members are committed to various degrees, and the trust is continually looking to recruit new members. I hope that the debate will assist it with that goal. The work that the trust is undertaking is clearly incredibly worthy, and it has been mindful of developing the project so that it will make a positive contribution to the Scottish Government’s national objectives. It is hoped that the pilot will provide an example of how housing can be developed to aid Scotland in becoming a healthier, fairer and greener society. I am pleased to have been able to focus members’ attention on the trust and co-housing, and I welcome, and congratulate it on, its work, including the work that it has already undertaken to publicise the benefits of co-housing and in the project in North East Fife. I wish it every success in the future. I thank members for their cross-party support to enable the debate to take place.

Will the member give way?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. As we know, the bill is in two parts. It is fair to say that one of the points of contention about part 1 was that, given the bill’s provisions on mandatory appointments such as those relating to the Law Society, the judiciary and the Faculty of Advocates, the council runs the risk of being lawyer-heavy with insufficient attention being paid to the interests of the users of the court as well as the wider public interest—and more so if the designated up to six Lord President appointees also include lawyers. There is an issue there. However, although an organisation such as the Forum of Insurance Claims Managers rightly refers to its 80 per cent interest in litigated cases, we need to recognise that, as the Lord President suggested, much of the council’s work at the start will involve drafting rules. Indeed, he described that as “a substantial project”. Nevertheless, as the Lord President and the cabinet secretary—and, indeed, the academics Professors Mullen and Paterson—recognise, sub-committees will be very important. If they are set up from the start, they will be able to break down the work and it will be much easier to ensure that wider interests are represented in the Lord President’s appointments. We should also bear in mind that it will be possible for the Scottish Government to use secondary legislation to adjust the council’s mandatory membership and perhaps to reduce the number of lawyers in due course. The Lord President was also right to stress in his written evidence the fact that there was much talk of the experience in England and Wales, where the Spencer review led to a rebalancing of the membership of the Civil Justice Council to half legal and half lay members, without any recognition that rule-making functions in England and Wales belonged to a separate body. Nevertheless, I hope that the Lord President recognises in his appointments the importance of the interests of the insurance sector and indeed the trade unions. I have every hope that in time the new council will have a greater focus on policy matters, not to usurp democratic input but, as the Lord President himself put it, to frame “the sort of system we want to have, how we want it to work and whose interests we want to protect”,—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 4 September 2012; c 1610.] taking its lead from Parliament on matters such as court structures or civil remedies. As for part 2, I, like others, have no problem with the proposition that those who can afford to do so should contribute towards their criminal legal aid. At a time of real strain on the public purse, such an approach has to be right. However, as the Scottish Human Rights Commission suggests, contributions should not be pitched at a level that would impact on an accused person’s right to a fair trial. As far as levels of contribution are concerned, I welcome not only the cabinet secretary’s commitment to regularly reviewing the human rights impacts of part 2 but the agreement reached with Capability Scotland and SLAB to exclude disability living allowance and its successor from assessments of disposable income. Not unexpectedly, there was considerable opposition from solicitors to the suggestion that they collect criminal legal aid contributions in summary cases. SLAB estimates that collecting those contributions would cost it £600,000 and, of course, solicitors fear substantial levels of non-payment. Attempts to draw on present experience from the history of collection in assistance by way of representation cases where guilty pleas were entered did not take matters forward greatly. Mark Harrower of the Edinburgh Bar Association said that his firm made no attempt to collect contributions and, unsurprisingly, SLAB did not have any information on non-collection. However, it advised that in 2011-12 solicitors would have been required to collect £154,000 for criminal ABWOR cases. That is a relatively small figure, but I note from the bill’s financial memorandum that the average contribution payable under ABWOR under the new arrangements is estimated to be £143 from income and £187 from capital as opposed to the current maximum contribution of £142. It is important to remember that in summary cases 44 per cent of those making a contribution will pay below the current ABWOR maximum contribution of £142. I know that many people in the legal profession believe the proposals to be a pay cut by another name and there is clearly a risk that delays associated with collection of contributions will impact on the administration of justice, even though they clearly should not. Nevertheless, we are in difficult financial times and I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to reporting back to Parliament on the impact of the proposals in due course. In relation to the reimbursement of legal expenses, Scotland has, as the cabinet secretary has pointed out, no tradition of reimbursing the legal expenses of acquitted defendants. It is suggested that to reimburse the contributions of legally aided defendants who are acquitted would potentially advantage them at the expense of privately funded individuals. James Wolffe QC, speaking for the Faculty of Advocates criminal bar association, believes that no one, whether paying privately or not, should be denied a refund of contributions, although he had no information to indicate how many privately funded people have been acquitted. There is clearly little evidence on the point. In England and Wales, reimbursement started out as being for exceptional cases only. Since 1985, following the creation of the Crown Prosecution Service, reimbursement from central funds has been much broader and applies to all defendants; of course, there is provision for defendants to be asked to contribute towards costs, which is not part of our system. In his evidence, the cabinet secretary described the issue of reimbursement of legal expenses as “fraught”. In its response to the committee, the Scottish Government has indicated that it is not persuaded that it would be right to make provision for the recovery of contributions on acquittal either as a general rule or in some cases. I accept that the bill deals with criminal legal aid only and not with the wider issue of the recovery of legal expenses, but I hope that the wider issue merits being kept on the radar for the future. At a time of radical change in the criminal justice system, that seems not unreasonable.

I refer to my register of interests as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. The televising of court proceedings has not been reviewed since the then Lord President issued guidance 20 years ago, so many will view Lord Gill’s announcement of a review as a measure that is coming not before time. My view on the matter is one of caution. We clearly need an open and transparent criminal justice system, but the interests of justice must remain paramount. Allowing television cameras into court to film proceedings must not be for the purposes of entertainment—it should not be reality TV for those who are at home during the day to fit in between “Cash in the Attic” and “Countdown”. It can be justified only if it improves public understanding without impinging on the administration of justice. Our nearest neighbours south of the border are looking at the possibility of televised trials. The traditional difference between the jurisdictions of England and Wales and of Scotland, until Lord Gill’s announcement suspending it, was that the final decision was left up to individual trial judges. While televising proceedings was banned altogether in England, there has been no such ban in Scotland, but there was a requirement for all involved parties to consent, until Lord Hamilton’s recent change. However, it is clear that, while in both jurisdictions, there is little disagreement that judgments, sentencing and the disposal of appeals can be televised safely, there are concerns that filming might seriously impact on the ability of witnesses and victims to give evidence. If we look over the sea to Norway, another of our close neighbours, few of us will not have caught a glimpse of proceedings in the trial of Anders Breivik, the man who was convicted in August of murdering 77 people in one of the worst indiscriminate killings in memory. His trial was televised in its entirety, with the exception of his testimony. The decision not to air that was made because of the considerable emotion that surrounded his crimes and the concern that giving air time to his extremist views, the basics of which were already widely known, would reopen emotional wounds across Norway. However, the televising of his trial was widely seen as having a cathartic effect: it allowed people to see with their own eyes that justice was done and, in some ways, perhaps offered through the objective spectacle a degree of closure to the nation. To what extent should we follow such practice here? At the recent round-table discussion on the issue at the Justice Committee, a recurring concern was the need for safeguards and guidelines. Particularly strong points were made in that regard by Victim Support Scotland in relation to the protection of witnesses. Donald Findlay QC was strongly against the proposal to televise trials and suggested that lives could be put at risk by doing so, and Aamer Anwar referred to the unhappy experience of the O J Simpson trial. By contrast, Steven Raeburn of The Firm argued that “the functions of the court are not operated for victims or for any particular interest group; they are for the public interest, and the public interest must be fully served.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1787.] However, the public interest is surely best served by ensuring that the interests of justice take precedence. Any future change must surely be conditional on an assurance that the safety of no one—be they victim, witness, juror or other interested party—will be jeopardised and should be introduced only on the basis of clear guidelines for broadcasters, the judiciary and the public alike. If there is a genuine case for televising trials, particularly in respect of evidence—I am not fully convinced that there is—it should be the subject of careful consideration. I think that we all await with interest the Channel 4 series “Windfall”, which will include the Nat Fraser trial. We should approach the issue with caution, but certainly not with closed minds. I await the outcome of the Lord President’s review with interest. Today’s debate is of course wider than just whether to televise trials; it extends to how the media and press interact with our court system. The Contempt of Court Act 1981 is a piece of legislation that is worthy of closer scrutiny in these circumstances. As other members suggested, at the Justice Committee’s round-table session a wide range of views was expressed on how the Scottish justice system should work with the media, not least the press. The “superinjunction farce”, as it was labelled by Steven Raeburn—when an English footballer sought a ban on newspapers reporting his alleged affair in order to protect his identity, while the social networking site Twitter was awash with his name—is an example from England and Wales of the frailty of legislation in the face of modern mediums of communication. Several witnesses at the round-table discussion suggested that the 1981 act is in need of review to make it robust enough to deal with 21st century communication, although how that can be done without venturing into the territory of policing the internet is not clear.

There was certainly a reference to it, but I do not think that it was a substantial part of the debate on the bill. However, that debate is now history and we shall see how the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Act 2012 operates in practice. Most people at the round-table discussion believed that extending the provisions of the 1981 act to cover internet communications would be a futile exercise. I agree with that view. In view of the time, I will make one final point. Aamer Anwar said: “We have reached a stage at which the judge’s directions must be in severe and unequivocal language, so that jurors understand that if they go home and research and download material, they can be sent to prison for doing so. Jurors need to understand that it is as serious as that.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1780.] I agree with that and I think that the matter needs further attention.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its future budget plans are for international development. (S4O-01346)

I welcome the minister to his new post and wish him every success. Will he provide an update on what the Scottish Government is doing internationally to protect some of the world’s poorest communities, which are worst affected by climate change?

I congratulate Liam McArthur on bringing this issue to the chamber and on his well-considered opening speech. I acknowledge the contribution of the Sunday Post to the debate and I hope for Mr Mark Griffin’s sake that he thinks that time spent in this debate is time well spent. No doubt we have all been affected by nuisance calls at some point. Indeed, some of us may feel that we have had an inordinately large share of the quarter of a billion cold calls that Scots receive every year. There are many occasions when I avoid answering my phone at home if I do not recognise the number, such is the pervasiveness of the problem. That is not to mention nuisance texts—I received a text myself on a night out last Friday, yet again regarding mis-sold PPI. If I had had the number of accidents that companies seem to think I have had, I would be an extremely unlucky person indeed. Unsolicited calls and texts are at best annoying. Many people have the confidence to ignore calls from unidentifiable numbers, to hang up on unwanted sales calls, or to delete unsolicited texts, but—as Liam McArthur rightly highlights in his motion—many people do not have that confidence, particularly older, more vulnerable people. Cold calls can make their lives very difficult indeed. I have had a significant amount of constituency case correspondence related to unwanted phone calls. One man who contacted me described the calls as a plague. I have every reason to believe that that is true of many people’s experience, not to mention the real irritation of the silent calls. Simply switching off or ignoring calls is often not an option. Millions of people depend on their phone for genuine communications. The TPS is one way to limit incoming calls. The Information Commissioner’s Office is responsible for the regulation of the Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003—the statutory guidelines concerning the communication of marketing materials by phone, text, e-mail and fax. Regulation 21 gives teeth to the preference service, which prevents marketeers from making unsolicited calls to people who are registered on the preference service. As for the problem of identity, regulation 24, which has been referred to already, requires that callers must identify themselves and provide a business address or Freephone number on request. However, the role of the ICO is limited. It can act on complaints only when the caller is identifiable, UK based—as Maureen Watt suggested, that is a problem—and when the recipient is registered with the TPS or can prove that they asked the callers not to contact them; Mary Scanlon referred to that. It is quite a difficult test. What other options are there? I have contacted BT on behalf of constituents to obtain information on its procedures. BT advises customers to report the source of the call to their landline—if the source can be traced—to the BT nuisance calls bureau. I discovered that many of the major UK mobile networks operate their own nuisance or malicious calls bureaux. O2, Orange, T-Mobile, Vodafone, Virgin and Tesco are a handful of the service providers that offer such a service. Clearly, those service providers must operate within constraints, just as the ICO must do. Although those services are welcome, there is a lack of uniformity in procedure across the board. I therefore fully understand the demand that Liam McArthur has identified for a clear, simple method of reporting nuisance calls and texts across the board. The purpose of the Liberal Democrat campaign is commendable but, ultimately, the powers that are required to make any substantial changes in the area lie with Westminster. If the Liberal Democrats want to make a real difference, I suggest that they should have a word in the ears of their UK Government colleagues at Westminster—even if, no doubt, the minister concerned would be happy to support their efforts.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to promote the safe and effective prescription of psychotropic medication to care home residents. (S4O-01312)

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to promote the safe and effective prescription of psychotropic medication to care home residents.

Has the cabinet secretary also considered the recommendation by researchers at the University of Dundee and NHS Fife of systematic medication reviews? That is particularly important as the study found that the majority of psychotropic drugs that are used by nursing home residents were started before the patient was admitted.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on NHS Fife’s recent announcement regarding restrictions on the availability of IVF, in light of the imminent publication of a national fertility review. (S4T-00054)

I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to £12 million of investment in IVF treatment, and I note the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s preference for NHS Fife to have delayed its decision. As I am sure he is aware, there are important issues relating to smoking, obesity and the number of treatment cycles. Will he confirm that the national infertility group will deal with those issues in its review?

I refer to my register of interests—I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates. As we all remember, in 2010 the cabinet secretary asked Lord Carloway to carry out a review of Scots criminal law and practice given the decision of the UK Supreme Court in HMA v Cadder and in the wake of the emergency legislation that followed. I hope that the criminal justice bill that follows the on-going Government consultation contains provisions that will prevent the requirement for emergency legislation in the future. The Carloway report has a lot in it apart from the proposal to abolish corroboration. There are important aspects in relation to arrest and detention, and I welcome the general support for the concept of arrest on reasonable suspicion. In relation to detention, the consultation seeks to test whether there is support—as I hope—for the proposal that the police would be required to consider the proportionality of holding a suspect in custody, taking account of the nature and seriousness of the crime and probable disposal if convicted. Carloway also recommended that questioning be completed within 12 hours. The principle of keeping detention without charge to a minimum should be welcomed, and it is a key aim of Lord Carloway’s report. However, while welcoming that proposal, we must ensure that it will work. Some commentators suggest that it is an unrealistic period and the consultation seeks to invite comment on it. During a Justice Committee evidence session, we floated the idea of exceptions to it and it will be interesting to see how the consultation goes on that. Additionally, Carloway recommends that charged suspects appear in court within 36 hours of custody. Although that is a laudable aim, we need greater detail on what that means in practical terms—weekend court sittings, for example—and further input from the Government seems necessary, as Mr Macdonald perhaps hinted. On the right to legal assistance, Carloway proposes a requirement for legal assistance to be provided to a detainee “as soon as practicable after the start of detention”, regardless of whether he or she is to be questioned by police. Access to sound legal advice is a cornerstone of a fair justice system, but we need to consider whether there would be a sufficiency of solicitors to cope with the increase in uptake of legal advice if it were to become a statutory right, and how that would be funded. Additionally, Carloway identifies scope for the offer of legal assistance to be waived if detainees are fully aware of the consequences. That seems to be a fair proposal. With regard to children and the law, Carloway makes an important recommendation with regard to those aged between 16 and 18 waiving their right of access to a lawyer and recommends that those under 16 should never be allowed to waive their right of access to a lawyer. I hope that we follow that path, even if there are those who argue that many children under the age of 16 are mature enough to know their own minds. The Scottish Government intends to take forward Lord Carloway’s recommendations on abolishing corroboration. I have no issue with that. As lawyers, we seek to get around the rule by relying on technical rules such as distress and the Moorov doctrine, and I believe that Lord Carloway was right to suggest that corroboration “has developed into a series of rules which, realistically, are not capable of being understood by many outside the world of criminal legal practice.” I do not believe that there is any substantial evidence that the requirement for corroboration prevents significant miscarriages of justice—although evidence is difficult to find—and nor do I believe that its abolition will necessarily lead to significantly larger numbers of successful prosecutions in the longer term. However, we must consider carefully the implications of abolishing it for the remaining safeguards to prevent miscarriages of justice. Elevating to a higher level the concept of cases needing to be proved beyond reasonable doubt as our principal safeguard is neither appropriate nor sensible. It is perhaps unfortunate that Carloway did not consider majority verdicts to be within his remit, even if we have a good idea about his views on the matter. That means we have not had any direct consideration of the impact of the abolition of corroboration on majority verdicts. Although the Government does not believe that there is any need to change the rules on majority verdicts at present, surely it would be wise to consider responses to the consultation on it, as indeed it would be to consider the possibility of an additional safeguard that the trial judge should be entitled to acquit if he or she is satisfied that no jury properly directed could convict. Is it right to restrict that safeguard to the appeal court? We need to reflect further on that. Although I share the Government’s view that those who question whether the wider system of protections in Scots law is sufficient to prevent miscarriages of justice in the absence of a requirement for corroboration should bring forward their evidence, it is important not to set the bar too high and to expect too much hard evidence because there is limited evidence at present on how far corroboration prevents miscarriages. The Government should accordingly take any well-argued concerns seriously, even if they are not fully empirically based. On appeals and the role of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, I welcome the recommendation to abandon what is called the gatekeeping role for the High Court in relation to SCCRC references that was introduced by the 2010 act in the wake of Cadder. However, on the proposed new test that it is in the interests of justice that the appeal be allowed, I agree with Gerard Sinclair, the chief executive of the SCCRC. He gave evidence to the Justice Committee that that proposal is: “not to remove the gatekeeping role of the High Court at all, but instead to dismantle the gates at the bottom of the driveway and reassemble them at the entrance to the front door.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 13 December 2011; c 651.] The Government needs to consider that carefully. I welcome the consultation, and I encourage anyone who has not participated to do so before the closing date.

I refer to my declared interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this members’ business debate and bringing the issue to the chamber. I also acknowledge the CFALP’s professional campaign. I have raised the subject in correspondence with the cabinet secretary and at question time in the chamber on 31 May. It is safe to say that the issue is not going to go away. Of course, we have as a society moved a long way from the days when prospective lawyers paid premiums for their apprenticeships, even if minimum salaries for trainees and the diploma itself are comparatively modern phenomena—that depends on people’s age. However, students who undertake the diploma in professional legal practice are at a particular financial disadvantage when they are compared with their peers who seek to qualify as doctors, dentists and vets. That is partly because of the nature of the law degree. Traditionally, it has been perceived as an education in itself, unlike the training for vets, dentists and doctors. Accordingly, the smooth transition to the diploma as part of essential professional training is obscured. However, the diploma should not be considered to be just another postgraduate degree—to that extent, I disagree with the National Union of Students. The cabinet secretary has made the Scottish Government’s position clear and has talked about tough choices. In contrast, the CFALP refers to the position on loans for fees and to the benefit that some DPLP students will receive under the new postgraduate arrangements. The campaign group has a point, although a loan for tuition fees might not be a consideration at all for the wealthiest. The debate is about not just fees and loans but the make-up of our legal profession. As the campaign group has pointed out, the socioeconomic profile of entrants to the legal profession is narrow and there are disproportionate numbers from the wealthiest in our society. Without a doubt, we have a long way to go to reach the point at which the legal profession reflects the economic and social diversity of modern Scotland. Despite tuition fee support, the reality is that poorer students might well be deterred from the DPLP not only by the maintenance issue but by the substantial difficulties in obtaining training contracts and the rather slim chance of getting a firm to support them on the diploma. We must acknowledge that, by reforming the postgraduate student allowances scheme, the Scottish Government was able to extend support for tuition fees with postgraduate loans for about 5,000 full-time and part-time students. That has not been replicated elsewhere in the United Kingdom. The cabinet secretary has argued in previous answers to me that living cost support should be available through personal career development loans. Those loans are, to my knowledge, offered by three high street banks, and may be an attractive source of income to students who will have a handsomely paid job immediately after graduating. Unfortunately, however, that is not a prospect that many young people expect. Career development loan repayments must commence immediately after graduation, and the banks advise students that they must ensure that they can afford monthly repayments before agreeing to the terms of the loan. Many students cannot make that commitment. I fully accept that the diploma should not be for the faint-hearted, particularly in current times when training contracts are very difficult to obtain, and no one should embark on the diploma without a full appreciation of the risks involved. I remind members that to proceed to the bar and the Faculty of Advocates requires not only a diploma, but generally speaking a period of devilling of around eight months, which is unpaid, although a few comparatively modest scholarships or bursaries are available. That will certainly deter young—and many not so young—lawyers from humble backgrounds from taking that path. More generally, we ought to look at the experience south of the border when considering alternatives to the LLB. Modern apprenticeships are increasingly being pioneered by some large firms in the south, which operates as a financial benefit to the new apprentices.

It is not entirely clear how far the Law Society of Scotland is championing that concept in Scotland. In conclusion, it is clear to any reasonable person that the Scottish Government is under enormous pressure, but I hope that the cabinet secretary will continue to keep the issue under review.

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate and welcome the opportunity to discuss Fife diet in the presence of Mike Small and his colleagues. I also welcome my friend and colleague Paul Wheelhouse to his new position. As Fife diet has grown over the past five years from a one-year experiment to a network with a growing membership—it currently has 4,400 members—the clear message has been that the environment and food policy are inextricably linked. However, at the root of this remains its importance to people’s health and the regionalisation of food production and consumption. Fife diet’s latest manifesto highlights several ways to improve not only the regionality of food and the success of buying locally sourced produce, but people’s health, through both the style of diet involved in eating Fife-based goods—a low meat intake and a high consumption of seasonal produce—and the diet’s long-term goal of reducing CO2 emissions. Both those aspects represent the benefits that individuals and families can reap from being part of the diet. However, the diet is about more than individuals; it is about helping communities to survive. Currently, full details of only the first 10 points of the diet’s manifesto are available online, but I am assured that the second 10 points will be available in the not-too-distant future. From the first 10 points, it is evident that the manifesto is designed to be not only a Fife manifesto, but one that can be translated nationally, with aims such as a “seasonal 5 a day” and the decentralisation of food infrastructure. In North East Fife we are blessed with fine local produce, from strawberries and potatoes to venison and fresh fish—and even ice cream and beer. It is right that we make the most of what is available on our doorsteps. That is not to say that we should stop purchasing any food from beyond our local authority boundaries—I believe that Mr Small would agree—but we should be encouraged to use resources that are already nearby and to explore what can be grown in the region. With places to eat such as the Anstruther Fish Bar and the Peat Inn, it is reasonable to ask why anyone would choose to eat anywhere else anyway. On a serious note, our local and regional food systems are under threat—no more so than in my constituency, where there is a planning proposal that, if it were passed, would close the St Andrews abattoir. That could result in animals being transported far outwith North East Fife to be processed if no local alternative is available. Although that is currently a sensitive matter, it has the potential greatly to affect meat farmers and local businesses throughout my constituency. Regardless of that, the problem remains that overreliance on a small number of large abattoirs, mills and dairy processors makes us all the more vulnerable to fluctuating food prices. Although the consumption of locally sourced goods would not protect us from that, it would offer some help. It is clear that the aims of the Fife diet are to improve people’s health and reduce everyone’s “carbon foodprint”. I understand that Mr Small has called regional eating only one step of many, and there is more that we can do to help ourselves and our environment, but ultimately it comes down to what we as individuals, families and communities are able practically to achieve. I welcome the publication of the manifesto and its relevance to North East Fife, and I hope that it continues to provoke debate about food and the environment well beyond this debate.

Will the member give way?

The reform of the electricity market is as essential in Scotland as it is across the whole of these islands, and I welcome the proposals to ensure security of supply and affordability. It is clearly right that Scottish ministers have a statutory right to be consulted when the UK Government takes forward its proposals given the importance of matters in Scotland, which is fast becoming the energy powerhouse of the British isles, even if energy is both reserved and devolved. We certainly need to work in partnership rather than just as a consultee. It is imperative that Scottish interests are at the heart of all decision-making processes on electricity markets, including in the key area of formulating the Ofgem strategy and policy statement. I support the Scottish Government’s view that Scottish ministers must be closely involved in contracts for difference, which will, it is hoped, provide lasting arrangements for price support for emerging renewable technologies. It is vital that in any transition from renewables obligations to CFDs, support for renewable generation is maintained. We must ensure that the Scottish Government is involved in the detail, which is as yet unclear. Furthermore, the provisions in the draft energy bill that relate to offshore transmission are important in preventing difficulties for contractors who are both generators and engaged in transmission, and in order that such vertically integrated suppliers are able to test their transmission with impunity. Changes to the Electricity Act 1989 will be required, and I hope that that can be resolved quickly through legislation at Westminster. In its report, “Powering Scotland”, which was published 10 months ago, Reform Scotland made several recommendations on the future of the energy market, including the recommendation that energy policy should be formally devolved to the Scottish Parliament so that the Scottish Government can formulate a clear energy policy that meets Scotland’s needs. For the present, however, we must ensure that we are operating as effectively as possible within the limits of the devolution framework, while recognising the importance of the UK electricity market as a whole. There has been considerable concern that the intention behind the UK Government’s plans for the draft energy bill and its overarching reform of the energy market is to provide new subsidies for nuclear power. As the Scottish Government and many other organisations—including Reform Scotland—have stated, Scotland does not need new nuclear power stations, and nuclear energy does not merit a boost in funding. As my colleague Kevin Stewart said, WWF Scotland has described the UK draft energy bill as “a lose-lose situation”, given that nuclear is being phased out in the long term in any event. For the avoidance of doubt, I say to Murdo Fraser that I, too, have not seen any briefing from EDF. Why should nuclear power be subsidised when, aside from the enormous costs associated with installation and the reliance on regular imports of uranium from overseas, there are the costs of security and decommissioning and, ultimately, the costs to the taxpayer and the environment of storing radioactive waste? Nuclear power also gets extortionately expensive when things go wrong. The UK Government’s proposed insurance limit for operators is €1.2 billion, but the costs of the Fukushima disaster last year are widely projected to reach around €200 billion. Suppliers of nuclear energy simply could not afford to insure their facilities to a level commensurate with the risk without Government help. It is surely short-sighted to bolster the nuclear industry—even ignoring the arguments on the impact of European Union state aid rules—when to do so beyond the lifespan of current reactors might be at the expense, as other members have suggested, of nascent and truly sustainable Scottish renewable energy sources. In that respect, I agree with the House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee that “policy and financial support for nuclear” should not be “rolled up with that for renewables.” In relation to emissions performance standards, in its recent report the same committee is as scathing as ever about the proposals. However, control and regulation of emissions are devolved matters, and I hope that whatever model of EPS is considered appropriate for Scotland is consistent with delivery of our world-leading climate change legislation. The aims of both the Scottish Government and the UK Government, over the course of electricity market reform, must be to ensure that consumers get the best deal possible. In the long term, we can achieve that only by promoting sustainable energy production. The only truly infinite resources that Scotland has for energy production are human talent and the power of wind and water. Scotland must continue to prioritise matching and marrying the two to create a world-leading energy industry and to ensure that the world-leading renewable energy target of generating the equivalent of 100 per cent of electricity from renewable resources by 2020 is met. I am delighted to learn that that ambition has been hailed by the UK Government’s Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Ed Davey, even if it has not been endorsed so warmly by his Conservative colleagues—including some of those in this chamber. Rising production costs are, in many ways, unavoidable but the success of the vertically integrated big six suppliers in the electricity market depends on competitiveness. It is essential that the UK and Scottish Governments work together to ensure that the imminent reform of the electricity market allows for effective competition. That could only be a good thing for household bills. Last but not least, we must also recognise the interests of consumers, particularly those who are in fuel poverty, whom many members have mentioned. Perhaps a more effective recognition of their interests is required in the reform debate.

Like other members, I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing this members’ business debate. I welcome the publication of the first results from Oxfam’s humanitarian index project. The term “gross domestic product” must have very little meaning for those who live and work outwith the professions of politics and economics; after all, what it encompasses is certainly not instantly obvious. As the Poverty Alliance points out in its briefing for the debate, one very real problem is that people on low incomes feel that politics and the decisions that are made—and their economic impacts—are distant activities to which they have little chance of making any meaningful contribution. It is also revealing—if not surprising—that according to the humanitarian index more deprived areas seriously lag behind in community spirit and in the number of volunteers in those areas. I am sure that everyone in the chamber will agree that it simply is not true that the success of a nation’s economy can be judged by the trade of paid goods and services alone. The measure of GDP will remain an important tool, but we also need to appreciate its shortcomings—not least its lack of focus on real outcomes from the spending that is included in its calculation. The Scottish Wildlife Trust is by no means alone in pointing out that spending in one area to counter the negative side effects of activity in another is not “growth” according to any sensible use of the word. As a result, I very much welcome the new index as a complement to GDP; indeed, that is how Oxfam describes it in its conclusion. A wide variety of measurements will, in itself, offer a more focused picture of Scotland’s performance—and, on that subject, I am pleased that the Scottish Government takes seriously the requirement to gather and analyse economic data effectively in order to enable effective policy decisions to be made across the range of Government portfolios. Ken Macintosh and John Park have referred to the national performance framework, Scotland performs, which has been described as the result of an “innovative” and thoughtful approach to calculating progress, and in the establishment of which it has been said that the Scottish Government and all other non-governmental bodies across business, local government and the third sector “deserve praise” for their work. Those are not my words—they are the findings of the Carnegie UK Trust and the Sustainable Development Commission in a report that was published last May. What matters is subjective; many business owners will say that growth and profit—financial viability—are what matter most to the economy. On the other hand, when a typical Scottish family is asked what matters to them, they are probably unlikely to mention growth or profit. That is not to say, of course, that their wellbeing is not firmly entwined with private sector success, but it certainly demonstrates the fact that Scots’ needs and aspirations vary enormously. When consulted as individuals by the humankind index, people made it clear what was most important to them—health and housing were at the top of the list. However, for someone without a job, both might well be affected. Once again, I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing the debate and look forward to seeing how the index develops in the coming years.

I welcome today’s statement. Will the cabinet secretary provide further information on widening access to universities and the steps that will be taken to improve that?

4. To ask the First Minister what issues were discussed at the most recent meeting of the British-Irish Council. (S4F-00815)

The First Minister has referred to the findings of the latest social attitudes survey, which show that 71 per cent of people trust the Scottish Government to act in Scotland’s best interests, compared to 18 per cent who trust the United Kingdom Government. The same survey also shows that 73 per cent of people think that the Scottish Government ought to have most influence over how Scotland is run. In the light of that survey, what advice will the First Minister give the Prime Minister at the next meeting of the British-Irish Council?

Will the member give way?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made regarding the introduction of a shingles vaccination for all 70 to 79-year-olds. (S4O-01162)

The minister will be aware that a chicken pox vaccine is available in Australia, the United States of America and Japan. Can he say what implications his answer to my first question has in relation to a chicken pox vaccine?

I thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing his motion to the chamber for debate. I declare an interest as a member of Amnesty International. Last week, I attended a meeting of the cross-party group on human rights, where I heard David Grimason talk with great conviction about his son, who—as Jamie Hepburn said—was killed in Turkey by a stray bullet. I am delighted that David has been given the opportunity to meet Michael Moore, the Secretary of State for Scotland, to encourage the United Kingdom Government to take the issue very seriously indeed. I hope that, in the days between 2 and 27 July, we will see a strong and robust arms trade treaty take shape during the negotiations in New York—one that has as a priority reduction of the human rights abuses that occur as a result of the arms transfers that go ahead regardless of the political climate. There have been efforts in the past to control and measure the number of arms that are sold in the global market. The UN has gone to some lengths to prevent interstate conflict and reduce the stockpile of weapons. An instrumental tool that the UN has used in combating the problems is the UN register of conventional arms, which came into existence in 1991 and has, to date, received reports from more than 170 states. The register was created out of a desire to establish greater co-operation between states, but as the control arms campaign says, the UNRCA is a transparency mechanism and a recording tool, not a tool to control arms transfers. The campaign also points out that the classification of arms categories was created to satisfy a similar goal and it does not consider the kind of weapons that are found today in conflict zones where human rights violations take place. The other registers that exist include the Wassenaar arrangement, which is used by 41 countries including the USA, the United Kingdom, France and Russia—four of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and the largest exporters of arms in the global market—and the European Union consolidated military list. Those two lists perform a similar task to that of the UNRCA in allowing clarity in the recording of armaments, but in contrast to the UNRCA they have a far greater scope with regard to weaponry and machinery. The main aim of those registers has been to create transparency in armaments and, as the UN explains, to avoid “excessive or destabilising accumulations of arms taking place and to champion preventative diplomacy.” However, despite their success in recording the vast majority of official transfers, they do not inhibit the transfer of arms, which could be more effectively checked by the proposed arms trade treaty. In addition, it seems that the UNRCA does not offer as efficient a role as alternative registers and it is now clear that there is a need for a humanitarian-based treaty to alleviate current and potential human suffering. The arms trade treaty seeks to prevent the trade of arms in circumstances that would lead to the infringement of human rights, allow human rights abuses or war crimes to take place and allow poverty to grow. In order to do that, the treaty must have a broad spectrum and encompass not only conventional weapons and equipment but, as Amnesty International proposes, the technology to develop, maintain and produce them. I agree with Amnesty International that the arms trade treaty should also cover small arms, light weapons, ammunition and munitions of all kinds, and weapons that are used for internal security. Many countries have national lists of controlled military equipment that correspond to the acceptable control lists that are suggested by the Wassenaar arrangement and the EU consolidated military list, but many countries do not. Accordingly, the arms trade treaty should aim to be comprehensive. We need as many states as possible to set a similar standard and not to accept the less-stringent UNRCA categorisations. As Jamie Hepburn’s motion suggests, the arms trade treaty should aim to prevent civilian deaths and human rights abuses. That is a laudable aim and I hope that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to encourage the UK Government to be effective participants in the arms trade treaty negotiations.

I refer to my declaration of interests, as I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates. It seems to have been a long time since we commenced consideration of the bill. In relation to part 1, we should remember that we are dealing with a bill that is designed to deal with the particular difficulties of the decision in Petch and Foye, and not a bill that is designed to deal with sentencing in general. As the policy memorandum states, the intention is to put back in place the policy that existed prior to the Petch and Foye judgment. In essence, the aim is to give flexibility to judges in sentencing and to ensure compliance with the requirement, which arises from ECHR case law, to ensure that once the punishment part of a sentence has passed, a prisoner has the opportunity of regular reviews of his continued detention as well as the opportunity to identify properly the period that is required for punishment—or, as it also known, retribution and deterrence—as opposed to public protection. The concerns that surfaced as a result of Petch and Foye were predominantly in relation to comparative justice, and to seeking to ensure that someone who has been sentenced to an indeterminate sentence is not released earlier than a prisoner on a determinate sentence whose situation might otherwise be the same. The bill seeks to correct that anomaly by giving a judge power, in specified circumstances, to apply a percentage that is higher than the normal 50 per cent—which equates to the normal early-release provisions for determinate sentences—to the stripped-down notional determinate sentence. The proposed methodology has certainly caused concern, not only to the Law Society but to the Faculty of Advocates. There certainly seems to be an argument that, for the purposes of achieving comparative justice, the comparison should be with the actual determinate sentence that the prisoner would have received rather than with a notional stripped-out determinate sentence. That may, of course, raise issues about the extent to which, in a determinate sentence, there is an element for protection of the public, but that could give rise to a debate in itself and is a matter for another day. The methodology in the bill is undoubtedly complex. Although I note the cabinet secretary’s comments that it is not unnecessarily complex, I believe that it will cause difficulties for the general public in understanding sentencing, even if it will provide a solution. However, it should not be forgotten that during the stage 1 debate the cabinet secretary invited alternative suggestions and, as John Finnie pointed out, no alternative was forthcoming. In the absence of working alternatives, we have what we have. Nevertheless, I remain concerned about the overall complexity of the provisions and the degree to which they will be welcomed and accepted in the court system. I therefore ask the cabinet secretary to keep the operation of part 1 of the bill under review and to take on board comments about its operation in practice from interested parties and, perhaps, from the new Lord President. Part 2 relates to disclosure of information that is obtained by the SCCRC. Since the Justice Committee embarked on consideration of the bill, the only person who was convicted in the Lockerbie investigation—Mr Megrahi—has died. Even before he passed away it might have been tempting to say that events had overtaken the bill, given the publication in the Sunday Herald of the statement of reasons for appealing his conviction. When that happened, it looked like part 2 of the bill was obsolete and redundant, as members have said. However, we must not forget that this is not all about Megrahi; part 2 has a wider general application and merited on-going consideration by the committee and the Parliament. I rather doubt that it will be much use in practice, but I hope that our deliberations will prove to have been helpful, particularly in relation to data-protection issues. In relation to a posthumous appeal, if a member of Megrahi’s family wants to take matters further they should appreciate that in the first instance it is for the SCCRC to decide whether it is in the interests of justice that a reference to the High Court be made. In the circumstances of an abandoned appeal, that is likely to be far from straightforward. I am pleased that the Government sought to clarify matters in relation to legal professional privilege and to acknowledge concerns by lodging amendments on which we voted this afternoon.

We can all be victims. From the lonely pensioner who loses money in a telephone scam, up to the highest judges in the land—as we saw in Edinburgh last week—none of us can guarantee that we will not fall victim to crime. I do not wish to sound too pessimistic, but virtually anyone in Scotland could find themselves in a victim situation or, indeed, witnessing a crime, without any prior warning. As the cabinet secretary states in the consultation paper, “No one wants to be a victim of crime and the impact on their life may go on long after the justice system has moved on to another case.” For those reasons, we, as a Parliament, have a duty to respond to the needs of witnesses and victims. It is clear that statutory protection for victims and witnesses is important. We must ensure that victims and witnesses receive the support that they need, from the first point of contact with the justice system—usually the police—right through to the post-sentencing period. We must ensure that victims and witnesses feel that they are part of a system that recognises them as individuals, as well as recognising the rights of the accused. Lewis Macdonald properly referred to the history of the strategy for victims. I welcome this Scottish Government’s support for victims to date, including investment to tackle violence against women, investment in specialist domestic abuse courts and investment in a variety of public information that is available online and in leaflet form. I particularly welcome the £900,000 of funding that has supported organisations that deal with murder, suicide and victims of human trafficking—a very serious issue that was debated in the chamber at the end of February. We have also made progress with the introduction of victim statements in serious cases and with the extension of the victim notification scheme. However, we can do more. The consultation on the proposed Scottish Government bill identifies six key objectives for victims and witnesses policy. Together, they seek to ensure that those involved are well-informed, are confident of protection, have access to tailored support and receive damages from the offenders who are responsible for their predicament. Those are laudable aims. The Government’s proposals in the victims and witnesses consultation include concrete provisions such as the victim surcharge, which, whether the rate that is set is fixed or variable, will be a considerable step forward if it can make a significant impact in alleviating hardship among victims. A similar proposal, as Annabel Goldie mentioned, was introduced in England and Wales a few years ago. We would obviously seek to avoid the computer system problems that they had when that scheme was set up. The consultation recognises the need to ensure that payment of compensation by offenders to victims is done through a payback procedure that is as clear and speedy as possible for the victim, but it also recognises, realistically, that some crimes are perpetrated in which no one is clearly identified as a victim. Mandatory consideration of compensatory awards is clearly a step forward, although the assessment will remain a matter for the court. Clear service standards may represent only a small step forward but can eliminate much misunderstanding. Automatic special measures for those who suffer sexual offences and domestic abuse are a big improvement. Screens, supporters and TVs elsewhere in court buildings can really help to reduce the stress and distress that victims and witnesses routinely suffer. From my personal experience, I know that supporters, in particular, can provide much reassurance to very nervous witnesses. As things stand, special rights are available as standard only to children in Scotland. I welcome the proposed extension of the definition of the age of a child to 18. Accordingly, I strongly support the Government’s proposal to extend standard special measures to victims of sexual offences and domestic abuse. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on stalking. Only a couple of months ago we had national stalking awareness day, and we really need to do much more to protect the victims of stalking. The problem of case management affects courts across Scotland every day. It leads to much frustration and annoyance being aimed at the justice system as a whole and its practitioners. It also leads to wasted expenditure, as we were advised in evidence to the Justice Committee in our discussions on the budget last year, and as referred to in Audit Scotland’s report into Scotland’s justice system. Clearly, we must do better. As Annabel Goldie mentioned, improved rights to allow victims to make representations to the Parole Board is a small but significant change. Let us not forget the basics. Victims and witnesses need to know what is going on when they are involved in a crime. It is in their interests, and in the interests of the justice system generally, for them to know exactly what is happening with regard to process, outcomes, their rights and responsibilities and the services that are available to them. Scottish Government publications, such as “Making a Victim Statement”, which guide victims in plain terms through the process of making a formal victim statement to court, are important improvements that reduce the uncertainty and anxiety that inevitably arise at the prospect of appearing in court. I strongly welcome the Government’s proposal to create a right to information for victims in support of the principles of the draft EU directive. As the consultation also suggests, there is scope for using modern methods of communication to much greater effect. The victim’s understanding of the sentencing process should never be ignored if confidence in the system is to be maintained, although I caution against the suggestion that that is somehow an easy task.

I share that concern, but courts and the justice system must move with the times and recognise the benefits, as well as the difficulties, of modern methods of communication. The consultation makes the eminently sensible proposal that the issue of whether there should be a closed court could be considered far earlier in the proceedings in appropriate cases, to help victims and witnesses understand well beforehand what the court process is likely to involve. To turn up on the day and not be certain whether the public will be admitted is a source of much anxiety. I am happy to support the Government’s proposals in the consultation and I look forward to reading the responses from interested individuals and organisations. We must recognise that no criminal justice system can survive without the co-operation of victims and witnesses. We, as a society, need properly to recognise that contribution.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is regarding the review of community planning partnerships. (S4O-01114)

As part of that agreement, can we hope for clarity about the alignment of local and national priorities?

I refer to my registered interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. I have the disadvantage of not being a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and not having heard the evidence, but I thought that the bill’s primary aim related to registering title and completing the existing land register. It is, of course, about title to land, not who might have a beneficial or financial interest, which is a much wider issue. Amendment 1 seeks to amend section 111. I accept that the minister directed members to that section at stage 2, which might be considered a bit of an own goal. I am not convinced that we should tag on to that section something that is a great deal more complicated than Rhoda Grant gives it credit for being. In the case of a publicly owned company, interests would be likely to change frequently. Foreign companies might have diverse ownership structures, which would raise issues of property taxation and company law that are outwith conveyancing practice. I am not sure what evidence the committee has taken on the issues. Any such regulations may have an impact on the market for land, and proper expert evidence in that respect should be considered. To my knowledge, there are no such requirements for land registration elsewhere in the United Kingdom, although Andy Wightman made certain critical comments to the committee in that regard. There may also be unspecified costs on and expense for the keeper. I therefore strongly suggest that much more thought and consideration is required before we agree to such regulations being made, and that provision for them ought not to be part and parcel of the bill at this time. I recommend that we reject amendment 1.

4. To ask the First Minister, in light of the economic impact on the area, what representations the Scottish Government is making to the United Kingdom Government regarding the transition of RAF Leuchars to an Army base. (S4F-00730)

It is almost a year since the Secretary of State for Defence announced the closure of RAF Leuchars. We have had no further details of its transition to an Army base, so I welcome the First Minister’s statement. As he will appreciate, the whole community has been extremely perturbed by the absence of information, so anything that he can do to provide that information will undoubtedly be appreciated.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration is being given to providing financial assistance toward living costs for those studying for a diploma in professional legal practice. (S4O-01069)

The diploma in professional legal practice, the diploma in social work and the postgraduate diploma in education stand out from other postgraduate courses in that they are an absolute requirement for entry into their respective professions. Students undertaking the diploma in social work receive bursaries, and students on the PGDE can expect support equivalent to that available for undergraduate degrees. However, students studying for the DPLP are considered to be in the same category as students who undertake courses that are not mandatory for employment. The current funding arrangements cannot seriously address the accepted narrow social profile of students on the DPLP. Notwithstanding current financial constraints, will the cabinet secretary at least consider reviewing the appropriateness of the arrangements for the DPLP?

There is a strong sense of déjà vu about the debate. Last week, during the stage 1 debate on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, I reminded the chamber of Calum Steele’s comments to the Justice Committee. He said: “We must look at the jobs that we do and ask ourselves not who does them, but whether they need doing in the first place.” That must be the first port of call in any review of staffing. We must then, of course, look at issues of duplication. If we have a national service, do we need quite as many staff in IT, HR or finance—or as many chief constables, for that matter? Calum Steele also said that “we should never get into a situation in which we talk about the value of a police officer versus the value of a support member of staff.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 1009 and 1008.] This is about balance—balance in the context of a commitment to an additional 1,000 police officers, which was given in 2007; in the context of a substantial growth in the number of support staff between 1997 and 2000; and in the light of the budget that is now available. Of course, the figures for support staff have been reduced, but if we take as an example not 2005 but quarter 3 in 2003, there were more support staff back then than at quarter 4 in 2011. Therefore, we can be selective about the dates or periods that we choose. The Labour motion refers to concerns that “cuts to civilian posts are taking police officers off the front line to perform tasks better suited to civilian staff”. However, we know that police support staff numbers vary enormously between Strathclyde and Lothian as a proportion of total staff, and that, in Fife, there is a tradition of a significant number of police officers being office based for at least 75 per cent of the working week. We know that resolving a crime might involve officers in front-line tasks and in what others might think of as backroom staff tasks—and certainly in tasks that take officers off the streets for a while. Traditions and cultures vary, and the new service must take all such issues into account operationally, within the budgetary constraints under which we operate. Why would an independent audit help? Can a uniform standard be established for a support staff role? I doubt it. Do we want to become embroiled in what Andrea Quinn of the Scottish Police Services Authority described as the “disingenuous” distinction between front-line and back-office tasks? Would we prefer police numbers to drop, as in England and Wales—the number of police will drop by 700 in Devon and Cornwall alone—and to have a Government that loses its police force’s confidence? Unison argues that large numbers of police officers in one force do what are essentially civilian roles in other forces but, contrary to what some politicians suggest, there is no agreed optimum balance between civilian staff and police officers. Chief Constable Smith made it clear in relation to the approximately 1,000 staff who have gone to date that, as a matter of policy, police officers have never been put in support staff roles. I say in the interests of balance that he conceded that some police officers are still in roles that it would be more appropriate for support staff to do. In some parts of Scotland, it will be difficult to reduce the number of support staff through people leaving naturally and through voluntary severance. However, we should remember that ACPOS’s figures for redundancies are cumulative over the period until 2015-16.

As the cabinet secretary acknowledged, support staff have made and will continue to make an important contribution to reducing crime and making Scotland safer. We need to ensure a proper framework for the operation of the new police force. Labour’s motion says that cuts to support staff “are detrimental to the ability of the police service to protect the public”, but we have not heard much about that—perhaps the closing Labour speaker will refer to it. Is it not the case that cutting police numbers instead would be far more damaging to the police service’s ability to protect the public?

As others have indicated, with a few exceptions, the argument that there should be a national force has been accepted. While Unison and the Lib Dems think that it is wrong in principle, others such as Reform Scotland think that the Scottish Government has not provided sufficient justification for running from the centre a service that, historically, has been delivered at a local level. Reform Scotland also argued—unconvincingly, I would say—that each local authority should be represented on the national police authority, regardless of whether it is the size of Clackmannanshire Council or Glasgow City Council, because that reflects the current structure of local authorities. Unison’s concerns are, understandably, about the protection of jobs. In that context, even if we accept ACPOS’s figure that there will be 2,000 redundancies, those are to be achieved cumulatively by 2015-16. We are talking about voluntary redundancies being achieved over a period rather than all at once. Of course that will not be an easy task, but it is important to reflect on the evidence of Stephen Curran of Strathclyde police authority, who said that the ratio of police to support staff was 4:1 in Strathclyde, in contrast to Lothian and Borders, where it is closer to 60:40. Therefore, we face different problems in achieving voluntary redundancy in different parts of Scotland. I am reassured by the comments of Chief Constable Smith on the issue, and Calum Steele’s remark that “We must look at the jobs that we do and ask ourselves not who does them, but whether they need doing in the first place”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 1009.] is highly pertinent. As for the Lib Dems, despite the fact that they highlighted the issue at last year’s Holyrood elections and this year’s local elections, there is scant evidence that there is concern about it on the doorstep; there is a much greater concern about maintaining the number of police on the beat.

Time will give us the answer. As the report makes clear, the committee was not hung up on the number of people who should be on the board. “Quality over quantity” must be the mantra. As has already been said, even though the committee has not reached a view on what form parliamentary scrutiny of the police and fire services should take, we saw the need for such scrutiny. We clearly need a strong democratic element to policing and, like Humza Yousaf, I believe that we need to take on board the Auditor General’s comments about the need for open, participative and transparent oversight. The FBU favours the involvement of the Justice Committee. Although I accept that that would place a considerable strain on the existing structure, my inclination is more towards that approach or to a tweaking of the committee structure, rather than some form of police commission. However, as Graeme Pearson indicated, we must listen to all the arguments. Clearly, there is a need for post-legislative scrutiny of the move to single services. I would have thought that a timescale of at least five years would be sensible for drawing informed conclusions. There was a lot of discussion about the interaction between the national police board and local commanders and local authorities. The results of the pathfinder project may impact on the issue, but it is clear that some flexibility in local arrangements is required. That need for flexibility must be right. Local police plans will be different—that is already the position between the Borders and Lothian, as was highlighted in the evidence to the committee. In relation to the question of resources for local commanders, we need more clarity about what that might mean in practice. There was a difference of view among the witnesses about forensic services. Some, such as HM inspectorate of constabulary, argued that the chief constable should have clear operational direction over forensic crime scene examination. That view was supported by most senior police representatives. Against that view was Andrea Quinn of the SPSA, who was an active supporter of what is inelegantly described as the “sterile corridor”. In the SPSA’s written submission, that arrangement was described more elegantly as “clear demonstrable impartiality”. However, the important points to stress are that Ms Quinn accepted that the chief constable and his command team should decide what crime scenes the SPSA should go to and when. Although senior police officers criticised the arrangement that has prevailed since 2007, neither Chief Constable Smith nor Chief Superintendent O’Connor, in response to questioning, were able to point to any examples where the arrangement had been detrimental to the interests of justice. I am therefore not persuaded that we should change the position outlined in the bill to make the forensic service directly accountable to the Scottish police authority and not to the chief constable. We all know that, under the Human Rights Act 1998, public authorities must act in a way that is compatible with the European convention on human rights. We are also aware how the related provisions affect the Scottish Parliament. However, there is a body of opinion, represented by the Scottish Human Rights Commission and Amnesty International, that believes that human rights considerations ought to be on the face of the bill. In that respect, I must declare an interest as a member of Amnesty International, but I share the view that there is a lot to be said for having explicit recognition of human rights in the bill and certainly for embedding that in any appropriate code of ethics and training. Although we may not quite have the social and cultural history of Northern Ireland, it would be good if we, too, could ensure that human rights are at the core of policing. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s response that it will consider any appropriate amendments in that respect.

I welcome the announcement of up to £25 million for youth employment from unallocated funds, but does the minister know yet how future funding is to be allocated across the programmes and across the UK?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate on this important report. Concerns about Cornton Vale are not new. As we know, Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons reported in 2009 and 2011 that there was an immediate need to address overcrowding. He also highlighted the high levels of mental ill health and the lack of a family-friendly visitor centre. When he gave evidence to the Justice Committee, he drew attention to “the time bomb that is Cornton Vale.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 25 October 2011; c 339.] The recommendations on Cornton Vale are not a bolt from the blue. It is clear that the Scottish Government needs time to address the implications, but it is fair to point out that there have been changes to alleviate overcrowding, such as the creation of a women’s wing at HMP Edinburgh, which I and other Justice Committee members visited a few months ago. The news is not that nothing is being done, but that much more needs to be done. In looking at the report as a whole, the importance of reconfiguration must be stressed. The commission stated that it considers “that many of our recommendations could be achieved through reconfiguration of existing funding, rather than significant new investment”. It did not refer to full implementation, as the Association of Directors of Social Work erroneously suggests in its briefing, but, given the current financial situation, the point must be a very relevant consideration. The commission sensibly suggested that community justice centres would not need to be new custom-made centres. It is strong on the need for multidisciplinary teams and mentoring, which I support. Women offenders need the support that mentoring can provide, if the cycle of reoffending is to be broken. That cycle causes disruption not only to prisoners but to their families and their children in particular. It is a salutary lesson to note that approximately 30 per cent of children with imprisoned parents develop mental health problems. The higher risk of such children ending up in prison is perhaps unsurprising. As the report suggests, high-quality visitor centres are needed. The chief inspector of prisons has called for them for some while. They must be a prerequisite to assisting mother-and-child relationships. The commission pointed out that prevention and early years spending were not part of its remit, but it nevertheless stressed that intervening in the early years of life will have significantly more impact on reoffending rates than intervening later in life would have. The commission said that, as far as children are concerned, early intervention starts with the mother. I have to agree with that. In 2007, the chief inspector of prisons reported that 80 per cent of women in Cornton Vale had mental health problems. We know that the Scottish Government is finalising its mental health strategy. It is essential that that addresses issues of trauma and self-harm, which are prevalent among many female offenders. There is a clear need for adequate mental health training for police and prison officers, particularly—as others have suggested—in the management of people with borderline personality disorders, who are all too prevalent in the system. The commission’s report highlights that access to education or rehabilitative programmes is insufficient. It is common sense that the absence of constructive activity is hardly conducive to good mental health. We know that only around 30 per cent of women on remand go on to receive a custodial sentence and that, as the cabinet secretary has said, 76 per cent of custodial sentences that are imposed on women are for periods of six months or less. The alternatives to which the commission refers—electronic monitoring and bail supervision involving engagement with a proposed multidisciplinary team—seem eminently sensible. There must be scope for cutting the costs of prison by reducing the number of women who are on remand, especially among the group who are not likely to be sentenced to a custodial term in any event. It should also be borne in mind that only 2 per cent of female offenders were involved in serious violence last year. One of the clear facts to emerge from the commission’s report is that comparatively few offenders are entitled to statutory throughcare, most offenders qualifying only for voluntary throughcare. The Justice Committee wrote to all 32 local authorities, asking them about the arrangements that are available on release. It is clear that voluntary throughcare has drawbacks. First, it requires offenders to opt in and the level of take-up is not high. Secondly, there is no integrated case management system. Thirdly, there is no assigned criminal justice social worker. The commission made important points on the difficulties that homelessness causes for discharged prisoners. It is common sense that, if we want to discourage reoffending, we must make access to safe accommodation on release a priority. Without a roof over their head and early access to benefit, the chances of someone avoiding reoffending will be diminished. Even if we take the view—as some might do—that prison is primarily a place for punishment and deterrence, at the end of the punishment a proper level of assistance must be a must. The report is a welcome contribution on an issue of pressing social need. It has clear financial implications on which the Government needs to reflect, but I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comment that it is up to all of us to ensure that the report does not pass without bringing about real and substantial change. That really is the task for this Parliament.

I refer members to my entry in the register of interests as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. One of the advantages of the recess is that it enables one to catch up with reading: I mean not light reading like Ian Rankin, but heavy reading of the decision in Petch and Foye. It might help if we remind ourselves how we got here. A 1990 decision of the European Court of Human Rights held that discretionary life sentences that were imposed by English courts were composed of a punitive element and a security element. The ECHR concluded in that case that, once the punishment part had passed, an individual was entitled to regular reviews of his continued detention. English legislation was passed in 1991 to deal with the situation, and contained in its provisions for the release of discretionary life prisoners a specific cross-reference to the provisions for release of long-term prisoners who had been sentenced to determinate terms. That is important in ECHR terms, but the 1993 legislation for Scotland did not—for whatever reason—contain that cross-reference. However, in a 1999 High Court case—O’Neill v HM Advocate—the appeal court embarked on a clarification of the position by the exercise of constructing a notional determinate sentence that would be arrived at by deciding on the period of imprisonment that would have been appropriate purely for the purpose of punishment if a determinate sentence had been imposed, and then specifying a period of one half of that—or two thirds in exceptional circumstances—as the notional sentence that a prisoner would be required to serve before he could be released, if a determinate sentence had been imposed. That is in keeping with the statutory provisions for release on licence in the 1993 act. It is clear from the decision in the O’Neill case and, in particular, from the comments of the late Lord Rodger, that the court was aware of the potential difficulty that that posed, but the approach was arrived at with the overwhelming purpose of achieving comparative justice. The Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Act 2001 was passed to give statutory force to the approach in the O’Neill case and makes it clear that no part of the punishment part should include any element that is necessary for protection of the public. The then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, indicated when moving an amendment to that bill that “the court is required to take into account the period that a prisoner sentenced to a determinate sentence of that duration would have served before becoming eligible for release under the early release provisions that are set out in … section 1 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993.”—[Official Report, 30 May 2001; c 1091.] However, by definition, one half of the sentence for a determinate sentence may in some cases include an element for protection of the public. That was the problem that was brought to a head in Petch and Foye; Christine Grahame talked about the majority decision in that regard. In relation to the 2001 act, Lord Clarke stated, in a typically robust manner: “It cannot, in my opinion, be seriously argued that the legislature had not appreciated this possible anomaly in passing the legislation in the terms it did, when the Lord Justice General had spelt it out so clearly in the judgment which the legislature was seeking to enshrine in the provisions in question.” Whatever the deficiencies of the 2001 act, the Scottish Government is today seeking to rectify the problem. Are the provisions in the bill too complex? Insofar as the bill provides for the court to set a minimum period of imprisonment for the non-mandatory life sentence at between half and all of the notional stripped-down punitive period, the anomaly will be removed. The bill will give discretion to judges in sentencing, but will also require judges to engage in a difficult exercise. As Michael Meehan of the Law Society of Scotland said, judges will have to consider, in relation to what is a relatively rare form of disposal, not only the discretionary life sentence but what they might have done had they gone down a different route, and compare the two. He went on to say that “the exercises are different because, of course, the paramount consideration in cases with a discretionary life sentence is protection of the public.”—[Official Report, 31 january 2012; c 866.] The Law Society made the important point that, except in a situation in which an extended sentence is imposed, the issue of protection of the public is not generally considered discretely by a sentencing judge when passing a determinate sentence. The Scottish Government’s response is to accept that the provisions are complex but not unnecessarily complex in an undoubtedly complex area of law. I note the Government’s comments on the value of a framework setting out the details of the rules that are to be applied by the sentencer, but I am also pleased to note that it would be happy to consider the precise terms of any specified alternative. Given that we are in what the Law Society implies is an artificial situation, if the aim is to give judges flexibility in sentencing in order to avoid the Petch and Foye anomaly, it seems paradoxical to do so in what has been described as a rigid, step-by-step way. On double counting, the grounds on which the court may set a punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence at more than one half of the notional equivalent determinate sentence, such as the seriousness of the offence and any previous convictions, are similar to the criteria that are used to determine the length of the overall notional determinate sentence. Is this double counting? Will it give rise to ECHR challenges? The Scottish Human Rights Commission sits on the fence. Although the Scottish Government’s position is that the criteria are to be applied for separate purposes—which I accept—there are two separate purposes within the overall sentencing framework. The committee’s view was that the Government might have benefited from consulting more widely before introducing the proposals. Understandably, the Government has indicated that because this was not a new policy, and there was a need for swiftness in resolving the anomaly, it has got the balance right, particularly given the low response to the committee’s call for evidence. Again, it is hard to disagree, but I think that we have to accept that the scheme that is proposed has not generated much enthusiasm. Therefore, although I welcome this element of the bill, there remains scope for further consideration of its detail and for seeking help from stakeholders on consideration of whether there is any realistic alternative. Certainly, it is not helpful to criticize without alternatives. Having perhaps been overly hasty in 2001, Parliament should endeavour to learn from that experience.

I refer members to my registered interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I am a relative newcomer to the Parliament, so I was not a party to the debate on the future of tribunals in September 2010, in which reference was made to the report of the group that was led by Lord Philip, which concluded that the tribunal system in Scotland was extremely “complex and fragmented” and did “not meet the key principles of independence and coherence”. Having announced in that debate that there was to be a Scottish Tribunals Service, the cabinet secretary, Mr MacAskill, is reported as having said that that was “the first small step on a big journey. The real prize is for all tribunals in Scotland to form an integral part of the Scottish justice system.”—[Official Report, 30 September 2010; c 29183.] That must remain the aim, and the current consultation heralds a further significant step along the way. Given that the new tiered structure will not for the moment include most tribunals that operate on devolved matters, let alone those on reserved matters, there is a considerable way to go, but it is a start. Tribunal reform was one of the Scottish Government’s commitments for the making justice work programme. Making justice work aims to deliver a Scottish justice system that is accessible, easy to use and cost efficient. Those aims are admirable. As the minister said, tribunal reform must draw on the principles of the Franks report from the 1950s—on fairness, openness and impartiality. As I said, Lord Philip was not complimentary about Scotland’s tribunal system. The Scottish Tribunals Service supports just six tribunals today, but there are many more and the integration of the six that are serviced by the Scottish Tribunals Service can be only the start. As other members have said, more than 40 tribunals work on different devolved areas in Scotland. All were established by different statutes, in different eras, with different priorities in mind. We know that significant savings have been made from the establishment of the Scottish Tribunals Service and we cannot pretend other than that keeping the cost of tribunals under control must be a priority, but that must—as always—also be compatible with the interests of justice. Reform of the tribunal system is an essential step in making Scottish civil law fit for the 21st century. The consultation on the Scottish Government’s proposals for a new tribunal system for Scotland is therefore a welcome development. The strategy is clear, as I see it. The organisation of tribunals in Scotland, which can look like a jungle to the average person, will be streamlined, with a clearer appeals structure. Accessibility must remain at the core of the proposals. The new first tier ought to be better able to settle simple disputes, with the possibility of a referral to the appellate level. I do not believe that the system could embody functionality and simplicity better than that. I am also confident that the new proposals will reassure people who are concerned that tribunals will not be independent of political influence and will not be impartial. Tribunals are used by people who require assistance to resolve disputes when unfair treatment by a third party—most often, an organ of the state—occurs. It is therefore important that their operation is not compromised, or seen to be compromised, by partisanship. Let us be clear that the proposals are not a comprehensive solution to all tribunal-related challenges. In addition to the fact that the proposal is to commence with only the six tribunals that are serviced by the Scottish Tribunals Service, many tribunals remain reserved to the UK Government, so the Scottish Government cannot, at present, legislate on those areas. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has been in dialogue with the UK Lord Chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, with a view to progressing the suggestion that there be a transfer of the administration of tribunals that operate in reserved areas in Scotland, as has been recommended by the Scottish committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council. I am not sure where we are with those discussions; I heard what the minister said to David McLetchie on the issue, but I would appreciate any further nuggets of information from the minister in her winding-up speech. Progress has clearly been made elsewhere in the UK. It would be undesirable for the enthusiasm that has been demonstrated elsewhere not to be replicated in Scotland. The Scottish Government’s strategy for tribunals is clear. The proposals suggest an integrated model of first-tier tribunals, which will take on the work of current tribunals. In addition, an upper tier will be put in place as an appeals mechanism when decisions by the first-tier chambers are challenged. Of course, perhaps the greatest strength of Scots law is its integrity. I am confident that the proposed system of tribunals, under the judicial leadership of the Lord President, will help to ensure that that integrity is maintained. I also support proposals that seek to fully integrate tribunals with other forms of dispute resolution—first and foremost, the courts. The proposals that have been made on tribunals will not, as far as I am aware, affect an individual’s right to appeal to the Court of Session by way of judicial review. Although further clarity may be needed on the question of any appeal on a point of law to the Court of Session, I welcome in particular the proposal that appeals from the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland to the Court of Session will remain. That is an important safeguard. The proposals seem to herald a joined-up approach and represent a significant step towards sorting out the currently fragmented and piecemeal system. That cannot be anything but a plus. I am pleased to have had the opportunity to speak in the debate and am supportive of the Scottish Government’s proposals, even if I might prefer—as David McLetchie suggested—more rapid progress. I look forward to the report on the consultation responses in due course.

So far, Colin Keir has not mentioned the tribunal judiciary. Does he agree that it is appropriate that the Scottish ministers determine their remuneration on the basis of independent advice?

Will the minister give way?

4. To ask the First Minister what impact possible changes by the United Kingdom Government to regional pay awards would have in Scotland. (S4F-00573)

Will the First Minister outline what the Scottish Government is doing to offer the public sector workers who are under its control some security of pay, and will he expressly rule out following the Con-Dem coalition’s approach?

As other members have done, I commend the committee for its report. As the Justice Committee’s EU reporter, I am pleased to speak about the Justice Committee’s view on its EU priorities for the coming year. In February, we selected five EU priorities from the Commission’s work programme for 2012, largely because of their links to recent policies and initiatives at domestic level and, in some cases, to the Justice Committee’s established interests. We felt that that approach could help to add value to our existing and future work programmes. The Justice Committee was also keen to ensure that we had input at an early stage to any legislative proposal that raised subsidiarity concerns or could conflict with established procedures in Scots law. We have therefore included a regular item on the committee’s agenda to keep up to date with developments on our EU priorities and to keep a watching brief on other legislative proposals that are not contained in this year’s Justice Committee work programme. Let me turn to the Justice Committee’s priorities. The first is an initiative on special safeguards in criminal procedures for suspected or accused persons. The committee believes there is an overlap between some of the issues in that proposal and those that have been raised in Lord Carloway's review, on which the committee took evidence late last year and which Parliament debated when it was published. The committee has therefore written to the cabinet secretary for his comments on the impact of the proposal on implementation of the Carloway review’s recommendations. The second of the Justice Committee’s EU priorities concerns the proposals that seek to ensure that crime victims receive fair and appropriate compensation. It was agreed that there was some overlap with the UK Government’s current consultation on the criminal injuries compensation scheme and the Scottish Government’s plans to introduce legislation on victims’ rights. We have therefore requested that the cabinet secretary provide the committee with details of the Scottish Government’s input to the consultation and of how the EU proposal might square with its plans on compensation for victims. My view—speaking personally and not for the committee—is that any review of criminal compensation should be focused primarily on reducing the costs of bureaucracy and administration and not on levels of compensation. The Justice Committee’s third EU priority is an initiative that aims to define common minimum rules on legal aid in criminal proceedings. The committee understands that the Scottish Government intends to introduce legislation on that shortly, and has therefore asked the cabinet secretary how the EU proposal might impact on future legislation in this Parliament. The Justice Committee’s fourth EU priority is an alternative dispute resolution instrument for business-to-business disputes, which might raise similar subsidiarity concerns to a consumer dispute proposal that the committee considered in January. The committee believes that is important that we have the opportunity to submit our views at a much earlier stage than we can at present, which justified making the matter a key priority. The Justice Committee’s fifth and final priority is a proposal on jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 is, I believe, under review by the Scottish Government and it is the Justice Committee’s intention to monitor progress on that front on an on-going basis. The fourth and fifth priorities are not expected to be considered for legislative action before the end of the year and the committee will therefore revisit its priorities in due course. The committee will also consider the cabinet secretary’s response to the three other priorities that I have outlined. I am glad to be in a position to report on our work.

First of all, I thank Alison McInnes for lodging a motion on what is an important issue. When we think about offenders, we find it all too easy to think purely in terms of punishment, public safety and deterrence. However, as far as the individual in question and society are concerned, in this era of preventative spending, rehabilitation in all its forms and reducing reoffending must be priorities. With regard to rehabilitation, I am pleased to note the terms of the Government’s press release on Low Moss. As we all know, cutting reoffending is a long-term business and, as with minimum pricing, there is no silver bullet for it. As a result, I believe that we should consider the use of social impact bonds. Although they have been welcomed by Conservative proponents of the big society, the idea was embraced initially by the former Labour Home Secretary, Jack Straw, as Lewis Macdonald made clear. The Peterborough pilot raised £5 million from 17 social investors and is expected to involve 3,000 short-term prisoners set to leave Peterborough prison over a six-year period. The voluntary organisations involved, including YMCA and various trusts, aim to concentrate on improving the education skills and confidence of short-term prisoners in jail to make them better able to integrate into the community. Support organisations will provide intensive assistance after prisoner release to help individuals to settle into the community. Early indications are that participation is high; indeed, a key factor of the Peterborough trial is that its participants are volunteers. The fact that prisoners have expressed the desire to seek help and avoid reoffending is welcome and the Scottish Government should certainly be open to innovative schemes that help former prisoners to readjust. However, the only report so far on the Peterborough project was commissioned by the Ministry of Justice 10 months ago. It states: “given the early stage of development of the Peterborough SIB, we are unable to draw conclusions about or comment on outcomes.” My understanding is that the minimum possible period for assessing reoffending rates is two years and nine months from the project’s start and that investors can look forward to a return only after the project’s fourth year. Whatever the merits of the Peterborough project, it is really too early for the Scottish Government to reach a considered view on it. Moreover, how likely is it that SIBs will attract funding entirely additional to that for the third sector? After all, we might well need a high rate of return in order to attract investors. In addition, to make real savings in cash, significant scale will be required. From the Government’s point of view, savings might not be great, and set-up costs might be high. Therefore, we should not assume that social impact bonds are a panacea. A more straightforward public-social partnership might have something to teach us, too.

I have limited time, so I cannot. When the Justice Committee was taking evidence on the Scottish Government’s budget, we highlighted the fact that the obligation to produce throughcare plans for offenders was restricted to those offenders serving sentences of four years or more. The committee was keen for consideration to be given to extending that to short-term prisoners. In its evidence to the committee, Sacro welcomed the positive steps that are already being taken to address reoffending and reduce the reliance on short-term custodial sentences. Therefore, when we consider reoffending, we should bear in mind that the SNP Government is already committed to the reducing reoffending change fund and that, although reoffending rates are still way too high, they are dropping, albeit modestly. In addition, as the cabinet secretary has said, the whole-system approach specifically targets young people who offend. As I have said, we should be open to new ideas in relation to reoffending. I hope that, when the time is right, the Government will give full consideration to at least one social impact bond pilot project; it should certainly not dismiss the idea out of hand.

Does the Scottish Government believe that the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 is strong enough to ensure responsible dog ownership?

Would Mr al-Megrahi have been granted compassionate release if he had continued his appeal?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, and I declare a relevant interest as a member of Amnesty International and of the Faculty of Advocates. The insomniacs among us in the chamber may have seen last week’s Scottish questions from Westminster, which was broadcast on BBC 2. Fiona Bruce, a Conservative member of Parliament—not to be confused with Fiona Bruce of BBC fame—raised the issue of human trafficking in the House of Commons and asked David Mundell whether he agreed with her view that human trafficking was an issue best tackled at UK level. Mr Mundell answered by saying: “I absolutely agree with my hon. Friend that the UK can bring great weight to this issue on behalf of Scotland. It is also an issue where we have been able to work with the Scottish Government, demonstrating that the two Governments can work together on matters of great importance on a day-to-day basis.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 February 2012; Vol 540, c 857.] It is clear that David Mundell was nearer the mark than Fiona Bruce, and the Scottish Government must and should co-operate with the UK Government on these issues. However, this subject above all should not be a constitutional one. Scotland can and must be able to do more, because human trafficking is deadly serious. Human trafficking knows no boundaries and if Scotland is to challenge it, it cannot do so within boundaries. Trafficking must be confronted by the international community through international strategies and multilateral involvement in global humanitarian organisations. I had the good fortune to be present at the launch of Baroness Helena Kennedy’s report, “Inquiry into Human Trafficking in Scotland”, at the Hub in Edinburgh in November last year. The recommendations aside, the background information in the report concerned me. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the EHRC was unable to determine accurately the extent of trafficking in Scotland due to its particularly clandestine nature, but, based on referrals to the national referral mechanism during a sample period, a conservative estimate of 75 victims each year is likely. We should reflect on that: every year, 75 vulnerable adults—and children—arrive here in Scotland, often promised a stable job and basic pay, only to end up bonded with debt, imprisoned in flats run by trafficking circles and forced into the sex trade, domestic servitude or the drug trade, or even into forced work in legitimate employment such as agriculture or catering. As Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People has highlighted, there are currently no reliable data on the scale and nature of trafficking of children. It is clear that the conviction rate is an issue. Section 22 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 deals with trafficking in its most prevalent form: prostitution and sexual exploitation. However, since 2003, there has been only one successful prosecution under the act, which affected only two offenders. Since an equivalent act came into force in England and Wales, there have been 150 successful prosecutions. Recent legislation such as the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 confronts trafficking, but there is no doubt that we can do more. We can look to the EHRC report for guidance on where to start. Although the parliamentary timetable is tight, I hope that the Scottish Government will find the time to consider seriously whether a new catch-all piece of legislation can be introduced. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments in relation to statutory aggravation in that regard. It was suggested in the EHRC report that prosecution of trafficking in Scotland faces an additional hurdle in the form of the requirement for corroboration in criminal cases. In December last year I welcomed the Carloway review and the proposal to end the requirement for corroboration if appropriate safeguards were forthcoming. Whatever the merits of the review’s proposals, there can be no doubt that corroboration can be a barrier, and when we reflect on it, we should not forget its relevance to trafficking offences. Most importantly, human trafficking—as the EHRC report argues—should not be viewed as a “foreign problem”. Scotland is a destination country: it is our problem as much as anyone else’s, so what more can we do? The report calls for a strategic approach to trafficking, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government is hosting a summit to refresh the strategic direction for policy. A summit will, itself, raise the profile of the issue among the wider public—another key recommendation of the report. There are many other recommendations, all of which merit closer examination. For example, the report states that “human trafficking thrives where there is inequality”. It is clear—however optimistic it may be—that inequality must be reduced if we are to create an environment in which trafficking is less likely to occur. International co-operation is also paramount. Article 4 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: “No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.” Amnesty International did sterling work in relation to trafficking in its 2008 report, “Scotland’s Slaves”. However, as Amnesty International states, human trafficking is a form of modern-day slavery and we need international strategies to deal with that modern-day problem. On a European level, let us not forget the Council of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings, which also outlines a pan-European strategy for tackling the problem. At a UK level, we need to continue to co-operate with the UK Government and UK agencies with the same determination to facilitate seamless co-operation around the globe. At the domestic level, I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to the introduction of a trafficking care standard and an end-to-end service for trafficking victims. I support the Government’s motion and I am very glad indeed that we are having the debate. I hope and believe that Scotland can take the lead in the defence of fundamental human rights in this area.

I sympathise with many of the points that have been raised, but does the member accept that when the Lord President of the Court of Session gave evidence to the Justice Committee in November last year, he confirmed that 40 per cent of the Scottish Court Service’s expenditure went on maintaining court buildings?

What steps can the Scottish Government take to encourage the continued development of low-omission green buses?

The cabinet secretary said in his statement that chartered teachers should be among the first to access the new professional development opportunities. What specific assurances can he give teachers who invested a great deal of time and effort in achieving chartered status that they will be able to use any new arrangement to build on the recognition that they currently enjoy through the scheme? In effect, what flesh can we put on the bones of the word “credit”?

4. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions he has had with the Secretary of State for Defence regarding the establishment of a multirole brigade at Leuchars. (S4F-00460)

The First Minister will be aware of press comments, saying that the Secretary of State, Philip Hammond, has cast doubt over the deployment of the multirole brigade, seven months after his predecessor confirmed that very commitment in a statement to the House of Commons. Does the First Minister agree that such fearmongering is very unsettling for my constituents? Will he join me in condemning the comments, and urge Mr Hammond to offer clarity on the situation as a matter of urgency?

I remind members that the Scottish Government has managed to maintain in Scotland a truly progressive approach to further and higher education, which is based not on the ability to pay, but the ability to learn. In doing so, it has managed to preserve student numbers and maintain the education maintenance allowance, and will provide £265 million of capital spending over the next spending review period. That progressive approach has served Scotland well since the days of the enlightenment and is all the more important today, when we seek to reindustrialise Scotland with emerging technologies. I accept that we need skilled people to drive that forward and our commitment to colleges must be one of the most important investments that we make. However, the achievements that I mentioned—EMA, student numbers and the additional capital investment—have been made despite the fact that we face a falling block grant from the Government at Westminster, with its emphasis on austerity and a reduction of about one third in the capital budget.

No, I have only four minutes. This is a Conservative debate. I read the Conservatives’ manifesto from last year’s election, “Common Sense for Scotland”. It is a 36-page document but has a short paragraph at the bottom of page 14 that outlines the Conservatives’ plans for colleges: “We want to encourage greater scope for colleges to work with local schools, universities and businesses to enhance their economic and social contribution and to open up new opportunities to students through better integrated learner pathways.” I hope that members did not blink, because that appears to be the Conservatives’ plan for Scotland’s colleges. As I said, one of the defining characteristics of the Scottish Government is its progressive vision of Scotland, which stands in stark contrast to the miserable mix that the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition proffers the people of England. Let us remember that the SNP is investing in excess of £500 million in colleges in 2012-13. From the day that the SNP Government came to office in 2007 up until the end of the spending review period, it will have invested £4.7 billion in further education. Meanwhile, the UK Government is directing a 25 per cent real-terms cut at further education in England between 2010 and 2015. That is massive, disproportionate and twice the size of the cut in Scotland. Couple that with the trebling of tuition fees in England and I am sure that Scotland’s college students share my relief that the days of direct Tory control over further and higher education in Scotland are a distant memory. However, events do not stand still. The plans for regionalisation that are detailed in “Putting Learners at the Centre” and in Russel Griggs’s report, which was announced yesterday, will change the nature of the FE sector in Scotland. Those plans will, I hope, make the sector more responsive to skills demands, particularly in the green sector. They will also help to ensure that colleges are in the best position to deal with the difficult public finances that the country faces. In my constituency, which is served by Elmwood College, there will be regionalisation of the non-land-based provision while the college pools its resources with the Scottish Agricultural College and others to provide a land-based specialism. There may be a paradox between the two approaches, as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said yesterday, but it is geared towards delivering a modern and efficient further education system. There is, of course, no threat to the campus at Elmwood. We have spoken a lot about college funding. I sensed a touch of confusion between price and value. We have also spoken about youth unemployment. Of course youth unemployment is too high. That is why we established a Minister for Youth Employment and the opportunities for all programme. We need to look at matters in context—

We will be preserving the total number of college places.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it expects to publish the findings of the consultation on post-16 education reform. (S4O-00616)

The cabinet secretary is aware of the concordat signed by Elmwood College in my constituency, Barony College, Oatridge College and the Scottish Agricultural College to create an arrangement that is based on specialism instead of region. Given that the consultation speaks of regionalisation of the college sector, how will the arrangement between those learning centres affect their funding following the proposal for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to fund colleges regionally from the academic year 2012-13?

Does the First Minister agree that Westminster’s attaching conditions to the section 30 offer is unacceptable and might be considered as playing politics with an offer that was made ostensibly to achieve legal certainty?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and, like other members, I welcome the minister, Sarah Boyack and Margaret Mitchell to their new positions and thank them for their contributions to the debate. As the Parliament has already recognised, the 2007 election fiasco should never happen again. However, it was not all bad—in many senses, what happened in 2007 was significant. It was the first time that the single transferable vote system had been used in Scotland for local elections—sadly, that is not why the 2007 elections stand out in our memories. At 38,352, the number of spoiled local government ballot papers was rightly perceived as being way too high, even if it was somewhat less than the number of spoiled ballot papers in the parliamentary election on the same day. It is clear that Scotland’s reputation for being able to administer elections efficiently and fairly suffered a damaging blow. The people of Scotland are entitled to a robust and efficient electoral system, and I am glad that members across the chamber agreed that things had to change for the elections in 2011 and 2012, to ensure that people would not, in effect, be disenfranchised by accident ever again. The independent report that Ron Gould published in 2007 was a welcome guide to how elections ought to be run. The SNP accepted the report and the wide-ranging conclusions of the review, acknowledging the unusually complex system in Scotland whereby electoral responsibilities are divided between Westminster and the Scottish Parliament. As we know, the administration of local government elections is devolved to the Scottish Parliament, but many powers remain at Westminster, such as the franchise and the power to change the voting age at those elections, as the First Minister reminded us last week. In connection with that issue, I find it surprising that the Liberal Democrats are so hostile to votes for 16 and 17-year-olds in the referendum without acknowledging that, if we had control of the franchise for local authorities, there can be no doubt that the reform could have been introduced for the elections in May. The complexity of the situation is illustrated in the Gould report. Members who have looked at it recently will know that it includes an interesting table, on pages 12 and 13, that lists the various statutes—created by Westminster and Holyrood respectively—that affect local government elections. The situation really is a guddle. No wonder Gould described it as antiquated and fractured. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is continuing to press for full control of the franchise for local elections in order to streamline the legislation and maximise efficiency in the process. Gould expressed concern that two different voting systems were used on one day—first past the post and STV. That led people to put crosses where they should have put numbers and vice versa. We need to continue the public campaign to make voters aware of the need to place 1, 2 and 3 on the paper as opposed to crosses. I am glad that a public awareness campaign immediately before the 2012 elections will focus on that. Following Gould, the decision was taken to separate elections to the Scottish Parliament from local government elections. That decoupling brings us to where we are today, with the local government elections approaching a whole year after the parliamentary elections. The Gould report argued that holding local government elections in the same year as Scottish Parliament elections might have overshadowed the importance of the former. Few would disagree with that. It is important to ensure that there is an informed debate before any local government election, and I am glad that there will be no confusion between elections this year that might detract from that debate. This year’s local government elections are no less important than any that have gone before. The decoupling presents a significant challenge in relation to turnout. Sarah Boyack reasonably mentioned issues with postal voting. I am happy to stand corrected, but I am not sure that there has been much consideration of the alternative voting methods that could complement postal voting, which are mentioned on page 69 of the Gould report—in particular, advance voting. Those methods might increase turnout and they certainly need to be considered in connection with any franchise for the referendum. I hope that the minister will address that, either in his closing speech or later. Local authority elections are often regarded as being less exciting than national elections. Although I concede that local elections often lack the television and other media coverage and excitement of parliamentary elections, it is local authorities that provide many of the services upon which vast numbers of the electorate rely. Without those services, daily life would grind to a halt for many people. For that reason, local elections matter just as much as any other elections. I therefore urge my constituents and voters throughout Scotland to get fully involved in the elections and to cast their vote. Let us hope that, whatever the result on the first Thursday in May, we can be proud that the elections have been fairly and efficiently run.

The Isle of May, in my constituency, is a significant seabird and grey seal colony. However, the long-term trend of decline in the number of seabirds continues. What further action can the Government take to address the decline in the seabird population, given its role in creating sustainable tourism?

I welcome the resolution to the matter. However, given that a previous agreement foundered on a ballot of the trade unions, will the cabinet secretary clarify what the situation is in relation to the current agreement and a potential trade union ballot?

15. To ask the Scottish Government whether it is evaluating the capacity for telehealth to aid mainstream health provision following the recommendation by Audit Scotland in its report, “A Review of Telehealth in Scotland”. (S4O-00563)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer. Does she agree, however, that more needs to be done to raise awareness of telehealth possibilities and initiatives within NHS boards? In particular, does she agree that NHS boards should have a dedicated clinical lead for telehealth to co-ordinate activity and development in the area?

Like other members, I welcome this debate, and I thank Margaret Burgess for bringing it forward. Pay day loans are not the wisest idea. However, although we criticise pay day lending, we should not forget that, in many cases, the major high street banks have charging structures that can cause distress to borrowers throughout the country. The OFT report that was published in June 2010 said: “While the rates charged by payday lenders are high, they can be lower than for some mainstream alternatives such as unarranged overdrafts.” One of the major problems is that, for many folk, there are, of course, few alternatives to pay day loans for short-term finance, but the need for information on loans and ways to restructure debt must be paramount. Alternatives to pay day loans and places where customers can find support and assistance for managing debts are essential, and clear advice on the problems that ensue if the loan is allowed to escalate must be available. That is where the role of the CABx and other organisations can be vital. Inevitably, debt is a trap that companies can exploit and regulation therefore remains a necessity. For that reason, I welcome attempts to improve regulation in the industry, but they are not enough. As the OFT seems to suggest, a minimum adherence to good codes of practice is rather lukewarm. The OFT has, of course, suggested codes that cover complaints processes and advice to customers. That is all right as far as it goes, but it does not go nearly far enough. The OFT is against price control remedies because it believes that the supply of high-cost credit is already constrained and that any reduction in access would have a detrimental effect on some customers who use the loans for non-discretionary spending. It is clear that there are some risks there, and obviously we have to accept that argument. Perhaps there is an argument that it would be appropriate simply to have a substantial maximum interest rate, but we know the problems with that—other members have outlined them. The difficulty, of course, lies in assessing what that rate should be. However, it goes without saying that, as a minimum, consumers should have as much information as possible, and some form of compulsion to record interest rates on a price comparison website, for example, in return for obtaining a credit licence in the first place might be a sensible move. As other members have suggested, there is a substantial role for credit unions. In my constituency, we have the North East Fife Credit Union, which does a very worthwhile job. I welcome the Scottish Government’s service approval scheme for credit unions, but more needs to be done. We need to encourage the buddy system for credit unions that we can see elsewhere in the world. In that system, financial assistance and—perhaps more important—expertise are shared between mature credit unions and newcomers. Whatever support we can give to credit unions, we must accept that they are unlikely at the present time to fill the substantial need for credit. That is why it is essential that a proper form of regulation is in place. As Gavin Brown has already indicated, loan sharks are one risk in the area. The infamous loan shark is not just a character from television soaps; loan sharks present a real risk to individuals and families who need cash to cover the cost of their daily duties and essentials. Finally, there is one group that is especially vulnerable to debt: the young. I cannot think of anything worse in the present time than a young section of the population being burdened by such debts and their experience of the financial system at an early age. Members should, please, bear in mind the effect of policies on the young.

No one could say that ridding Scotland of offensive behaviour at football or in society in general is easy, and the bill cannot be anything other than a step along the way. However, it is not the bill that was introduced in May. We have a freedom of expression provision in relation to the second offence, a general review provision, and an amendment to the provisions in relation to a regulated football match. Those are small but significant amendments. What I am still struggling with is the fact that some members chose not to participate in discussions to amend the bill, particularly given that, as was reported in June, members of the Opposition thought at that time that legislation should be in place as quickly as possible. I understand that they might not agree that this bill should be in place, but they did think that there should be legislation. When the Labour Party announced on Sunday that none of its proposals required new legislation, I found it troubling. We have a problem that is worthy of legislation in June but not one that is worthy of legislation in December. No one has said that the problem can be solved with legislation alone, and no one has said that sectarianism is a problem at football games alone. However, legislation is a key instrument in a broad approach to the eradication of offensive behaviour of a religious, racial or homophobic nature at football matches. The Lord Advocate spoke in evidence about gaps in existing legislation. By their actions, some Opposition members clearly seek to deny that there are such gaps. I have always accepted that the bill overlaps with existing legislation. However, as I said in June and at the stage 2 debate on 3 November, and as academics such as Dr Kay Goodall and the Lord Advocate have said, there is a transformational effect from legislation. The Lord Advocate said: “Legislation can be transformational ... it can change society’s behaviour and its attitude towards behaviour, and that should never be overlooked.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 20 September 2011; c 309.] As well as providing a primary mechanism, which is to punish those guilty of an offence, law has a secondary function in changing public attitudes to behaviour. Naming the offence will have a transformational effect on people’s behaviour and offensive behaviour at football will become a named crime. It will be something that people will be keen to avoid that will be rather different from a conviction for breach of the peace which, as others have said, is being used in any event far less often because of its known difficulties. There is much to commend in Labour’s 11-point plan, but will it transform behaviour on its own? If, as a football pundit said to me, football has had 100 years to clean up its act and failed to do so, will what Labour proposes change the attitude of the clubs? Few would argue against the proposal for points docking in appropriate circumstances, but that is not a matter for the Scottish Government. As I understand it, FIFA rules would prevent any Government intervention. Let us be clear that if behaviour changes, as we all hope that it will, there will be few or no prosecutions, and we will all be happy.

I want to press on to finish the points that I can in the short time that I have. I am not clear what the Labour Party’s position is on the second offence. I could guess that it says that section 38 of the 2010 act is sufficient, but we should not forget that that section does not include any reference to incitement to religious hatred. In that respect, I take on board some of what Patrick Harvie said. In contrast to section 38 of the 2010 act, the bill removes the need to prove that the person making the threat intended to carry it out and the need to prove that the behaviour actually caused fear and alarm. As others have said, the 11-point plan refers to much that is under way. The Scottish Government has always said that it will continue to take an inclusive approach to its programme to tackle sectarianism. As I understand it, the Government has committed itself to spending £9 million on the issue over the next three years. I very much hope that the Labour Party will recognise that its plans and the bill are not mutually exclusive. Legislation must go hand in hand with non-legislative action in education and dialogue. In my view, not to support the bill when the opportunity presents itself while at the same time condemning sectarian songs sends out entirely the wrong message. We need new legislation, but we also need a wider approach—on that, at least, I hope that we can all agree.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what response it has received from the United Kingdom Government to its representations on reductions to feed-in tariffs from solar panels. (S4O-00425)

Does the minister agree that the proposals to cut the feed-in tariff by more than 50 per cent in one year are disappointing when contrasted with the Scottish Government’s ambitious programme for renewable energy production? Will he continue to press the UK Government for a reversal of the decision?

I refer to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I acknowledge the care and time that Lord Carloway and his team have afforded to this important review. It is a big report with a lot in it, and we can only touch the surface today. In the foreword to the report, Lord Carloway states: “The underlying and long-lasting implication of Cadder is that the system must fully embrace and apply a human rights based approach.” We must consider his review in that context. The proposal for removing the requirement for corroboration in criminal cases is perhaps the most ambitious proposal in the report. I agree whole-heartedly with Lord Carloway that the most important aspect in establishing the value of evidence should be its quality and not its quantity. We have heard that the concept of corroboration has a very long history. Until relatively recently, it used to be part of the civil process in Scotland as well as operating in criminal cases, although that is seldom mentioned today. The requirement for corroboration in civil cases was abolished in 1988, and the civil system has functioned without the need for corroboration quite adequately, even if it must be accepted that, in a case based on a conflict of oral evidence, two witnesses in support are better than one. The term “corroboration” is often misunderstood by the layperson; it means that there must be two separate sources of evidence. It does not mean that there should necessarily be two independent witnesses to confirm every piece of evidence. As has been said, it is a hangover from medieval times at least: a security mechanism to protect accused persons from mistakenly being hanged from the gallows in an age in which there was no such thing as an appeals process. Thankfully, we have moved on. As Lord Carloway has said, the principal reason that is advanced nowadays for retaining corroboration is to prevent miscarriages of justice. As has been said, his review found no evidence to suggest that the rates of miscarriage of justice in Scotland are any lower than they are in comparable countries that do not have a corroboration rule. Moreover, he argues that the requirement for corroboration increases the likelihood of a miscarriage of justice. If a complainer has a good case, but there is no evidence other than the complainer’s own evidence, the complainer is, because of the rule of corroboration, not able to obtain justice as the case does not proceed. Those are powerful arguments, but I do not believe that removing corroboration is a silver bullet that will necessarily increase efficiency and improve justice—and it may not, in human rights terms, be more than neutral. The cabinet secretary has referred to the research on the 468 cases. The second table shows that 95 out of 141 sexual offences could have been prosecuted. However, Lord Carloway himself admits: “it is important to remember that the removal of the requirement for corroboration would not guarantee a conviction” in the cases in which there was deemed to be a reasonable prospect of conviction. The reasonable prospect of conviction that is assessed by the Crown Prosecution Service in England is an objective test in which a prosecutor assesses whether it is more likely than not that a conviction will be obtained. The figure is something in excess of 50 per cent but perhaps not much more, and in reality convictions do not always follow. Therefore, we should not be overwhelmed by the figures and, as David McLetchie has rightly said, the difference between conviction rates in Scotland and those in England and Wales is minimal. We should perhaps counter that point by remembering the comments of Helena Kennedy when she was talking about human trafficking this week. In her view, the rule on corroboration may be a bar to convictions for trafficking, and I cannot see any real argument against that. We obviously acknowledge that the test to be applied in criminal cases is whether the Crown has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. In Carloway’s view, that is the essential safeguard to protect the accused. In particular, he believes that safeguards, such as an automatic warning to the jury of the risk of convicting on the basis of uncorroborated evidence, should not be required. Similarly, he believes that a judge at first instance should not be entitled to acquit an accused in a solemn case even if he or she considers that it would be unreasonable for a jury to return a verdict of guilty on the evidence adduced. It is in the area of safeguards that I believe that the Government would be wise to listen to the arguments. Justice Scotland has said that it is “dismayed by the suggested wholesale removal of corroboration absent alternative safeguards”. The Government needs to listen to that argument, and others, so that we can have a full and meaningful debate on the point. I will move away from corroboration and touch on the review’s comments on adverse inference. I agree with Lord Carloway’s recommendation that there should be no change to the current position—that is, that no inference should be drawn from silence on the part of a suspect when they are questioned. There is no strong case for replicating the English experience, and indeed in England the matter is rarely an issue in trials. Similarly, I believe that, post-Cadder, the distinction between section 14 detention and arrest is no longer meaningful. In the remaining time, I will touch on the question of rights of access. Lord Carloway’s analysis is that there is nothing in European jurisprudence that precludes suspects from waiving their right of access to a lawyer, but he goes on to consider the position of vulnerable adults and children. Most significantly, he makes a recommendation that under-16s cannot waive their right of access to a lawyer, which seems a sensible recommendation. It is unusual that under-16s, who may not consent to many things in life, are able to waive something that is so important to their human rights. On a waiver generally, Lord Carloway does not specifically suggest in his review that the police should record the reasons why a suspect waives their right of access when they are at a police station or wherever—Lord Hope made that suggestion in a Scottish case heard by the Supreme Court in which judgment was given last week. However, in the evidence that Lord Carloway gave to the Justice Committee on Tuesday, he agreed with the proposal that the reasons why an accused has used the waiver should be recorded. It is a helpful suggestion, and it may be a useful addition to any Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland manual. There is an awful lot in the Carloway review. It is an important contribution to the debate, and I look forward to a full and meaningful debate on it.

On Tuesday, I heard about the UK Government’s final decision to close the Forth maritime rescue co-ordination centre, which is in my constituency, with a mixture of anger, frustration and worry. I felt anger because the decision seems to be based largely on financial grounds, with the centre being another victim of the coalition’s cuts dogma, whereby the need to reduce the deficit takes precedence, whatever the cost. I felt frustration because I believe that the consultation was little more than a sham in relation to Fife Ness and that it failed to take account of the interests of the workforce, the strong views of the local community and the importance of local knowledge. I felt worried because I fear that the UK Government’s decision jeopardises the wellbeing and safety of all those who work in dangerous maritime conditions on our temperamental Scottish seas, which other members have mentioned. It is important to consider exactly what the changes entail and what impact they will have on communities. The Fife peninsula juts out into the North Sea on the east coast. My constituency encompasses the easternmost point of the Fife peninsula, Fife Ness, which is home to the Forth MRCC. One glance at a map of the east coast tells us nearly all that we need to know about the importance of having an MRCC in Fife. The Forth MRCC is responsible for protecting those who work and serve on the seas and coasts for a stretch of more than 300 miles along the east coast. To the south, the Firth of Forth is a bustling waterway. Further south lies the varied coastline of East Lothian and the Scottish Borders, with its many fishing villages and harbours. To the north lies nearly 100 miles of Angus and Aberdeenshire coast before the northern limit to the zone at Doonie Point. We heard in Claire Baker’s speech how busy the MRCC is, so I will not repeat that, but it goes without saying that the area concerned covers the site of the Forth replacement crossing, for which construction work is due to commence in the current parliamentary session. It represents Scotland’s largest civil engineering project in a generation. There will soon be hundreds of builders, material deliveries and heavy machinery around the construction site. We need to ensure that the project is given the best possible safety provision in the form of a marine safety service that is fit for purpose. In addition, the substantial volume of maritime traffic in the Firth of Forth and the adjacent waters is expected to increase enormously in the next few years in line with the expansion of offshore renewable energy developments. As for fishing, the east neuk is renowned for its fishing industry, which is vital to the local economy. In the past few years, Anstruther harbour has been upgraded to include a marina that caters for leisure sailing, which is rapidly growing in popularity. We should not forget that, as the Scottish Wildlife Trust has said, Scottish waters are home to internationally important numbers of breeding seabirds, many of which are in the Firth of Forth, and also grey seals, whales and dolphins. They all need to be considered. The original UK Government consultation on modernising HM Coastguard was truly senseless. It proposed the closure of Shetland and Stornoway coastguard stations as well as the stations at Fife Ness and Clyde. I acknowledge the point that Tavish Scott made in that respect. Thankfully, the UK Government was made to see sense and to change the proposals, which would have left Scotland with only two coastguard stations. It elected to revise its proposals, but it still failed to recognise the vastness of Scotland’s coastline and, as the Scottish Government stated in its response to the consultation, the expectation of increasing levels of activity in the Fife Ness area for the foreseeable future. When the second consultation ran from July to October, we knew that it was likely to be academic for Fife Ness, and so it has proved. In effect, the second consultation precluded any revision of the Government’s initial proposal to close Fife Ness. Only time will tell what the impact will be of the decision to close MRCC Forth, but it is crystal clear after Tuesday’s decision that Scotland cannot afford to allow Westminster to continue to make decisions that jeopardise Scottish interests, be they maritime or otherwise. I will put the situation in perspective. Scotland has 60 per cent of the UK’s coastline, but the figures in the second consultation document indicate that only 69 of the 324 staff will be based in Scotland. I reckon that that is just over 20 per cent, which speaks for itself. The UK leadership has proved to be insensitive, confused in its approach to modernisation and ineffective in addressing the coastguard provisions that need to be in place to ensure truly safe maritime activity in the 21st century. The decision to close Fife Ness is yet another blow to my constituency, North East Fife, which is still coming to terms with the closure of RAF Leuchars and the continued uncertainty about the timetable for the Army’s arrival. Once again, the coalition Government has proved itself to be a Government that does not listen—even to its own supporters, such as my namesake Ming Campbell. In July, he asked: “Forth is a station offering value for money and increasingly busy because of the increase in leisure and commercial traffic—why on earth should it be a candidate for closure?” Why on earth, indeed? I deeply regret the decision that has been made and I hope that the Scottish Government will continue to press the case for reversing it. In any event, I hope that the Scottish Government will press for greater clarity on the timetable for closure and continue to press the case for devolving maritime safety.

Given that the United Kingdom Government has confirmed that full details of implementation of the basing review will not now emerge until April 2012 and in view of the disquiet that the delay is causing the community in Leuchars, what representations is the Scottish Government making to the UK Government?

The motion states: “That the Parliament recognises the very valuable contribution that the public sector makes to the economy and society”. It goes on to say that “there is an urgent need for reform”, and that the Parliament believes “that the proposed reforms will ease the burden on taxpayers”. Let us get it right—public workers are taxpayers, too, and in very large numbers. They contribute directly to the Treasury through taxation and, on top of that, provide the staffing in schools, hospitals and the transport system, among other services, that enable the public sector to carry out its activities. Those same public sector workers and others will suffer as a result of the proposals. We all know what the reaction has been to the proposals. I welcome the fact that Danny Alexander has accepted the need for concessions, even if no members of his party are present in the chamber. Those concessions include the proposal that employees who are within 10 years of retirement will have no changes made to their anticipated benefits. It is right not to penalise those who are least able to change their pension planning but, even among that group of people, there are widespread concerns about the UK Government’s perceived divide-and-rule strategy. We should remember that the average local government pension is less than £5,000 a year. The average pension for female NHS workers is only £5,000 a year, but the median pension for women is much less than that. Although teachers, firemen and police do better than that, they are a relatively small percentage of the total number of people in public pension schemes. Half of all women pensioners who have worked in the NHS get a pension of less than £3,500 a year. That does not strike me as largesse or excessive. We should also remember the impact of the change in indexation for inflation from the RPI to the CPI.

Sorry, but I have only four minutes. A Government that spends money on a properly funded pension scheme for its public workers is simply recognising its responsibilities. That must be our aim. There is a lot of merit in Lord Hutton’s proposals but, whatever the merits, given the record fuel prices, VAT rises and high inflation, now is not the time to penalise ordinary workers. We believe that the proposals are another example of the poorly thought out deficit reduction plan. As the cabinet secretary said, we know the consequence of the Scottish Government failing to introduce the planned increased contributions in the NHS, fire, police and teachers schemes. We must continue the dialogue and press the UK Government for a change in policy. In the absence of that, there is no alternative. However, the fight should be not with the Scottish Government but with the UK Government. The NHS pension scheme was reorganised in 2008 and, in the short term, it has a surplus of contributions over benefits paid out. As Marco Biagi alluded to and as the British Medical Association suggests, the contributions to the scheme currently exceed the benefits that are paid out by £2 billion a year. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that increasing contributions amounts to a deficit reduction mechanism above all else. As the BMA and others have said, there is a risk that implementing the proposals will cause large numbers of folk to walk away from their public sector pension schemes, which would leave the schemes worse off than before. The Tories have raised concerns about people in private pension schemes. In the current financial climate, we must accept that few of those schemes are prospering and annuity rates continue to fall. However, the answer to that dilemma is not to penalise the public sector at this difficult time for ordinary folk. As the Scottish Trades Union Congress has said, nothing in the Government proposals will improve the situation of those in private schemes. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s suggestion about continued dialogue, and I urge members to support his amendment.

What discussions is the Scottish Government having with the Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust to assist 18 to 25-year-olds to set up their own businesses?

I welcome the committee’s report. It seems a long time since stage 1, when most members accepted that there is a problem that needs to be addressed through legislation. However, we are where we are. Some critics say that the existing legislation means that there is no need for the bill. For example, in its evidence to the committee, the Law Society took the view that section 1 of the bill does not improve the common-law offence of breach of the peace, which, as we now understand it, requires a public element. The Law Society believes that breach of the peace, together with section 38 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, which was passed to deal with situations in which there is no public element, should be sufficient. Although I do not doubt that there is an overlap—common-law breach of the peace and the offence in section 1 proceed on the basis that they are judged by the effect of the accused’s behaviour on others—there are differences. For example, section 38 of the 2010 act also requires intention, and a defence could be that the accused did not intend to use threatening and abusive behaviour. Also, section 38 does not make a link to the likelihood of inciting public disorder. In addition to the issue of intention, as the Lord Advocate says, whether behaviour is likely to cause fear or alarm to a reasonable person is an objective test, and evidence of actual fear and alarm is necessary. That introduces hurdles that are not part of section 1 of the bill. Therefore, although it may be true that section 38 of the 2010 act and the common-law offence of breach of the peace together cover the majority of situations that section 1 may be seen to address, it is wrong to assume that they cover all situations. I am happy to accept the Lord Advocate’s comments in that respect. When James Kelly recalled the Lord Advocate’s appearance before the Justice Committee, at which he commented on what songs might or might not be caught by the bill, Mr Kelly did not mention two words that were in the Lord Advocate’s speech: “circumstances” and “context”. Those two words are also in the Lord Advocate’s guidelines, if Mr Kelly cares to read them. Even if I am wrong—even if the Lord Advocate is wrong—and the critics are right that section 1 adds nothing to the existing legislation, that takes no account of the transformational aspect of legislation.

I am not sufficiently familiar with the specifics. The minister might provide that information later if the member requires it. I am not sure which convictions he is referring to. As the Lord Advocate said: “Legislation can be transformational. ... it can change society’s behaviour and its attitude towards behaviour, and that should never be overlooked.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 20 September 2011; c 309.] As Dr Kay Goodall said in her written evidence: “The decision to create new legislation, even where it overlaps with existing law, can be justified. Creating specific named offences can aid public discussion and encourage public support. Doing this also makes it easier in practice to monitor reporting, recording, prosecution and conviction of the offences.”

I would like to press on. Given the Lord Advocate’s comments this week on data capture and, in particular, his answer that under the current law it is not possible to capture the specific type of conduct that is libelled in a breach of the peace case or under section 38 of the 2010 act unless it is specifically libelled, Dr Goodall’s comments have some resonance. The Church of Scotland rightly said: “Law works at its best when the majority of the population think that it represents a collective will”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 22 June 2011; c 82.] Let us remember the opinion poll that was taken in September: 89 per cent of Scots believe that sectarianism is unacceptable in Scottish football and 91 per cent agree that further action is necessary.

No, I would like to press on. If we were to abandon the bill now, as Opposition members seem to think that we should, that would send the wrong message to Scottish society. I welcome the Government’s intention to consult on extending the protected categories to include age and gender, which are the missing protected categories from the Equality Act 2010. I also welcome the Government’s commitment to amend the provisions on travel to and from football matches and to clarify provisions on matches. I share the committee’s concerns about the impact that the catch-all test in section 1(2)(e) might have on freedom of expression and speech under the European convention, but I am glad to note that the Scottish Human Rights Commission is continuing discussions with the Government on that section. On songs and chants in support of terrorism and terrorist organisations, I note again the Government’s response that such songs and chants, which are offensive to any reasonable person, should be caught by the bill if they are likely to incite public disorder. The Government has said that it recognises the need to assist the public in understanding the scope of the offence and will seek to clarify it in a variety of ways. That is an important part of the education process. We need to press on with that if we are to go forward. I am also pleased that the Government has some evidence of self-regulation by football crowds. Long may that continue. In an ideal world, the committee could have taken evidence on the operation of section 38 of the 2010 act in relation to the proposed offence in section 5. In any event, however, we know that section 38 is not specifically directed at incitement to religious hatred and, unlike the situation south of the border, we currently do not have such legislation. I am pleased by the Government’s acceptance of the need for a specific, declaratory section on freedom of expression. It is a sensible move. We need to make it clear that freedom of expression is not under threat. Legislation is only part of the answer, but let us try to work together to make a better bill rather than abandon it altogether.

I declare an interest as a member of the Faculty of Advocates. I welcome the findings of Lord McCluskey’s further report as part of the on-going debate about the UK Supreme Court and its relationship with the High Court of Justiciary. However, we should remind ourselves that the High Court of Justiciary’s position as the final court for determining criminal justice in Scotland was reaffirmed in section 124 of the principal piece of legislation on criminal procedure in Scotland, which was passed by the UK Parliament as recently as 1995. As a member of the SNP, I would prefer Scotland to be a signatory to the ECHR with its own supreme court. Alas, that is not the situation we find ourselves in. Much of the debate concerns the provisions of section 57 of the Scotland Act 1998, in particular subsection (2) and the assessment of whether the Lord Advocate in his acts has acted in a way that is incompatible with convention rights. From the passage of the Scotland Act 1998, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council has been required to exercise a devolution jurisdiction, and the Lord Advocate has been required to act in a convention-compliant way, subject to the limited exceptions in section 57(3). In practice, matters have become interrelated and confused. It is accepted by the UK Government, as well as the Scottish Government, that section 57 needs to be changed, and provisions to amend it are in the current Scotland Bill. However, although clause 17 of that bill removes the devolution issue label from acts and failures to act by the Lord Advocate, it talks about them instead as convention issues. In Lord McCluskey’s view, that simply changes the paperwork and not the substance. I find it hard to argue with his view. Lord McCluskey believes that there ought to be parity between the High Court of Justiciary and the English courts with regard to appeals, and he recommends that only cases that raise a point of general public importance certified by the High Court should end up at the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court in England can act as a final court of criminal appeal, but that has never been the position in Scotland. I will quote from paragraph 37 of Lord McCluskey’s final report: “When the Human Rights Act was passed in 1998, the decision was implicitly taken that certification, required in most criminal proceedings, was still to be required in English cases even when the issue in the proposed appeal was one of compatibility with convention rights.” If that is the practice in England, it should be so in Scotland too. As the cabinet secretary said, the Lord President has this week commended the proposal that the High Court should be brought into line with the criminal division of the Court of Appeal in England and the Court of Appeal of Northern Ireland by the requirement of certification. That surely must carry some weight. I turn to the recommendation that “the Supreme Court should be limited to declaring whether or not there has been a breach of a Convention right and, if there has been, to saying why this is so.” I agree with that proposal. The human rights of the accused should be the same in convention terms, be they in Edinburgh or Exeter, even if the practices and procedures of criminal law in those jurisdictions differ. As the Scottish Law Commission said in October 2010: “There is no more reason why a particular feature of Scots criminal law need be the same as any feature of English criminal law in order to comply with the requirements of the Convention as there is that any feature of either system should be the same as a feature of Russian law to achieve that purpose.” There are reservations in the legal profession about the proposals, not least from the Law Society of Scotland. It opposes the idea of mandatory certification by the High Court of issues of general public importance before a case may proceed to the Supreme Court: “Requiring a certificate of public importance could raise the situation where some people are restricted from appealing because the contravention of their human rights does not meet that test and this, we feel, could restrict access to justice.” That argument has an attraction—we should avoid a hierarchy of rights—but I am not sure how many cases would be affected in practice and, moreover, it risks putting us out of step with the rest of the UK. If there is a need to review the nature of the test, it should be addressed across all jurisdictions in the UK. I turn to the question whether the Supreme Court should be able to hear appeals where an appeal was refused by the High Court. It is important to bear it in mind that Lord McCluskey is actually saying that the Supreme Court should have the power to grant or refuse leave but that it should have no power to consider granting leave unless a certificate that the matter is of general public importance has been granted by the High Court. If the Supreme Court has an unfettered jurisdiction to hear appeals, inevitably its position is as the final arbiter in the system, which has the potential—I use the word advisedly—to damage the integrity of the Scottish criminal justice system. In the desire to allow the Supreme Court to have such an unfettered right, there is among some people an inherent criticism of some recent High Court decisions. The answer to that is not to imply that the Supreme Court knows better but to ensure that convention issues remain at the forefront of judicial culture, tradition and training in Scotland’s courts. However, even as a fully independent nation, we should never be afraid to learn from other jurisdictions while respecting our own traditions. Finally, I turn to the recommendation to refer devolution issues to the Supreme Court when they raise issues of compatibility. I agree that that is a good proposal. I am glad that the cabinet secretary accepts that. As I recall, that was one of the criticisms of Justice Scotland in a briefing at the time of Lord McCluskey’s first report. I welcome the report.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how much farmland is leased to Forestry Commission Scotland. (S4O-00220)

How far does the minister believe that land leased to Forestry Commission Scotland will go towards meeting the planting target of 10,000 hectares a year?

I welcome the debate. Historically, mental health was often thought of as the Cinderella of the health service. I hope that those days are gone for good, but mental health needs to be kept at the forefront of health policy. We need to recognise that it concerns all of us—young and old; rich and poor; men and women. Our nation has been recognised by other countries and the World Health Organization for its work, but there is still much that can be achieved to ensure that Scots are able to lead fulfilling and positive lives. Members should welcome the Scottish Government’s consultation document, which builds on the progress that has been made. However, there is no room for complacency. The strategy identifies four priorities, one of which is improving access to psychological therapies. As we are all aware, depression can strike anyone. I do not want to get hung up about the statistics for the prescription of antidepressants, but I agree with others that the search for alternatives to drugs must remain a priority. I welcome the target of an 18-week referral period for psychological therapy treatments from December 2014, but wish, of course, that that target could be improved. Unless we can take significant strides in talking therapies, we will find it difficult to reduce prescriptions for antidepressants. To do so, we need more trained counsellors and psychologists, or at the very least to make better use of existing staff. If preventative spending is to mean anything, surely that is one area in which it could have an effect. Mental illness has social and economic impacts, of course. Employment improves self-esteem; unemployment may seriously damage a person’s mental health. We must create a society in which people are able to create self-worth. Mental illness is detrimental to personal income, and the ability of ill persons as well as their carers to work is likely to be substantially impaired. However, it would be a simplification to say that only our economy is hit by mental illness; as Mary Scanlon said, society is also harmed. It is revealing that the overwhelming majority of the prison population have some form of mental disorder. We must recognise the role that carers play. As the carers strategy indicates, we need to continue to recognise the importance of families and carers, balancing the need to inform, consult and support them with an individual’s basic human right to confidentiality about their illness or treatment. Many speakers have talked about the issue of stigma. Well-publicised statistics from the see me Scotland campaign show how wide-ranging mental health problems are. Research last year showed that those with mental health issues felt that most negative attitudes came from friends and family. Such a perception alienates the vulnerable from those whom they need the most. Acceptance boosts self-esteem and worth and reduces readmission rates for those with mental illnesses and aids faster recovery. Progress is being made in the reduction of stigma, but we should not forget that prejudices have been acquired over a long period of time and will not disappear overnight. Continuing effort is required, and I welcome the NUS Scotland paper in that regard. One of the other key priority areas of the strategy is the prevention of suicide. In Fife, fully 5 per cent of the budget that was delivered through the choose life project was dedicated to raising awareness of suicide prevention services. A number of projects were supported, such as Penumbra’s early response self-harm project and the Link adolescent befriending project. We need to continue to support such projects. Simply giving people the opportunity to speak to someone who will listen is essential to making people feel that they are supported and cared for. That is particularly important, given that the choose life survey for NHS Scotland showed that 46 per cent of Scots would not directly ask someone whether they were feeling suicidal. We need to encourage a culture in which people have the ability to call out for help and are able to find it. A Scottish Government research document that was published in 2008 highlighted the fact that sport can reduce suicidal tendencies in adolescents and that older generations benefited from supportive families and close community links. For those who have become isolated or simply feel isolated, funding for groups that help them to connect and are willing to listen without judgment is essential. We should not forget the importance of peer support in mental health recovery. We might wish to consider the extent to which peer groups can provide a role as independent advocates. I might have missed it, but I did not see any reference to peer support in the consultation document. We need to exercise care when returning long-term patients to the community. A few weeks ago, I was at a hospital in my constituency where preparations are in hand to return about 45 long-stay patients to the community. However, that represents an ordeal for many of those patients. The comfort of the institution has helped them to recover, but the fear of the wider world could potentially have a detrimental effect on their mental health, if not handled sensitively. On dementia, it is right that implementation of the strategy remains a priority—with our rapidly ageing population, that surely goes without saying. I welcome the strategy’s recognition of the importance of the role of families and carers in supporting people with dementia and their involvement in decision making. We need to ensure that the promoting excellence programme is continued right across the care setting. On children and adolescents, we must continue to recognise the importance of good mental health. During a recent visit to the Playfield institute in my constituency, I was struck by the valuable work that is going on to train staff to deal with mental health issues that affect children and adolescents. I very much welcome the additional spending in this area in recent times, and the 33 per cent increase in the size of specialist mental health services. We need to build on that. Again, money spent at this stage can really be viewed as preventative spending. I commend the consultation document to the Parliament.

During the recess, I had the opportunity to visit the Scottish fisheries museum in my constituency. I was struck not only by the enormous size of the museum but by the sense of an industry that has had to adapt again and again to survive. Fisheries were not and are not an industry for the faint-hearted, especially given that the common fisheries policy has failed Scotland’s fisheries and the marine habitats that provide fishing opportunities. Scotland’s marine fisheries are an important resource. As we know, about £430 million-worth of fish was landed in Scotland last year and the Scottish fleet employs more than 5,200 fishermen. Direct employment in catching, aquaculture and processing amounts to 19,800, which is just shy of 1 per cent of all Scottish employment. If one considers indirect economic activity, the total number of jobs that depend on those sectors rises to 48,000, which is equivalent to about 50 per cent of the direct and indirect employment that depended on North Sea oil at its peak, so the industry is big and important for Scotland and is a key provider of goods and employment. We have a reputation for high-quality seafood that is increasing Scottish fish sales abroad. Our seas present us with a multitude of valuable opportunities. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to keep up efforts to secure Marine Stewardship Council sustainability status for more Scottish stocks. Fishing is important to Scotland but, as the cabinet secretary said, we as a country have no separate voice at the negotiating table in Brussels and no automatic or statutory right to be part of the UK delegation that attends relevant European Union meetings. This summer, in papers that proposed amendments to the Scotland Bill, the Scottish Government said that it wanted that position to be changed. The Parliament should support that proposal. The Opposition parties want us “to work closely with the UK Government”, but working closely depends on mutual respect, which would be enhanced if those parties accepted the automatic right to be part of the delegation. Unfortunately, Scotland’s fishing stocks are a sorely mismanaged resource. Since 1964, North Sea cod stocks have reduced by 59 per cent and haddock numbers have fallen by 57 per cent. A greater abundance of fish makes fishing effort easier. Good conservation is good for our fishermen. The management framework that the common fisheries policy provides has failed. Our fish stocks and the economic opportunities that they provide are under threat. The collapse of fish stocks would represent an unacceptable loss of opportunity for our nation’s future generations. The common fisheries policy has failed because it is removed from the communities on which it impinges. The absurdity of fish discards that are equivalent to 25 to 33 per cent of fish that are landed has stripped away all the CFP’s credibility as a means to conserve our marine stocks. The fundamental fact is that fishing communities need to be given more responsibility for their local resources. Despite any proposed safeguards, selling transferable fishing quotas on an international market might only make bad management worse. In extreme situations, Scottish fishermen might sell their quotas because of poverty, which could lead to a decline in already hard-pressed fishing ports. Our fishermen will respond most quickly to a conservation mechanism that involves them and motivates them to adhere to and support the policy. The policy’s obvious objectives are to ensure that there are healthy fish stocks that provide fishermen with a secure occupation and—more than that—that there is an abundance of fish, which will ensure that fishing effort is better rewarded than it is for pursuing the skeletal remains of the shoals that once swam in the North Sea. It is obvious that the fishing industry desires stocks that are healthy enough to provide a reliable catch in the future. Fisheries science has been discredited by association with the quota system. Throwing good-quality fish overboard does nothing to preserve stocks but might be the practical result of decisions by policy makers that ignore the best scientific evidence. The scientists who provide us with the ability to comprehend what goes on under the waves must be listened to. The infamous Grand Banks saga in Newfoundland provides a clear enough example of what can go wrong when science is ignored. However, it is not only scientists who can deliver useful evidence that can help to conserve fish stocks. Scottish initiatives such as real-time closures represent positive steps forward. Passing to fishermen responsibility for avoiding spawning cod, for example, makes the industry responsible for its future. Taking spawning fish out of the water reduces population recruitment. Instead of focusing, as previous conservation measures have, on net size, which may not be reducing mortality in the smaller fish that should pass through nets unharmed, and instead of focusing on species quotas, we should focus on preserving breeding fish. Fishermen need to be involved in the conservation process. Putting power in the hands of those who need it—those who rely on fish stocks—is a form of subsidiarity that will achieve results. Regionalism is a good concept, but the EU should set broad principles and leave the management decisions to the fishing nations. Fishing policy should not be about quantifying natural resources into time quotas, standardised nets and graphs that look good in a Brussels office. Cod are not standardised lengths. We need to allow cod the space to live and fishermen the time to make a living. However disagreeable we think discards might be, we should avoid the conclusion that a blanket ban is the answer. We need to heed the RSPB’s prevention-rather-than-cure advice, particularly in a mixed fishing environment, and we must engage with the industry on the issue. We need to encourage initiatives such as the conservation credit scheme and the catch quota scheme. We need a policy that is fit for the 21st century and the Scottish Government should be encouraged to develop that. The motion should be supported.

The cabinet secretary has largely covered the issue that I was going to raise in my supplementary question. I wanted to draw attention to the fact that eligibility for the scheme is based on status at 31 March 1999, which has caused difficulties for some charities. When he reviews the scheme, will the cabinet secretary ensure that Scottish Water takes account of dates?

The minister will be aware that the decision by the Ministry of Defence to close RAF Leuchars could have a detrimental effect on the Fife economy and jobs. Does he agree that Fife will require investment to ensure that it does not suffer too greatly at the hands of a decision made by the coalition Government at Westminster?

1. To ask the Scottish Government on what date it expects to receive a report on the independent review of college governance. (S4O-00154)

Given the fact that some Scottish colleges are already in discussion regarding possible merger, would the cabinet secretary advise that such discussions be delayed to take account of the recommendations of Professor Griggs’s review and the pre-legislative paper on post-16 education reform?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the proposed closure of RAF Leuchars and its replacement with an Army base, in light of the impact of these proposals on the local community. (S4O-00118)

Will the Scottish Government undertake to press the UK Government for details of the infrastructure expenditure it proposes to ensure an efficient and appropriate transition between RAF Leuchars and the new Army base?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. On local accountability, I welcome the fact that more councillors will have a formal role in the governance of the service than at present, but will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that, after consulting others, we will move towards the most consensual model of local accountability possible?

First of all, I, like others, wish to acknowledge the substantial contribution made to Scots law by the late Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, which is in my constituency. I am a member of the Faculty of Advocates; in accordance with its traditions, Lord Rodger was my great-grandfather and I knew him as a man to whom detail was very important. He had a distinguished career as an advocate and then as Lord Advocate, and from being a judge in the Court of Session, he had a meteoric rise to become Lord President and Lord Justice General. Following that, he became a law lord in the House of Lords and latterly a Supreme Court judge. Whatever our reservations about the Supreme Court’s role, we should acknowledge Lord Rodger’s substantial contribution to that court and to law in general. Of course, Lord Rodger sat on the Cadder case. In the Cadder judgement, I was particularly struck by his analysis of the Thomson committee report and the history of the passage of sections 2 and 3 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980, which was consolidated in the detention provisions of sections 14 and 15 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which have caused such difficulties. His analysis was that the thrust of the Thomson committee’s view in the 1970s was that the public interest in the detection and suppression of crime outweighed any disadvantage to the detainee in being questioned in the absence of a solicitor. He believed that that was no longer compatible with European human rights law jurisprudence. The High Court of Justiciary looked at the same issue in HMA v McLean and drew an entirely different conclusion as to compatibility with the European convention on human rights following the Salduz judgment. Times move on. Human rights law jurisprudence is not static. As human rights lawyers know, the European convention on human rights is a living instrument. Although article 6 of the convention—the fair trial provision—makes no specific reference to the right not to incriminate oneself, that should now be considered an essential element of it. Lord Rodger suggested that there was not the remotest chance that, had the European Court of Human Rights heard the argument, it would have accepted that, despite the absence of the safeguard of legal representation during interview, the detention procedure would somehow be considered to be compatible with article 6 because of the other protections of Scots law. That view is almost certainly correct, albeit that it is far easier to say that with the benefit of hindsight. That argument was of course never tested in Europe. The European Court of Human Rights is not a criminal appeal court; it exists to ensure that minimum standards on human rights apply across its signatory countries. It does not try cases. Its primary impact is providing just satisfaction to a complainer where it finds that there has been violation of the convention. It is for the contracting state to bring about appropriate changes to domestic law that has given rise to the violation. Accordingly, the European Court of Human Rights differs from the Supreme Court as it now exists in the UK. Notwithstanding the eminence of its members, that court has played a much greater role in Scottish criminal law than was ever realistically envisaged at the time of the passage of the Scotland Act 1998. We have no written constitution in the UK. Had we had one, the provisions of the treaty of union in relation to criminal law could not perhaps have been so easily disregarded. In their submission to the Advocate General for Scotland’s review of devolution issues and the acts of the Lord Advocate, the Scottish judiciary stated: “By a series of incremental decisions … a major constitutional change has already been brought about in relation to the existence of a right of appeal from a decision of the Criminal Appeal Court to the Supreme Court, and that without the public consultation and careful consideration that such a major constitutional change might have been expected to receive. We cannot regard that as a satisfactory situation.” Moreover, in criminal matters, the Supreme Court clearly does not operate on an equal footing in the different criminal jurisdictions of the United Kingdom. In that respect, the recommendation of the review group headed by Lord McCluskey that only cases certified by the High Court of Justiciary as raising a point of general public importance proceed to the Supreme Court is to be welcomed. There really should be no basis for allowing a second bite at the cherry for ordinary criminal appeals. It is also inappropriate that, in relation to its fair trial review, the Supreme Court has the power to quash convictions, whereas the High Court may quash a conviction only on the basis of a miscarriage of justice. That issue needs further examination. A central issue remains: how do we ensure that Scotland provides the level of human rights protection to its citizens that the convention requires? Although the expert group under Lord McCluskey agreed that the existing statutory basis for bringing human rights issues to the Supreme Court is seriously flawed, it does not suggest an alternative to Supreme Court jurisdiction. Kezia Dugdale said that the group suggested in its report that the Supreme Court’s role may be to define and express the law applicable in human rights terms and then send the case back to the High Court of Justiciary to apply the law. As Lord McCluskey infers, that would also be an application in practice of the margin of appreciation principle that is central to European human rights law, which allows states—in this case, that ought to be Scotland—to apply the law in the context of their separate legal systems. Of course, that is not what we in my party would ideally prefer, but it requires further examination, which I believe the expert group indicated that it intends to carry out. I look forward to its further report in due course. I urge members to support the motion.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Scottish Water in connection with coastal pollution in Fife. (S4O-00086)

The minister should be aware that there is a Scottish Water waste pumping station adjacent to the shore in Pittenweem, which is designed to transport waste to the treatment works at Pathhead. Overflow pipes from that facility are designed to carry material into the sea during those periods when the pumping system is over capacity. Given the worsening problems with effluent leakage from those overflow pipes—

—directly on to the beach, will the minister undertake urgent discussions with Scottish Water?

I welcome the bill. Many critics question whether it is necessary. Many commentators have commented that, in the common-law offence of breach of the peace and in section 38 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 in particular, we have sufficient laws, which could be enforced in relation to behaviour such as that under discussion if they were used fully, and that sentencing could also be addressed under current legislation. “So why do we need the bill?” they ask. Let us be clear that existing legislation could be used on many occasions, but it is in the nature of law that offences can be prosecuted in many different ways, and it is for the police and the Crown to consider how best to proceed when alternatives are available. In addition, the same argument—that the same ends could be achieved under existing law—was made during the passage of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Act 2009 and rejected then. There is no doubt that the bill fulfils a need. It represents an opportunity to send a clear message to Scotland that behaviour of the sort that it covers is not acceptable in modern-day Scotland. It makes that abundantly clear to all who attend football matches and I believe that it will encourage enforcement. However, it is not an all-encompassing bill and nor should it seek to be one. I am heartened by the support of the police representatives in that respect, by the comments of the SFA chief executive, Stewart Regan, and by the willingness of the football clubs’ representatives to embrace the measure in an undoubtedly short timescale. However, that means, of course, that there is a responsibility on the Parliament to ensure that the bill is well crafted. In that respect, I welcome the Law Society of Scotland’s comments on the definition of regulated football matches. I also welcome the Equality Network’s thoughtful contribution to the debate and its support for the section 1 offence. I also share its concerns on the narrow remit of section 5(5) which, in contrast to section 1, is restricted to religious hatred only. However, the clear intention of the bill is not to impact on proselytising or anything of an artistic nature. Therefore, on the defences that would be available under section 5(6), it is arguable that less is better. I am not currently persuaded that the adoption of an English-style freedom of expression defence would improve matters. We have heard a little about deficiencies in the existing law on breach of the peace. It is clear that paragraph 21 of the policy memorandum does not adequately state the common-law position. However, it is equally clear from the decision in HMA v Harris that the absence of a public element would be fatal to a prosecution for breach of the peace. Addressing that is at least part of the intention of section 1(5)(b).

No, I do not agree with that point. Critics of the bill have also made a great deal of play about what they say is a lack of clarity in a bill that may outlaw the singing of the national anthem. I fully support the minister and the Lord Advocate when they draw attention to the fact that, in considering whether there is any offensive act, account must be taken of the facts, character and context. No legislation can be looked at in a vacuum. I also fully support the fact that measures on offensive legislation will cover not only fans’ behaviour but that of players and officials. That is an important aspect that needs to be emphasised.

The minister might care to deal with that matter in her closing speech. We should also accept that the bill is no silver bullet. We cannot change a culture overnight.

No. Additional measures—such as stricter policing of licensed premises on the day of matches, tougher policing, prosecution of e-hate crime and tackling sectarianism among offenders—are important. I also hope that the joint action group can build on its work and its six-point joint action plan, which was announced in May. Perhaps inevitably, much of the comment on the bill has focused on the speed of its progress, but we have a problem that needs to be sorted and we should not shy away from dealing with it. Sunset clauses may have attractions, but in my view it will be necessary to keep the legislation under review for longer than it would be prudent to use a sunset clause.

We have work to do on the bill, but let us support it and get to work on helping to build a better society.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with First ScotRail regarding the provision of commuter rail services in Fife. (S4O-00023)

The minister will be aware that the CrossCountry Trains daily 7.35 service between Dundee and Edinburgh was withdrawn from 23 May, which has resulted in overcrowding on southbound ScotRail services—especially the one that calls at Leuchars at 7.20 and Cupar at 7.28—and has created a gap of more than an hour in the timetable of trains to Edinburgh. Will the minister intercede with the management of CrossCountry Trains, perhaps through Transport Scotland, with a view to having them reconsider the withdrawal of the 7.35 service?

I begin by acknowledging the contribution of my predecessor, Iain Smith, who served in the Parliament for 12 years and was latterly convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. Iain invested a lot of his adult life in politics and was formerly a councillor in Fife. I have no doubt that losing his seat was a big wrench to him, so I take the opportunity to wish him all the best for the future. It is a great privilege for me to have the opportunity to represent North East Fife in the Scottish Parliament. Not only is it a magnificent part of Scotland, it contains the town that shares its name with Scotland’s patron saint—although, if legend is correct, only a small part of St Andrew’s bones reached the shores of Fife. In St Andrew, we share a patron saint with many other countries—an early recognition, perhaps, of Scotland’s ability to share with others. However, it is certain that St Andrew was a fisherman, like many of North East Fife’s inhabitants over the centuries. Within North East Fife, the east neuk retains that fishing link, although Ainster today is a far cry from the fishing village that it was in my grandmother’s day. Of course, North East Fife is much more than the east neuk or St Andrews. It has small towns and villages that make it a beautiful part of Scotland and give pleasure and enjoyment to many visitors from the rest of Scotland and the wider world. However, the area is not immune to crime and antisocial behaviour, which is the scourge of too much of modern Scotland. I turn now to the position of the victim. The first Scottish Government after devolution, under the then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, produced a Scottish strategy for victims, drawing on the United Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power. With the support of the major agencies of the criminal justice system, as well as Victim Support Scotland, the strategy was born. That strategy is under review by the Scottish Government, and I would be grateful for clarification from the cabinet secretary as to the current position in relation to the review. In 2001, the Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted the framework decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings, with the aim of setting out minimum standards for the treatment of victims of crime. That was followed in 2004 by the adoption of a directive relating to compensation for crime victims. The directive requires that crime victims should be entitled to fair and appropriate compensation for the injuries suffered, regardless of where in the EU the crime was committed, but the detail has been left to member states. It is my understanding that the European Commissioner for Justice, Fundamental Rights and Citizenship, Viviane Reding, is considering new laws requiring victim support systems in every EU country. I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could clarify whether any approach has been made in that regard, even if we believe that our own victim support systems would satisfy any Europe-wide norm. In Scotland as elsewhere, an order for compensation that is made by the courts is only a first step. An offender often lacks money or assets to pay. Moreover, sums are largely compensation for personal injury, rather than for economic loss. Even under the criminal injuries compensation scheme, a claim for loss of earnings will not be entertained for the first 28 weeks of absence. The compensation that is ordered is inevitably less generous, therefore, than what is available through the civil courts. As a matter of principle, should we not at least give consideration to ensuring that, if we are to have a victims’ rights bill, compensation levels reflect the loss to victims more appropriately? That could have wider implications but, if we are to pay more than lip service to victims’ rights at a time when there is a great deal of talk about prisoners’ rights, that might go some way to redressing the balance. The previous SNP Government passed legislation to ensure that compensation orders were more automatic and flexible and were updated regularly to reflect the means of the offender. However, we need to monitor the effectiveness of such orders in practice. For the victims of crime, the crime itself is unlikely to be easily forgotten, so let us not make the process of obtaining compensation an additional ordeal. Since April 2009, victims of crime in solemn cases only have been able to choose to make a statement telling the court of the physical, emotional, financial and medical impact that the crime has had on them. That is given after a verdict of guilt is returned, but before the sentence is given. It is designed to give the victim a voice but not to influence the sentence. Notwithstanding earlier pilot projects, it is probably too early to assess the effectiveness of such statements. At the pilot scheme stage, they were not often used. Before adding any extra teeth to victim statements, the Government would be wise to carry out a detailed assessment of their operation. It is a difficult balancing act between the public interest in the prosecution and sentencing of crime, and the desire on the part of the victim for justice as they see it. A certain degree of caution is required. We should continue to support victim notification schemes, so that parole boards can take account of the comments of victims before releasing offenders. The previous SNP Government reduced the threshold for notification purposes for prisoners serving sentences of 18 months or more. Again, the effectiveness of the policy should be kept under review. We should ensure that victim support organisations such as Victim Support Scotland and Rape Crisis Scotland are properly funded. We should avoid any temptation to reduce funding because of the more strained financial times that we live in. On the proceeds of crime, I very much welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to negotiating with the UK Government to remove the £30 million per year limit. The cash that is recovered is going into the cashback for communities scheme, which invests in sporting and cultural projects for young people, such as the Cupar youth cafe, the Cupar racquetball club and the St Andrews racquetball club—where I hope to be on Friday. Those are worthwhile causes indeed.

6. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had with the Secretary of State for Defence regarding the future of Scotland’s airbases, given the potential impact on jobs in the relevant local communities. (S4F-00039)

I am sure that the First Minister is fully aware of the remarks made this week by Liam Fox, the Secretary of State for Defence, at the Select Committee on Scottish Affairs, where he admitted that over the past decade substantially bigger reductions were made in military personnel in Scotland, proportionally, than in other parts of the UK. Does the First Minister agree that that supports the case for the UK Government not to close two thirds of Scotland’s airbases?