Like other members, I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate. It is clear that we feel passionately about our citizens having to turn to food banks to eat. Everyone who has spoken in the debate, I think, has said that it is absolutely unacceptable that anyone in a country as prosperous as Scotland should have to rely on food banks and that so many of our citizens are living on inadequate incomes. That concerns all of us, of course, as is evident in the efforts that are made by the providers of food banks, the volunteers who distribute the food and work in the centres, and all the people and organisations that donate to ensure that some of our most vulnerable people get food on the table. A number of members have mentioned that Scotland is a wealthy country. Last week, however, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation published a report that said that living standards fell between 2008-09 and 2011-12, which increased the proportion of people living below the minimum income standard to 21 per cent. The report summary says: “in 2011/12, the proportion of families below the standard rose sharply, as benefit and tax credit cuts started to kick in.” That is a clear indication of the damaging impact of the welfare cuts that are coming from Westminster, which will, it is estimated, reduce benefits in Scotland by more than £4.5 billion in the five years to 2015. Where is that money taken from? It is taken from the very people whom we have been talking about in this debate: workers on low incomes, families, those with long-term illnesses or disabilities, tenants in receipt of housing benefit, and people in the most vulnerable circumstances. They are precisely the people whom society should be helping, not harming. That tells me that we have a failed welfare state in the UK.

I will move on. We have already said a number of things in the white paper, which I will touch on later, about how we would proceed in an independent Scotland but, for me, one thing is clear: we would have a welfare system that looks after those who need it most; that we all have a stake in; and from which we know what to expect when we need it. I might talk a bit more about that later. I am sure that we are all aware of constituents who turn to food banks when they struggle to make ends meet. We should try to understand the issues and help as much as we can. That is why the Scottish Government commissioned research on the nature of food aid provision in Scotland, which Nigel Don referred to earlier. That research was published in December. We now understand more about the extent of emergency food aid in Scotland and that welfare and benefit changes are a major cause of the substantial increase in the use of food banks. As members have probably heard, I met Lord Freud last week. At that meeting, I took the opportunity to give him a copy of our research and to inform him of some of the damaging impacts of the Government’s welfare reform programme on our citizens in Scotland. Meanwhile, the UK Government’s research on food banks remains unpublished by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Perhaps that is why we have no representatives of parties in the UK Government in the chamber today; clearly, they are not as concerned about food banks as others are. We have heard a lot about the cost of living and the low incomes of many people in Scotland. Part of the contract between the people of Scotland and the Scottish Government is our defence and extension of certain core universal services, rights and benefits through the social wage. That includes increasing the provision of free nursery education; freezing council tax; paying the living wage to all staff covered by the public sector pay policy and encouraging other employers to follow our lead; and, from January, extending to families throughout the country the entitlement to free school meals for all children in primaries 1 to 3, which will be worth around £330 a year for each child who takes those meals up. We have also made efforts to mitigate some of the UK Government’s welfare reform proposals.

As I said earlier in the statement, we have a contract with all the people of Scotland. By freezing council tax, paying the living wage and having free prescriptions, we are helping families; we are not leaving people out. That is the contract that we have with the citizens of this country. We have made efforts to mitigate some of the worst impacts of welfare reform policies. We have provided £40 million to protect people from the 10 per cent cut in council tax benefit and £7 million for welfare mitigation. We have invested £9.2 million in the Scottish welfare fund. A lot of questions have been raised about the Scottish welfare fund and I absolutely agree with members. The fund was set up to ensure that money got out to the people who needed it most. It is a new fund; we know that councils have never had to operate it before. As was mentioned, early on, take-up of the fund was not as we anticipated. However, as I announced in the chamber last week in answer to a question, our informal feedback from local authorities and informal statistics to December show that since we introduced easier access to the fund and changed some of the criteria, we have seen take-up rising much higher. That information has been shared with the Welfare Reform Committee and it shows that the fund will be taken up and is now being used in the way that it should be. People are not directed from the welfare fund to food banks if they would qualify for the welfare fund; it is only if they do not meet the criteria for the fund that a local authority will send them to food banks. If anyone has examples of something different happening, we need to have them. That is about mitigation and, as I have said, we are mitigating the impact of UK Government policies in Scotland. However, mitigation is not enough. In “Scotland’s Future”, our white paper on independence, we set out why we believe that there is a better way for social security in Scotland. I appreciate that we all share the same views on food banks, but I feel strongly that the way forward for Scotland is to be an independent country and to ensure that we have a social security system in which we all have a stake—one that we contribute to when we can and, in turn, are able to access when we need to. It needs to be fair, transparent and sympathetic to the challenges faced by people, and respectful of personal dignity, equality and human rights. Benefits should not relegate those who cannot undertake paid work to a life of financial uncertainty and poverty. Welfare support needs to support a standard of living that ensures dignity and enables participation in society. I believe passionately that independence would allow the Scottish Parliament to make decisions on welfare; reverse the most damaging of the Westminster changes; ensure that we have a system that better meets Scotland’s circumstances; and allow us to build a fairer and more prosperous country where—as everybody in this chamber agrees—we do not want to see food banks.

The Scottish Government has published a number of documents that provide advice on how to establish a common housing register. They are all available on the Government’s website. I can provide the member with directions to the relevant part of the website.

I am willing to discuss the suggestions that the member has in that regard. I will arrange to meet the member, along with officials, to get the details of what is being proposed. We will then consider the proposal and get back to him.

The Scottish Government has a vision for housing and a plan to increase the supply of affordable housing and housing in the rented housing market. We are already doing that. If the member wants to make any suggestions, we will certainly consider them. We have offered meetings in relation to the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which is currently going through the Parliament, and are willing to discuss housing issues that are raised with us. Certainly, however, we are doing all that we can to increase the supply of affordable housing in Scotland.

All private landlords are required to ensure that homes that they let meet a statutory repairing standard throughout a tenancy. Tenants can apply to the private rented housing panel to force landlords to carry out repairs to meet the standard. The Housing (Scotland) Bill includes measures to improve the quality of private rented housing. Rents in the private sector are set at the market rate.

The member will be aware that, next year, we will consult on energy measures in the private rented sector, so we are taking on board the energy efficiency issue. We are aware of some of the issues that the member has raised about tenancy deposits, fees and premiums. We have clarified those matters. However, during the course of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, we are listening very carefully to stakeholders and members. I am open to listening to any suggestions on how to improve the situation for tenants.

All landlords are registered under the landlord registration scheme. The bill aims to ensure that tougher measures are put in place to enforce that. We have enforcement actions available and we want to make sure that those are used and strengthened. We will have regulations on the registration of letting agents. There will be consultation on the whole sector, including landlords, letting agents and tenants, to produce a meaningful code of conduct. We will target landlords who are not meeting the standards that we want them to meet. We are doing what we can. As I said, we have offered a meeting with members of the Opposition to discuss their concerns as the bill progresses. I hope to continue the discussion with the member then.

The chief statistician has announced that statistics on the Scottish welfare fund, covering the period 1 October to 31 December 2013, will be published at 9.30 am on 15 April 2014. Dates for all Scottish welfare fund statistical publications that are due for release in 2014 are available on the Scottish Government website. Annual statistics on the fund, covering 2013-14, are due for publication on 15 July 2014.

As previously indicated, the statistics up to September will be produced on 11 February. The member asked about the statistics to the end of the year. We have been conducting informal monitoring of the Scottish welfare fund. As the member will be aware, in October we changed the guidance to make it easier for people to access the fund. Since that change, we have seen a noticeable increase in spending in the Scottish welfare fund. The figures are showing about £90 million up to the end of December. The Deputy First Minister will share that information with the Welfare Reform Committee, and I understand that she will be writing to the committee today.

The £220 million help to buy (Scotland) scheme is available across Scotland to assist people who are looking to buy a new-build home. Participation in the scheme is voluntary and house builders, whether large or small, may register and offer houses for sale under the scheme. We currently have more than 100 house builders participating in the scheme, including house builders in two island authorities, and we would encourage all builders to participate.

We recognise the difficulties with some of the house-building schemes in the islands and we are looking at ways in which the Scottish Government can assist further in rural and island communities.

I am pleased to close the debate on behalf of the Scottish Government. Like others, I thank John Finnie for bringing the topic to the chamber for debate and for lodging the motion, which I whole-heartedly support. During the debate, members outlined clearly how the campaign can help. Sometimes, a small amount sets off the chain reaction about which Oxfam is talking and about which we have heard. In her speech, Jackie Baillie talked about how she had seen in her community something that altered the lives of individuals and their families, lifted them out of poverty and had an impact on the wider community. Such programmes in the underdeveloped or developing countries not only change countries and communities but make the world a better place, which is what we all want. Humza Yousaf, the Minister for External Affairs and International Development, would have liked to have been here but he is on a visit to Malawi and Zambia, representing Scotland’s work in those countries and seeing for himself some of the challenges that communities in the developing world face and the work that is being done to help them. During his visit, he will meet the Oxfam country director in Zambia to hear first hand about some of the good work that Oxfam, supported by Scottish Government funding, is doing to support communities in dealing with the impacts of climate change. Oxfam is a key delivery partner for the Scottish Government’s international development and climate justice funds. The project in Zambia is just one of a number of Oxfam initiatives that we are supporting and that are making a real difference to people’s lives in many parts of the world. In Tanzania, Oxfam is receiving £1.3 million of Scottish Government funding to provide food security for farmers through a partnership arrangement with the local Government and private companies. In Pakistan, we are giving Oxfam £350,000 to assist small-scale farmers to improve their productivity, while in Malawi we are providing Oxfam with £400,000 to deliver a project that is focused on addressing the needs of vulnerable women who have been affected by HIV and AIDS. Of course, that is just a flavour of the work that Oxfam does around the world, which is having a huge impact on people’s lives, reducing poverty and fighting inequality wherever they exist. That is work to which Scotland contributes globally, not just through the funding provided by the Scottish Government, but through the contribution of Scottish taxpayers to the UK Government’s development assistance programmes and, of course, through donations and purchases made by people in Oxfam’s 51 shops with 1,000 trained volunteers up and down the country, which members mentioned and on which they commented. Last year, Oxfam celebrated 50 years of working in Scotland and, in that time, it has done a marvellous job in raising awareness among the general public of the inequalities that, sadly, persist in many parts of our world. Oxfam played a crucial role in highlighting the problem of global hunger through last year’s campaign, enough food for everyone if. That influenced the Scottish Government’s decision to give funding to the six development education centres in Scotland that provide training and support for Scottish teachers to equip our young people to become global citizens and be aware of the challenges that our world faces and the role that we can all play in helping to tackle them. The make poverty history campaign in 2005 is another example of how Oxfam has worked with other organisations to help draw attention in Scotland to the issues that face people in the developing world. Oxfam has a track record of dedication and commitment as well as a passion to make a difference to people’s lives throughout the world. I can see that passion reflected in the lift lives for good campaign that it has launched. The campaign rightly highlights the two biggest threats to ending poverty: the growing gap between the richest and the poorest people in the world; and the damage that is caused to poor people by climate change. The Scottish Government takes both of those issues seriously. Right now, our £9 million international development fund is focused on helping some of the poorest people in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia. The “Scotland’s Future” publication sets out clearly what action this Government would take in an independent Scotland to help the world’s poorest people, including commitments to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national income on overseas aid, ensure that all our policies across Government do no harm to countries in the developing world, promote gender equality, and give careful consideration to the question of unjust debts. We also fully support the lift lives for good campaign’s focus on highlighting the issue of climate change. The Scottish Government strongly recognises the voices of those who are in the front line in relation to the impacts of climate change. They are suffering from a changing environment that is causing increasingly erratic weather patterns, crop failures, water shortages and newly spreading diseases. Our world-leading £3 million climate justice fund is a recognition of the injustice of climate change and the fact that those who have done least to cause the problem have been most affected by its impacts. The fund is already helping to mitigate the impacts of climate change for people in Malawi and Zambia and, last October, the First Minister announced a doubling of the climate justice fund, which will provide further support for vulnerable communities in sub-Saharan Africa. The Scottish Government is pleased to support this motion and commends the work of Oxfam in drawing attention to the issues of global poverty and inequality through the campaign. I encourage everyone to get shwopping. I will certainly be doing that. The Government is determined to do what it can to make a difference and I am pleased that, through this motion and today’s debate, the Parliament will encourage the people of Scotland to support Oxfam’s lift lives for good campaign in its aim to make an impact on poverty around the world. Meeting closed at 17:38.

The Scottish Government has provided Scottish councils with £20 million this year and up to £20 million next year for discretionary housing payments to mitigate the impacts of the United Kingdom Government’s bedroom tax. That is the maximum that is permitted under the legal limit set by the UK Government. We have also provided funding of £7.9 million to help front-line advice services to support people who are dealing with the bedroom tax, with £2.5 million being ring fenced for social landlords. We will continue to make the case to the UK Government that concessions should be granted, for example an increase in the Scottish share of discretionary housing payments. However, there is only one solution: the Scottish Parliament should have control over welfare benefits. We could then scrap the bedroom tax altogether.

I absolutely agree. I was absolutely shocked to read David Mundell’s comments. He is a member of the UK party that is in Government in Westminster and which is imposing the bedroom tax on the people of Scotland. He still supports that tax even when he discovers—as he should have a long time ago—the impact that it is having on our poorest people. He then suggests that we should make up for Westminster’s failings from our budget, which it has already cut. However, he does not tell us where that money will come from. One thing that is clear is that any money that we use in mitigation must come out of the devolved settlement, which is for housing, the police and the health service. He shows bare-faced gall. The Scottish Parliament does not have the powers to control welfare spending at the moment; the only way we can do that is to have control of the powers ourselves. That can, as I said, be achieved by voting yes in the referendum.

I have said on more than one occasion that we are mitigating the impact of the bedroom tax to the extent that we can; we have topped up discretionary housing payments to the legal limit. We have made it very clear what our views are on evictions and of separating out a specific group for eviction. However, that is only part of the issue. We now have the suggestion that housing benefit for the under-25s could be removed. It will just not be possible also to mitigate that. The only solution will be to vote yes in the referendum and to get rid of the bedroom tax entirely.

I absolutely agree that the policies are inhumane. Removal of housing benefits from under-25s in Scotland could impact on 20,000 children. It would put more children into poverty, which I am sure none of us here wants. Removal of those benefits from the under-25s would cost £133 million a year. The Scottish Government does not have the money to mitigate the impacts to that extent. The cost of extending the policy also to pensioners would be unthinkable and mitigation would simply not be possible. I absolutely agree that we must deal with the matter head on and bring control over welfare to the Scottish Parliament, where we would stop any further cuts to the benefit system and repeal the bedroom tax altogether.

The position is very clear. We know that Jenny Marra’s party is working with the Tories and that they want to pass the buck to the Scottish Government in order for it to deal with the matter out of the Scottish budget. However, I do not think that David Mundell understands that the Scotland Act 1998 expressly reserves welfare spending related to individuals’ housing costs. It was a Labour Government that put the cap on discretionary housing payments; we have topped up payments as far as we can. I do not think that what Jenny Marra said will go anywhere, because we are doing what we can, within our powers. Neither Jenny Marra nor David Mundell nor anyone else has suggested from where in the Scottish budget the money would come—even if they were to come up with a mechanism that would provide more money. No one has come up with that.

All the policies of this Scottish Government are fully costed, and we have costed what we are doing with discretionary housing payments. We will take no lessons from Alex Johnstone and the Tories on budgets and costings.

We published a report on 17 December that gives an overview of food aid provision in Scotland. The report found that all the food bank providers that were asked had witnessed a sharp increase in demand and they named welfare reform, benefit delays, benefit sanctions and falling incomes as the main factors that are driving that increase. We are doing what we can to limit the damaging effects of the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms on the most vulnerable by, for example, committing £20 million in the current financial year and up to a further £20 million in the next financial year to mitigate the effects of the so-called bedroom tax. With full powers over the economy and welfare in an independent Scotland, we would be able to do even more.

Informed by our food aid provision study, we are exploring the best ways in which to ensure that all those who use food banks have access to appropriate advice and support. As part of our work to mitigate the worst impacts of welfare reform on those on the lowest incomes, we are providing an additional £7.9 million for advice and support services from 2012-13 to 2014-15. The member touched on the sensitivity of the issue. Food banks are independent organisations and people are referred to them in moments of crisis, so we have to be careful about when advice is given and consider what advice is appropriate. With all that in mind, I confirm that we are aware of the matter and want to ensure that everyone has their income maximised, but we still need to ensure that food banks are allowed to maintain their independence and their charitable aims.

The Scottish Government has allocated £3.5 million to Glasgow City Council this year to supplement funding from the United Kingdom Government for discretionary housing payments. It is the responsibility of Glasgow City Council—and all local authorities—to ensure that the funding is directed to those who are most in need of financial support. The Scottish Government currently holds no information on the use of such payments, and it has no functions in relation to the administration of the scheme, which is the responsibility of the Department for Work and Pensions.

It is up to each local authority to decide on the length of a discretionary housing payment, in line with the DWP guidance. There is no set time limit, and the award will depend on the individual circumstances of each claimant. As a result of the Scottish Government’s provision of an additional £20 million, Scottish local authorities have £35 million to spend on discretionary housing payments in the current financial year. That would allow councils to award such payments for a longer period of time to those who are struggling. I would encourage anyone who is in need of assistance to continue to apply for a discretionary housing payment, and to ask for reconsideration if they believe that the wrong decision has been made, because they should not be frightened to do so.

As I said, discretionary housing payments are a reserved matter, and the administration of such payments is up to the DWP. It would not be appropriate for the Scottish Government to give guidance on a reserved matter. The Scottish Government has given £20 million to local authorities to ensure that they can top up their discretionary housing payments to the maximum that is allowed, which will ensure that all the most vulnerable people can get help where it is most required.

I have not been contacted by stakeholders regarding the white paper. All the key housing, regeneration and welfare stakeholders were contacted either by me or by a senior official on 26 November, following the publication of “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”.

In the debate on housing, I said that I was out discussing with stakeholders the Scottish Government’s vision for housing in Scotland and where we are on meeting our targets for affordable housing. In fact, we are well on target to meet those commitments. I also said that we had taken on board the views of stakeholders in developing all our strategies and policies. I have contacted and spoken to stakeholders since the white paper was published, so it is not true to say that the Scottish Government is not out and about and discussing the issues—such as our commitment on homelessness, which we have met—with stakeholders. Those things were all mentioned in the housing debate in the chamber a fortnight ago.

Between April 2011 and 30 September 2013, we have delivered 11,937 social rented homes. That is well over halfway to meeting our five-year target of 20,000 homes for social renting. Those homes will provide secure affordable housing for those who need it most, and I commend all councils and housing associations for working with us to maximise the number of homes built during that period.

As I said in my previous answer, we are well on course to achieve our target of 30,000 affordable homes in this session of the Parliament. The Scottish Government recently took action by increasing the subsidy to social landlords and local authorities to ensure that we could achieve it. We did that on the advice of the stakeholder group that we set up, taking the figure that it proposed to us. Social landlords and local authorities tell us that they can now continue developing and that the target will be met.

The Scottish Government is committed to eradicating fuel poverty. Since 2009, it has invested £220 million in fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes, with an estimated total net saving of more than £1 billion to household incomes over the lifetime of the measures, and has created a £200 million per year initiative, using Government funding to lever in additional investment from energy companies to tackle fuel poverty. However, we need the full powers of independence to tackle all the causes of fuel poverty. If elected in an independent Scotland, this Government will move the costs associated with the energy companies obligation programme and the warm home discount scheme from levies on consumers’ bills to central resources, cutting energy bills by roughly 5 per cent, or £70 a year, and allowing a new means of funding and delivering energy efficiency improvements to Scottish homes that is fairer and better suited to our needs.

I outlined in my answer how we are tackling fuel poverty and will continue to do so. In an independent Scotland, we will continue to keep the same spending to deal with fuel poverty, reducing fuel bills, and we will have full powers over our economy, tax and welfare systems, reducing poverty overall in Scotland, including fuel poverty.

Like others, I congratulate Elaine Murray on bringing the debate to the chamber and on highlighting Food Train’s excellent work in providing shopping, handyperson and befriending services to older people in six local authority areas across the country. I also thank her for clarifying the amount of lottery grant that it received. The figure that I had was the almost £600,000 one and my last words as I left the office were, “I am not going to argue with the member moving the motion!” I am glad that we have sorted out the matter, and think that the award is well deserved. The motion highlights the benefits of support services to older people, particularly those who find it difficult to manage some household tasks themselves but who, with a small bit of help, can continue to live independently at home. The fact that Scotland’s older population is growing is something to celebrate, because it is proof that we are using advances in medicine and technology to live longer and healthier lives. The Government recognises that organisations such as Food Train are vital in delivering good outcomes for older people and acknowledges their contribution to our wider work on housing and support for older people “Age, Home and Community”, the Scottish Government’s 10-year strategy for housing and support services for Scotland’s older people, was published in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in December 2011. We were delighted to include the work of Food Train as a case study in that strategy and I was happy to hear of the recent award from the National Lottery’s investing in communities fund, as that will allow the organisation to expand its services. Between 2010 and 2015, the Big Lottery Fund will invest £300 million though its Scottish grant programmes, which equates to an investment of £1 million a week in Scotland’s communities. Food Train’s award of almost £600,000 will help to support many vulnerable older people in Dumfries and Galloway over the next five years. I was interested in the accounts of Alex Fergusson and Aileen McLeod of their days out with Food Train, which I am sure have given them great insight into its work. Hearing about their experiences has certainly given me an insight. As we know, current population projections forecast that the number of people aged over 75 will increase by 82 per cent by 2035. Although that presents us with a significant challenge, Scotland has a track record of delivering real benefits to older people, including free personal and nursing care. We have retained those benefits in the face of current spending pressures and plan to continue them. It is vital to have the right housing and support for older people, as that will help to enhance people’s quality of life, help them to feel safe and secure, help to reduce the number of falls and other accidents in the home and subsequent emergency hospital admissions, and allow us to make better use of our resources. Those will all produce good outcomes for elderly people. Our national strategy for housing for older people is built around four themes, all of which are clearly shown in Food Train’s work: seeing older people as an asset, which is obviously vital to the organisation; choice; planning ahead; and prevention. Given that older people tell us that they want to remain at home for as long as possible, it is right that they, like anyone else, should have such a choice, and preventative services such as those provided by Food Train help older people to maintain their independence, retain control over their lives, stay active and contribute to their community. A number of speakers have mentioned isolation. Although older people want to stay at home—and although we want the same for them—the one thing none of us wants is for them to feel isolated. Initiatives such as Food Train prevent that because they allow people to get involved; indeed, as others have made clear, the work done by volunteers in that respect must also be praised. The point is that, in order to meet those needs and expectations, we need a range of different housing and support services. In 2011, we launched the reshaping care for older people programme and the accompanying £300 million change fund, which supported many services that were aimed at improving older people’s independence and wellbeing. A central theme of our work in this area is prevention. Its importance is widely recognised, particularly in the context of public service reform. We cannot pretend that we can always prevent falls or deterioration in health. However, like the services delivered by Food Train, there are many services that can support wellbeing and reduce the likelihood of traumatic and costly hospital and care home admissions. Good progress has been made in recent years but, as I said, we need to tackle the social isolation of people who live independently at home. Projects such as Food Train and the new living it up project, an initiative that supports active lifestyles for Scotland’s older people, have the ability to really change the lives of our elderly population, by which I mean our parents, grandparents, neighbours and friends, and, as Bruce Crawford said, all of us, one day—some of us sooner than others, and I include myself in that. Issues affecting older people have rightly gained national prominence in the housing and health and social care agendas. However, we need to increase that momentum. As we implement our strategies and deliver Scotland’s vision for older people, joint working across the public, independent and third sectors will be vital to the achievement of success. Food Train is making a significant contribution to the delivery of preventative services in a number of areas across the country, and I am delighted to hear about the success of the project and the significant funding award from the Big Lottery Fund. I wish Food Train well as it continues its work.

Unlike other parties in the Parliament, the Scottish Government has a clear vision that every one of us in Scotland should live in a high-quality, sustainable home that we can afford and that meets our needs. Our 2011 manifesto was the only one that contained a target for building affordable homes. No other manifesto had that and I point out that the Labour Party talked in the chamber about investigating, looking at, and possibly doing something about the issue but made no commitment whatsoever.

I will not take an intervention at the moment. I have been accused of not coming to the chamber to talk about housing, so I will talk about what we have done about it, and you can listen. [Interruption.]

I welcome the opportunity to affirm and demonstrate that the Scottish Government leads, listens and takes action to ensure that we can deliver that vision. It is important that we are working in conjunction with the entire housing sector in doing so. Of course we all recognise that challenging economic conditions continue to impact on house-building activity, but despite the prolonged economic downturn, the SNP Government has outperformed the record of previous devolved Administrations.

What I am saying is that we are building more houses than any other Administration in the Scottish Parliament has built, despite the economic downturn. [Interruption.]

We cannot get away from the facts. I will give members the facts. Some 4,117 new council houses have been built by the SNP Administration—the previous Labour-Liberal Administration built six in its last four years—and 26,781 housing association houses have been built, which is 15 per cent more than the previous Administration built. The Scottish Government and I are committed to delivering at least 30,000 affordable homes, at least 20,000 of which would be for social rent. We are making good progress. By September, we had already delivered more than 16,000 affordable homes, nearly 12,000 of which were for social rent. That means that we are already over halfway to meeting our 20,000 target for homes for social rent. To ensure that we remain on track, I took the lead on confronting the issue of funding for social housing developments. I recognised that councils and housing associations faced many pressures on their finances, and set up a working group with housing stakeholders, listened to their concerns and took decisive action by increasing all social housing benchmarks by £16,000 per unit.

Because I have been out there talking to the stakeholders and trying to get things moving. If leadership is judged by coming to the Parliament and speaking to the Opposition parties, I am sorry; for me, it is about going out there, talking to the stakeholders, listening to their concerns and taking action—and that is what we are doing. The £16,000 benchmark was recommended by the working group. That was its figure and we took it on board. That change enables councils and housing associations to keep social rents affordable and reduces the amount that they have to contribute from their own resources. That is particularly important, given the uncertainties of the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms. We backed up that change with investment in the draft budget.

No. I am not giving way any more. I have been constantly told that I have not come to the chamber to speak about housing, so I will do that now. Over the four years to March 2016, the planned investment in affordable housing will exceed £1.35 billion. Every new-build affordable home that we help to fund means more jobs in our construction industry, but it is, of course, also vital that we support a recovery in the market sector. Yesterday’s housing statistics underlined the continuing impact on our house-building industry of challenging global economic conditions and the Westminster cuts to our capital budget. The Opposition parties that are represented in the chamber cannot deny responsibility for part of the global recession. Despite these difficult times, Scotland’s rate of new house building per head of population continues to outperform that of the rest of the UK. That is a fact. Recently published National House Building Council statistics on new home registrations to the end of September 2013 show encouraging signs of increasing activity and recovery. A central plank of our support for house building is our £220 million help to buy Scotland shared equity scheme. I am pleased to see the industry’s positive reaction to that scheme. To date, 95 house builders have registered, and more applications are coming in. That list includes major public limited companies as well as small family firms that may want to build only a few, but vitally needed, homes.

I am taking no more interventions. I am sorry. I look forward to that scheme making a positive difference in the coming months and years and increasing the demand for and supply of new housing. Help to buy sits alongside other initiatives that we have supported or launched, such as our other shared equity programmes, the house-building infrastructure loan fund, and the private sector-led MI new home scheme. The story of our support is rich, diverse and on-going, and throughout it all runs the theme of innovation. For example, the national housing trust initiative, the first guarantee-based model for housing in the UK, is going from strength to strength, with deals being secured with 13 developers across 10 council areas, generating around £150 million of housing development. I turn now to homelessness. In 2003, the first devolved Scottish Parliament unanimously and rightly set an historic target to ensure that every unintentionally homeless person should have an entitlement to settled accommodation. In 2008, Iain Gray described that as “the best homelessness legislation in the world,” but admitted that, “we didn’t build the housing to make it work”. Instead, it has fallen to this Administration, in tough economic times, to build homes and to deliver on that historic commitment, which I confirmed almost a year ago. At the same time, we have also made progress in reducing the number of children in temporary accommodation, alongside wider falls in recorded homelessness in Scotland. For example, in 2012-13, the number of households with children in temporary accommodation reduced by 551 or 16 per cent. Those figures are going in the right direction, but we are not complacent. We want to minimise all time spent in temporary accommodation, and a temporary accommodation sub-group of key stakeholders, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, councils and Shelter, is due to report to the homelessness prevention and strategy group this month. We will use that and other evidence to consider what further steps need to be taken on standards in temporary accommodation. We also recognise the importance of addressing rough sleeping, and will continue to focus on preventing that from happening wherever possible. The latest statistics again indicate continuing falls in recorded homelessness across Scotland, including falls in rough sleeping. Our record on housing leadership over the past 12 months includes boosting housing supply budgets, outperforming Labour on affordable supply, staying on track to deliver 30,000 affordable homes, launching the help to buy Scotland scheme, expanding and developing the national housing trust, and achieving the historic homelessness commitment. Now, with the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which I introduced to the Parliament last month, the SNP Government will again take the lead. The bill will introduce a regulatory framework for letting agents, create a new private rented sector housing tribunal, increase flexibility in the allocation and management of social housing, and end the right to buy, thereby preventing the sale of up to 15,500 social rented houses over 10 years. However, only independence will allow us to deliver policies that reflect Scotland’s values, support strong communities and promote social justice. For example, the Institute for Fiscal Studies has pointed out that, under the current system—[Interruption.]

Opposition members were keen to comment on the Institute for Fiscal Studies, which pointed out that, under the current system, there is a disincentive for Scottish Governments to invest in keeping social rents affordable, because the benefits of our investment go to the United Kingdom Treasury and we get back lower housing benefit spend. Thankfully, “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland” offers a different way forward. Independence would give us full flexibility over housing budgets, allowing us to design how we use grants, loans, equity stakes or guarantees specifically for Scotland’s needs and circumstances. I can assure the Parliament that, if we become the Government of an independent Scotland, we will abolish the bedroom tax and integrate welfare and housing investment to support our housing system, our people and our communities. I move amendment S4M-08470.2, to leave out from “with grave concern” to end and insert: “that it is the current administration that has provided leadership and incentives to restart council house building in Scotland; welcomes the fact that over 1,000 council houses were completed last year and that this compares with only six council houses built in the four years of the last Labour/Liberal Democrat administration; recognises that, despite cuts in the capital budget proposed by the last UK Labour administration, and imposed by the current UK Conservative/Liberal Democrat administration, more social sector houses per head have been built in Scotland than in any other part of the UK over the past six years; notes the substantial contraction of private house building across the UK that has occurred as a direct result of the financial crisis, for which the last UK Labour administration must accept some responsibility, and recognises that, with independence, Scotland can achieve the level of investment required to meet its housing needs.”

Will the member give way?

I feel that I should just read out my first speech again because clearly nobody listened to what I said. I said at the outset that the Scottish Government has a clear vision that every one of us in Scotland should live in a high-quality, sustainable home that we can afford and that meets our needs. That has been the vision of this Scottish Government since 2011. I have been going out there and ensuring that we can deliver that. I am not that broad but I am big and I can take a personal attack. However, I took exception to Hugh Henry’s suggestion that the people to whom I was speaking were more important than people in this chamber. I have been out there speaking to homeless people and to people who have suffered abuse and have been on the streets. I have spoken to many groups, including rough sleepers and families on waiting lists. I have spoken to house builders, lenders, housing associations and developers.

No. This is my chance to respond to the attacks that have been made on me and I intend to do that.

I am not taking an intervention at this time. I will try to respond to some of the things that have been said. Hugh Henry rose—

I will take an intervention from Mr Henry considering that I mentioned him.

I am glad that I have clarified who I have been speaking to and that that has perhaps been accepted by the member. I have been accountable to this Parliament: I have attended a number of committee meetings, given evidence and talked about the Scottish Government’s housing vision and policy. We are delivering on that. A number of members have mentioned the 16,000 homes that have already been built. Mary Fee asked when it is starting. It is starting: we are building; we have got help to buy. I will explain some of our other schemes as we go on. Jackie Baillie said that we are doing nothing about temporary accommodation. Clearly, Jackie Baillie did not listen to what I said in my opening remarks. I said that we have set up a group precisely to look at the areas that she talked about. That group includes Shelter.

I am taking no more interventions. The group is reporting back to the homelessness strategy group. We are looking at all the issues, including the standards for temporary accommodation. We are looking at evidence on the standards. We cannot act on anecdote; we need evidence. We are looking at that and if we have to take action on it, we will do so. I am well aware that we are talking about individuals and families. I am also well aware that no matter what vision we have—

Clearly, there are people on waiting lists. Jim Hume mentioned 400,000. I said in my press release that 155,000 people were on waiting lists. Of course that is too many. Of course I do not like that. That is why I am out there looking at how we can reduce waiting lists. I understand that it is no consolation to any individual for us to say that homelessness is dropping or that waiting lists are falling. To any suggestion that I do not understand that I say: “Think again.” I do understand it, which is why I am out talking to people in those circumstances. I have covered waiting lists so I will say a bit to Patrick Harvie. I had written in my notes that I had forgotten to say that the Green Party had a target in its manifesto. I accept that the Green Party had a target in its manifesto and a vision. As Patrick Harvie has said, I recently launched the first private rented sector strategy since devolution. We laid out in it how we will regulate letting agents and how we will take the sector forward, because we know that it needs to grow. We have set up an independent sub-group, which is chaired by Professor Douglas Robertson, on security of tenure in private accommodation. After that group reports, if action needs to be taken, we will take it. Patrick Harvie rose— I said that I would not take interventions, but I will give way.

We are looking at everything and the debate will come through to the chamber. Standards in the private rented sector have been mentioned. We have agreed to introduce standards in the privately rented and privately owned sectors on energy efficiency and quality. They will apply—[Interruption.]

I am sorry. Maybe some people would be happy not to hear what I am saying. Richard Baker said that the previous Labour Administration built more houses than the SNP Administration has, but that is simply not true. The fact is that, on average, 4,068 houses a year were built under the Labour Administration, whereas the figure is greater—it is 5,019—under the SNP Administration. A number of members said that when we talk about council housing, we in some way do not appreciate or support the housing association sector, but we very much support that sector. I said in my opening speech that under the SNP Administration, the number of housing association houses built has exceeded the number under previous Administrations. The housing association sector is very important and is pivotal to what we do. We listened to what was said and we increased the subsidy. To answer a point from Margaret McDougall, the subsidy is greater for rural areas. We recognise absolutely that it costs more to build houses in rural areas and we have taken that on board. Alex Johnstone talked about the compulsory sale of houses under the Scottish Government’s national housing trust. The Scottish Government guarantees a part of the trust, but no Scottish Government money is in the houses under the trust. The trust provides an extremely popular way for people to enter the housing market. A sale is not automatic at the end of a term. Individuals who go into trust houses know exactly what they are going into. In some instances, the rental period can be extended, so I do not accept the point that Alex Johnstone made. I will finish with some of the things that the Scottish Government has done, as we were accused of not doing anything. We have boosted the housing supply budget, which is now at £1.53 billion over four years. We have outperformed Labour on affordable housing supply, with an average of 32 per cent more affordable home completions. We have kept on track to deliver 30,000 new affordable homes. We have launched the £220 million help to buy (Scotland) scheme. We have expanded and developed the national housing trust. We have achieved the historic homelessness commitment. We have invested in prevention through housing options hubs and seen a reduction in homelessness applications. We have signalled our intention to end the right to buy. We have provided £13.5 million for greener homes for sustainable developments.

We will invest £250 million this year and in the next two years to tackle fuel poverty and climate change. We have used secondary legislation to strengthen the rights of those who live permanently in mobile homes. We have published the first private rented sector strategy.

We have provided £20 million to top up discretionary housing payments. We have developed the MI new home scheme. I could go on and on—

The Government is delivering and is leading on housing.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Mr Hume take an intervention on that point?

Homelessness continues to fall in Scotland, as is shown by figures published earlier this month. In the first quarter of 2013 we saw an 11 per cent fall in applications to local authorities from the previous year’s figure and, crucially, falls in the number of households with children in temporary accommodation. That continues the positive trend of falls in homelessness in Scotland in recent years. Progress has been driven by the achievement of our internationally acclaimed 2012 homelessness target and our focus on prevention, working with local authorities and others, and supported by our investment in new affordable housing.

I agree that it is good news that we see homelessness figures continuing to fall. They have fallen in Stirling by 14 per cent, which is higher than the national fall of 11 per cent. The progress is the result of the adoption of the housing options approach to preventing homelessness by local authorities and their partners, rather than a change in the underlying drivers of homelessness. I attended a national homelessness event this morning that looked at how we can continue to work together on the issue and further develop the regional hubs—Stirling Council is a member of one—to prevent further homelessness. We have made significant progress in tackling homelessness, but independence would allow us to ensure that that would continue because we would have more control over finances and over threats from areas that are currently controlled by the United Kingdom Government, as typified by welfare reform.

The Scottish Government continues to work with charities that support rough sleepers, whose numbers in Scotland are reducing. We will continue to work with charities to reduce their numbers and the number of homeless people. We have set up a number of funds for welfare reform mitigation and we are encouraging charities to ensure that anyone who is sleeping rough has the access to those funds that they should have. We continue to support them through our voluntary housing action fund, which funds a number of charitable organisations.

Does the member accept that more houses have been built under this SNP Administration than under previous Administrations, which had the budget to build more? Our budget has been cut, yet we are still building more houses at every level.

The Scottish Government is doing all that it can to help the people who are hit by the bedroom tax, with £20 million of funding available this year and up to a further £20 million available next year. That money has been given to local authorities, which can provide discretionary housing payments to tenants who are in financial difficulties. I urge those tenants to contact their local authority so that they may access the money provided by the Scottish Government and pay their rent in full. Mitigating the full impact of welfare reform will not be possible. The only way we can end the bedroom tax and protect Scottish families is if we have full control of the welfare system in an independent Scotland.

The level of DHP funding from the United Kingdom Government is totally inadequate. Scotland receives only 8.9 per cent of the total DHP budget, despite having 12 per cent of those affected. The DWP estimates that Scotland and London have the same numbers affected by the bedroom tax, yet in 2013-14 Scotland received £15.3 million compared with £58.2 million for London. The funding provided by the Scottish Government will take seven out of 10 people out of the bedroom tax altogether, which should go most of the way towards alleviating the position for those who are unable to pay the tax.

I share the member’s concern about what we read in the press about the Tory-Labour administration in South Ayrshire, particularly the reference to children’s services in the letter that it issued, and I accept that that caused a lot of concern for many tenants. I wrote to the council leader on 3 November expressing my concern and urging the council to ensure that tenants in financial difficulty can access the funding, whether through discretionary housing payments or through the Scottish welfare fund. On 2 October, I wrote to South Ayrshire Council informing it of Scottish Government funding of more than £389,000, giving it a total of £651,419 to help tenants who are affected by the bedroom tax. The council is also aware that that funding will be provided in the next financial year, too.

We have made it very clear that how we will banish the bedroom tax in Scotland is by having a yes vote in next year’s referendum. The member is well aware that social security policy is devolved in Northern Ireland, which means that it is able to take that action. In all the meetings that I and the Scottish Government have had with United Kingdom ministers, we have made the very point that we should be able to do likewise. We are clear that benefits, including housing benefit, should be controlled in Scotland. The member should also be well aware that we are doing everything within our legal powers to top up discretionary housing payments. The only way that the Scottish Government is able to give grants to individuals is by paying the money to the local authorities so that they can top up those payments to the maximum level.

I absolutely agree that this is a pernicious policy from a Government that we did not elect. The Scottish Government is leading the way on homelessness throughout Europe. Homelessness is a devolved matter, a fact that the Scottish Parliament has taken on board not only with this Government but since the Parliament came into being. It is appalling that we have a UK Government whose policies are undermining our approach. Our priority for homelessness remains that we should take preventative measures, and we will do everything that we can to ensure that our homelessness policy is not affected by UK Government measures.

As I said to Iain Gray, I have asked that very question and have asked that the money in Scotland be paid direct to landlords and not to tenants, because that is what the landlords want and, more important, it is what the tenants want. I made that point very strongly to the UK ministers when I last met them.

That is part of the reason why we are lobbying on the matter. I agree absolutely with the member that the suggestions about taking in a lodger and working and all the other suggestions that have come from the UK Government are entirely inappropriate. They are inappropriate for most people, but they are particularly inappropriate for people who have a disability—particularly one as severe as MND. We have continually lobbied for disabled people to be exempt altogether from the bedroom tax, and that is something that we will continue to lobby on. I hope that people in the situation outlined by the member will be able to take up the discretionary payment, as they should not be left with the worry that they currently have about the bedroom tax.

I thank Nigel Don for lodging the motion and I thank all members for their contributions. As Scotland’s only national voluntary organisation working on fuel poverty, Energy Action Scotland plays a vital role in tackling the issue, bringing together a wide range of stakeholders, as we heard from Jackie Baillie a moment ago. Energy Action Scotland is well respected by all those working in the sector. In this, the year in which it marks its 30th anniversary, I welcome the opportunity to reconfirm the Scottish Government’s continuing commitment to support its work to tackle fuel poverty and to ensure that Scotland’s people live in warm homes that are affordable to heat. Norrie Kerr of Energy Action Scotland has been mentioned a lot in the debate. As Jackie Baillie said, he is the vice-chair of the fuel poverty forum. His being in that role means that Energy Action Scotland has made a valuable contribution to setting the direction of the Scottish Government’s funding on fuel poverty. Energy Action Scotland has been fully involved in shaping our home energy efficiency programmes for Scotland, or HEEPS, and plays an important on-going role in ensuring that outcomes are delivered. Fuel poverty has come a long way over the past 30 years, from a time when it was largely unknown to today, when it is recognised in the “Oxford English Dictionary”. That is not something that we should be proud of. It gives me no comfort, as the minister responsible for fuel poverty, that 684,000 households in Scotland were in fuel poverty in October 2011. That was an increase of 26,000 from 2010, but without the improvements in the energy efficiency of homes and in household incomes, the overall number would have been around 770,000 households. Although energy efficiency is a sustainable solution, it will never be a total solution to fuel poverty. We need the full powers of independence to tackle all the causes of fuel poverty by addressing household energy efficiency, income and prices, so that Scotland can be a beacon of progressive action to tackle fuel poverty and maintain household incomes. A few moments ago Jackie Baillie talked about a price freeze, which is something that the Scottish Government cannot do; we have no control over energy prices. Everyone in this chamber has agreed that rising energy prices are a huge part of fuel poverty, but we have no control over them.

No; I did not say that that was not SNP policy. I said that we had to look at rising fuel prices, which is why we have set up a commission to look at that and all the other aspects of fuel prices. Yes; we want to continue with our renewable energy programme.

The commission’s remit is to look at how an independent Scotland can promote fairer, more affordable energy prices, and the role of the Scottish regulator in addressing fuel poverty, delivering affordability and security of supply and environmental sustainability. If we have a date set for when the commission will report I will certainly write to Jackie Baillie with that. Tackling fuel poverty is an absolute priority for this Government. We have a statutory duty, which we have been reminded of by a number of speakers, to ensure, as far as is reasonably practicable, that people are not living in fuel poverty in Scotland by November 2016. We are doing everything within our limited powers to achieve that. We know that fuel poverty is a vital social issue that affects families across Scotland and we have taken action to tackle it. Over the past three years the Scottish Government has invested more than £220 million in a raft of fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes. Our budget—for the avoidance of doubt—in this year is £74 million and we have secured £79 million funding for the next two years. In contrast—we must look at this—Westminster has cut its fuel poverty funding. From 1 April this year, there have no longer been any UK taxpayer-funded fuel poverty programmes in England. It is the only country in the UK not to have Government-backed support on this important issue. We know that the most sustainable way to tackle fuel poverty is to raise the energy efficiency of homes. I have mentioned how, in its role as a member of the fuel poverty forum, Energy Action Scotland has helped to shape the new HEEPS. Those programmes are being used to lever in additional money from the energy companies obligation, or ECO, and offer a support package to all those who struggle to pay their energy bills and keep their homes warm. I want to make it clear that the HEEPS pilots—or the national retrofit programme, as it was known—indicated that we were levering in more than £2 for every pound of Scottish Government funding. That is important and why we hope to achieve the £200 million figure that has been talked about. Of the funding that has been announced, £46 million is for area-based schemes, which is very much what Nigel Don alluded to. The issue is about area-based schemes, through which fuel poverty can be tackled area by area, as opposed to bit by bit. The fuel poverty forum recommended that. As I said, the predicted leverage of the ECO is £130 million; there is also £30 million of landlord funding. We have a memorandum of understanding to deliver the affordable warmth scheme, which has been signed with three suppliers to maximise the use of the ECO in Scotland. We have also announced a two-year extension to the energy assistance package that is worth £32 million, which started from 1 April 2013. Up to August 2013, about 2,010 referrals had been made to that scheme and more than 700 installations had been completed. The promotion of the hotline is not about reinventing or repeating something. Every time that the hotline is promoted, more people contact the advice centres and more people go on to the programme. We want to reach out to as many people in Scotland as possible, particularly as we approach winter, to ensure that they have a trusted source that they can contact to find out about the energy efficiency measures that they could be eligible for.

I do not think that the hotline was presented as something new. A television advert will be shown, because we want to attract people to pick up the phone and call. I will not get into a debate about whether somebody thinks that the hotline is new or old. If, because of seeing the advert or the other promotion that we have done, somebody phones the helpline for the first time and gets support, that is what it is all about and the initiative will have succeeded. We are tackling fuel poverty from every angle that we can. Above all, we will not take vital support away from our most vulnerable citizens while the battle to end fuel poverty is not yet won. Without the work of organisations such as Energy Action Scotland, the fight would be much more difficult. Tackling fuel poverty is and will continue to be a priority for me and the Scottish Government. Meeting closed at 17:47.

The increase in waiting days for jobseekers allowance will cause more hardship and worry for newly unemployed people and their families. It will also mean added pressure on the local services that provide help and support for those unfortunate enough to find themselves in that position. That is why the Scottish Government is increasing its spend on mitigation measures to £68 million in 2013-2014, and why our draft budget maintains spending at that level for at least the next two years. We will do all that we can to help people make the transition to the new welfare system and to protect people in Scotland from the impacts of the United Kingdom Government’s cuts, but mitigating the full impact of all the cuts will not be possible.

Yes. I believe that the increase in the use of food banks that we have witnessed in Scotland is a result of the UK Government’s increasingly punitive welfare reforms. The decision to increase JSA waiting days was taken not by the families using food banks but by a chancellor ready to impose cuts on those least able to bear them. When the policy was announced, the chancellor was warned by Alison Garnham, the chief executive of the Child Poverty Action Group, who said: “We’re talking about parents doing the right thing but who have very little in the way of savings to tide them over if they lose their job. There should be no doubt this will leave more families and children cold and hungry and push more families towards doorstep lenders and foodbanks.” As I have said before, only when the Scottish Parliament has full control over welfare can we put in place policies that benefit the people of Scotland.

Like others, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate. Every opportunity for the Parliament to make its voice heard on tackling poverty and inequality in Scotland is valuable. I also thank the Poverty Alliance for organising challenge poverty week. Tackling this fundamental issue is a key priority for the Government, and I am fully supportive of the Poverty Alliance’s work on the area. Having spoken at a number of Poverty Alliance events over the past year, I appreciate how important it is to challenge poverty and the myths around it, as the Poverty Alliance is doing through its stick your labels campaign. It is clear that we must continue to work together if we are to tackle poverty effectively and dispel the myths around those in poverty and in receipt of benefits. I think that every member would agree that there are myths around poverty, which are peddled in many instances by part of the current UK Government and by some of the media. I have said that before, and I do not apologise for saying it again. I understand how poverty affects people. For most of my working life I have been involved in front-line services that deal with the most vulnerable groups in our society: those on low incomes or on benefits, and the sick and disabled. I understand the circumstances that they are in, and I cannot stomach it when I hear such people labelled in some quarters as scroungers, when we should be working to understand the issues and help as much as we can. The Poverty Alliance works very hard in trying to raise awareness of poverty. We recognised that in the “Annual Report for the Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland 2013”. We must listen to those affected by poverty and to what they say they need, rather than to what we think they need. That is why I regularly meet groups from around the country, including groups from the Poverty Alliance. I recently met a group from the Poverty Alliance to inform our strategy on health inequalities and to listen to what people in poverty had to say on the issues that affect them. It was a positive meeting and we got lots of practical suggestions; we will certainly consider them and will take some of them forward. The Scottish Government is committed to a long-term preventative approach to tackling the key drivers of poverty. We will continue that through the revised child poverty strategy, which will be published in the spring. The Scottish Government will continue to protect household incomes. We recognised a long time ago that the cost of living was a real issue for people out there. That is why we introduced what we call the social wage: free personal care for the elderly; the abolition of tuition fees, bridge tolls and prescription charges; free eye examinations; the council tax freeze; concessionary bus travel for the elderly and disabled; and increasing the provision of free nursery education. All those things are intended to help people who are struggling to get by and make ends meet. We are leading by example in ensuring that all employees for whom the Scottish Government is responsible will receive at least the Scottish living wage. We are encouraging other organisations to do that, too. Recently, another housing association came on board and announced that it is now a living wage employer.

The Scottish Government is looking at the issue closely in relation to the procurement reform bill. However, as Jackie Baillie well knows, we must also look at the European rules. We want to ensure that where the living wage can be paid, it will be paid, and lots of local authorities are looking at the issue, too.

Okay, but I am almost out of time.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I agree with the member that any contract must have good terms and conditions. I recognise that the living wage is only one step towards reducing inequality and that it is not a one-off solution to poverty. We are looking at every possible way of reducing poverty throughout Scotland. I found it disappointing that, at the start of the debate, a number of issues were raised that brought politics into it. We are doing what we can to mitigate the worst impacts of welfare reform. We have already provided £40 million to protect people from the UK Government’s 10 per cent cut in funding the council tax benefit successor arrangements; £7.9 million for advice and support services; and £9.2 million to top up the new Scottish welfare fund, which I want to say something about. We are all disappointed that that new fund has not been taken up to the extent that we wanted it to be. We are currently carrying out a thorough review, and the guidance has been changed to make things clearer to local authorities, which administer it. We are also looking at and working on improving the consistency of the fund throughout Scotland. Our commitment to the fund was made absolutely clear when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced that its budget would be kept at the same level for the next two years. We do not expect to reduce the fund just now; indeed, we want it to be taken up and will be advertising it and doing everything else possible to ensure that every penny of the fund is used for the vulnerable people who require it. On fuel poverty, the Scottish Government continues to provide funding for the fuel poor. We have, for example, the HEEPS scheme and, in response to an earlier question about why the scheme has not been taken up, I point out that we experienced difficulties at the start because the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets and the UK Government were determining the rules for the energy company obligation. We therefore reckoned that there would be an underspend, and that provided some of the £20 million that we are using to mitigate the bedroom tax. That should be recognised, because it illustrates the difficulties that we had in finding that money. However, we found it and ensured that it went back to vulnerable people. The fuel poverty budget will also stay the same for the next two years; we have not reduced it, because we expect the HEEPS scheme to be up and running, with contracts going and fuel poverty in Scotland being reduced. Unlike the UK Government, we continue to support fuel poverty projects in Scotland; indeed, we are committing £79 million to such projects to help the very people highlighted by Sarah Boyack. We have also continued the energy advice scheme, which replaced the energy assistance package, because we realised that people were still going to miss out under the UK schemes. The fact that we are committing £60 million to the scheme for the next two years also shows that we are addressing fuel poverty. I realise that I have gone over my time, Presiding Officer, so I will finish by saying that we will continue to take action to address fuel poverty. We are committed to the issue for the long term, but we need the support of everyone in the chamber. I am more convinced than ever that, in order to deal with poverty in our society, we need to be in charge of our own economy and welfare system, so that we can ensure that they are fully integrated. 13:17 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced the Scottish Government’s spending plans for 2014-15 and 2015-16 on Wednesday 11 September. For fuel poverty, he announced a budget of £79 million in both years. As with this year’s budget allocation, we will use our funding to lever in private sector funding from the utility companies that are seeking to meet their obligations under the energy companies obligation to create a fund of £200 million per annum. That will be used for both area-based and national scheme delivery through our HEEPS—home energy efficiency programme Scotland—schemes. The budget will address the fuel poverty forum’s interim report recommendations on Scottish Government funding programmes, continue to support our targets to eradicate fuel poverty as far as practicable by 2016, and contribute to meeting our climate change commitments.

The member will be pleased to know that, under our current measures, Aberdeenshire Council has the second-highest allocation in Scotland, at £4.4 million. That will provide assistance to just under 2,500 households in the area. I am sure that the member will be pleased to note that. Alongside what we are currently doing, the Scottish ministers continue to work to protect the interests of consumers. In the future, the expert commission on energy regulation will look to provide evidence on what improvements could be made to Scotland’s stewardship of electricity and gas regulation in an independent Scotland. The commission will provide advice on ways in which an independent Scotland could promote fairer, more affordable energy prices, given the need to address fuel poverty, and measures to improve energy efficiency.

To repeat what I said earlier, we will continue to work to protect the interests of Scottish consumers and continue to fund the HEEPS programme, which is providing measures throughout the whole of Scotland—unlike the United Kingdom Government, which has put zero into that. On the other question, there are some big ifs in that. If there were a future Labour Government, it is unclear how it would implement that future policy. Has Labour spoken to the fuel companies and what is their commitment? What would be the eventual impact on fuel bills?

We are currently looking at that issue. We have been in discussion with some rural communities, particularly in the islands—I discussed the issue when I was up there during the summer recess—and we continue to talk with them about that. We well appreciate the difficulties that island and rural communities face because they are off grid, as the member mentioned. I would be willing to sit down with the member to inform him what discussions we have had so far and where those are going. If he has any other suggestions to offer, I am willing to discuss them with him.

We are committed to tackling the long-term drivers of poverty through early intervention and prevention. In spring 2014, we will publish a revised child poverty strategy, which will be informed by discussions at the ministerial advisory group on child poverty. Our commitment includes a range of actions, such as working with local authorities, the national health service and others through the collective investment of £272 million in the early years change fund. We know that the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms are already having a significant impact. The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that, by 2020, once all the UK Government welfare changes have come into effect, around 50,000 more children will be living in poverty in Scotland than in 2011. In an independent Scotland, we could take welfare decisions that would ensure fair and decent support for people. Only with access to our own resources and the ability to join up policy across devolved and reserved areas can we make the substantial difference that we need to and tackle child poverty for good.

As I said in my earlier answer, we are taking a long-term approach to tackling poverty. However, our efforts are being undermined by the UK Government’s welfare reforms. We have published analysis that estimates that the reforms could reduce welfare expenditure in Scotland by more than £4.5 billion in the five years to 2014-15, with families and children among those being hit. The reforms include changes to child tax credit and working tax credits, which primarily affect couples with children, who will on average be £700 a year worse off. Mitigating the full impact of the cuts will not be possible. The solution is for the Scottish Parliament to have full control over welfare so that it can put in place policies that benefit the people of Scotland.

As the member will be aware, the Scottish Government has set up the Scottish welfare fund of £33 million, which should assist people who are struggling with food poverty. At present, we do not have statistics on food banks, but they are part of the overall monitoring of the welfare reforms. We have to consider what things people cannot afford because of welfare reforms such as the bedroom tax, and all the issues there. We will monitor that. We are looking at the Scottish welfare fund to ensure that every penny in it is used by the people who need it most, many of whom will be in food poverty.

We are doing all that we can within current powers and resources to mitigate the worst impacts of welfare reform. That includes £7.9 million for front-line advice and support services, £9.2 million to bring the Scottish social welfare fund up to £33 million, £40 million to protect people against the United Kingdom Government’s 10 per cent cut in the council tax benefit, and £20 million to enable local authorities to supplement discretionary housing payments. Over the period we will spend at least £224 million. Although that will help the damaging effects of welfare reforms, the solution is for the Scottish Parliament to have control over all welfare matters.

The figure is 560,000 people in Scotland, who were previously receiving council tax benefit. That includes 216,900 households with one person over 65, and more than 280,000 single-female households, of which 85,000 have a dependent child.

The HEEPS were launched on 1 April this year. To date, we have issued offers of grant for area-based schemes totalling just under £46 million, which will result in 25,000 to 30,000 households receiving around 40,000 measures to improve the energy efficiency of their home and help to tackle fuel poverty. We have also signed memoranda of understanding with three energy suppliers to deliver the affordable warmth scheme. From April to the end of August 2013, a total of around 3,500 referrals were made. Finally, from April to the end of August 2013, around 2,100 referrals were made to the energy assistance scheme, with more than 700 completed installations reported.

Yes, we will collect those figures and we will certainly keep the member up to date. However, I can tell her that £2.2 million has been allocated to South Lanarkshire Council.

The Department for Work and Pensions’ underoccupancy charge is affecting 82,500 households in Scotland, of which 63,500 contain an adult with a disability and 15,500 contain children. We estimate the average reduction to be around £11 per week per household.

Like, I am sure, everyone in the chamber, I was very concerned to read about the possible eviction of a disabled lady due to the bedroom tax; in particular, I was concerned that the local authority may have made an error in classifying the tenant as underoccupying her home, when she had said that she had a son and daughter living with her. I therefore wrote to the chief executive of North Lanarkshire Council and asked him to review the case. The response that I received a week later confirmed only that the eviction was not pending. I think that that case highlights the dreadful effect that the bedroom tax is having on Scottish society and why this Government believes that it should be scrapped.

I will say a couple of things on Ms Baillie’s Labour-come-lately proposal. It is pure hypocrisy. I like a bit of political ding-dong like anyone else, but the issue is far too important for this kind of political opportunism. The Scottish Government has consistently said that we oppose the bedroom tax. We encouraged our SNP councils six months ago not to carry out evictions. We are talking about real people out there. I want to say something important, because we should not have people frightened out there: to date, there have been no evictions in Scotland because of the bedroom tax. We will continue to talk to councils and work with stakeholders, and we will continue to look at every constructive proposal to mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax, but the hypocrisy of Labour at this stage is almost overwhelmingly unbelievable. We are consistent on the bedroom tax, but Labour has not been. I say to the people of Scotland that we continue to work with stakeholders, who are genuinely concerned about the impact that the bedroom tax is having on real people in all our communities. We will continue to do that until we get a yes vote in the referendum. Until then, we will ensure that we protect the people of Scotland from the United Kingdom Government and Labour policies.

I welcome Margaret McCulloch to her new role as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee. It is something that she has had only one meeting before coming to the debate. I congratulate her on becoming the convener. I am pleased to have the opportunity to provide opening remarks on behalf of the Scottish Government. I thank the committee for carrying out the inquiry and producing its report, and thank everyone who gave the committee the evidence that helped to shape the report. I am sure that, during the debate, we will hear examples of ways in which the Gypsy Traveller community continues to be disenfranchised and discriminated against; indeed, we have already heard some examples. Those are rightly considered to be some of the most troubling aspects of life in Scotland today and are not part of the country that we aspire to be. It is right that we consider the challenges and barriers that the Gypsy Traveller community faces every day, not just in this afternoon’s debate but as part of the work that we undertake to do every day for all the communities that we represent, because the Gypsy Traveller community has made and continues to make a significant contribution to the life of our nation. We believe in the importance of eliminating racism and racial discrimination against the Gypsy Traveller community. Make no mistake: we know that Gypsy Traveller groups are subject to widespread levels of prejudice, discrimination and abuse. They have a limited voice and influence in the public policies that affect them and they often have difficulty in accessing services that are appropriate for their needs. That results in much poorer education and health outcomes than there are in other communities. In fact, it was the consideration of those multiple poorer outcomes that helped to inform the Scottish Government’s recently published public sector equality duty outcomes, one of which will specifically address the inequalities that are currently experienced by many members of the Gypsy Traveller community. In that, we have committed to working with Gypsy Travellers and other stakeholders to determine the best way to raise awareness and improve understanding, and in that way foster good relations between Gypsy Travellers and settled communities. In addition, working with communities, we will also explore and build more sustainable means of engagement that take account of Gypsy Travellers’ culture and transient lifestyle. We will review the relevant existing data sources that we hold across a range of public domains and identify evidence gaps. That work will inform our evidence requirements and plans moving forward. We intend to carry out this work through a cross-Government group in order to ensure that all policy interests are taken into account. The same group considered the recommendations from the “Gypsy/Travellers and Care” and the “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live” reports and is in the process of putting into action—I stress the word “action”—the commitments that we made. In taking forward this work, we know that we need to see real tangible improvements in the lives of a community who have for so long felt ignored.

The Government has always been looking at the issues surrounding Gypsy Travellers, particularly where Gypsy Travellers live. The Scottish Housing Regulator now looks at the accommodation that will be provided for Gypsy Travellers. We will be looking at that. We have made improvements in care for Gypsy Travellers. We have set up a number of groups looking across portfolios, because, as the member well knows, there are complex issues surrounding the Gypsy Traveller community and we want to get it right. As has rightly been identified, one of the first things that we have to do is raise awareness and ensure that the settled community and Gypsy Traveller community can live and work together in harmony. That is important. It is not something that has been put on the back seat and ignored; it is constantly being looked at and is constantly under discussion. We brought the cross-Government group together again and we have welcomed the reports and evidence of the committee, which is informing how we will take things forward. We are talking about discrimination that, if it were targeted at any other ethnic minority group, would be deemed wholly unacceptable. So, we have started exploring how to deliver an awareness-raising campaign that will endeavour to change the perception and prejudices that are sadly still associated with this community. During the evidence session with the committee, I was asked whether I would support such a campaign and I said that I would, because I think that it would have merit. Following the committee’s report, officials held discussions with Amnesty International, which has also stated its support for such a campaign. For such a campaign to be successful, we have to include all stakeholders, including the Gypsy Traveller community. We look forward to engaging with them in producing and delivering a campaign.

I am announcing this today. We are in discussions about it. We will certainly keep the member involved. It will certainly be one of the first things that the group that we have set up will look at. We are making certain commitments today and that is one of the things that the group will look at. I would hope that it would be done fairly quickly, but I will not put a timescale on it and then have someone come back and tell me that we have missed it. It is something that we are keen to do as quickly as possible. We know that it is vital that we take this opportunity to tackle the entrenched attitudes that are still prevalent. It is about getting the campaign right to ensure that we can build good relationships and better understanding between settled communities and the Gypsy Traveller community. Responsibility is, of course, a two-way street. Service providers and the settled community undoubtedly have to do more to understand and respond appropriately to Gypsy Traveller communities. However, Gypsy Traveller communities also have responsibilities and must ensure that living in accordance with their traditional practices does not impact adversely on others.

I will touch on that shortly, but that situation does not take away people’s responsibilities. I am suggesting not that living on an unauthorised site demonstrates a lack of responsibility, but that responsibilities attach to all communities and they should not impact on others. I will talk about unauthorised sites shortly. We must look at how we can remove the barriers and we can do that only if there is a better understanding. We know that many of the issues that arise in local communities are very sensitive, but we need to balance the rights of the Gypsy Traveller population to follow their traditional way of life, and the rights of local communities to pursue theirs. One area in which we need to balance those different rights is unauthorised sites. We are very keen that the group should examine the rights and responsibilities in relation to authorised and unauthorised sites. We will invite representatives from local authorities, COSLA, the Gypsy Traveller community, and other stakeholders to be in the group, to look at that issue in depth, and to try to resolve the problem. It is about rights and responsibilities. The group will look into the quality of some of the local authority sites. I agree that some of the cases that Margaret McCulloch outlined are shocking and none of us wants to see that. I also recognise that residents of local authority sites pay rent and are entitled to get services for that rent, and we will look at that. No one in Scotland should have poor living conditions and, as part of its work, the group will look at including the option of issuing updated guidance to local authorities. We will also explore the development and implementation of a standard Gypsy Traveller site tenancy agreement with set minimum responsibilities and rights. We need to explore that fully with all interested stakeholders before we can make a decision on the best way forward. Any agreement should be about the rights and responsibilities of all concerned. When Gypsy Travellers are on a site, the services that they can expect from the landlord should be clear to them, as should what they should do if those services are not being delivered. I want to see that set out clearly in any tenancy or leasing agreement. We achieved previous success with the work of the north-east working party, which was chaired by the then Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil. That brought together a wide range of stakeholders and produced a strategy with practical steps to improve and sustain community relations in the north-east. We will follow up on the implementation of that strategy to see how its actions have been put into practice and establish what lessons have been learnt that we can apply to other parts of Scotland. There are sites in Scotland that are well managed and appreciated by those who live on them. The Presiding Officer is indicating that I should wind up my speech. We welcome the committee’s report. A full response was provided that was compiled from input from across all Government departments, and it sets out clearly our proposals for addressing the report’s recommendations. I look forward to progressing the work in light of those findings and recommendations as part of making Scotland the country that we want it to be.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate John Wilson on securing the debate, because I welcome every opportunity that the Parliament has to make its voice heard on tackling poverty and inequality in Scotland. The Oxfam report outlines how crucial tackling poverty and inequality is to achieving our vision of a successful Scotland “with opportunities for all ... to flourish”, as set out in the Scottish Government’s purpose. I absolutely agree with the report’s focus on helping the poorest in society. That is why tackling poverty and inequality is a central priority for the Scottish Government. We are taking a long-term, preventative approach to tackling the key drivers of poverty. That includes the actions that are set out in our child poverty strategy on maximising household resources and improving children’s wellbeing and life chances. At a time when the UK Government’s austerity programme is placing households under increasing financial pressure, as we have heard from many speakers today, we remain committed to greater equality and social justice. I think that everyone who has taken part in the debate absolutely agrees with that, and I recognise the real cross-party support for John Swinney’s round-table meetings, which will reconvene to discuss the matter again. As part of the contract between the people of Scotland and their Government, we are protecting household incomes through the social wage, free personal care, the abolition of tuition fees, the abolition of charges for prescriptions and eye examinations, and the council tax freeze. Those things all matter to families on low incomes and to those who are working and struggling to make ends meet. All the measures that we have taken are assisting those families. I support the report’s comments on the living wage. The Scottish Government is leading by example in protecting the pay of the lowest earners—the ones for whom we have direct responsibility—and in ensuring that all staff covered by public sector pay policy are paid the Scottish living wage. We are actively encouraging all public, private and third sector organisations to do likewise. We are doing that not just because we believe that it is the right thing to do for the benefit of everyone in Scotland, but because international evidence shows that countries that achieve greater equality also perform better in economic terms. Social justice leads to social cohesion, which is a building block of economic success. As a Government, we care about the wellbeing of the people of Scotland, how people live their lives, how they want to live their lives, and their aspirations and hopes. That is why our economic strategy and national performance framework include cohesion and solidarity targets that are designed to increase equality and reduce the disparities between different sections of our society. I also think that our approach to regeneration reflects the report’s recommendations. We recognise the significance of local people identifying for themselves the issues and opportunities in their areas, deciding what to do about them and being responsible for delivering the economic, social and environmental actions that will make a real difference. We recognise that the changes required to make all communities sustainable will be achieved only when communities themselves play an active part in delivering change. We have started from a strong position in Scotland, as there is already an impressive range of activity taking place throughout urban and rural communities, led by hundreds of committed local anchor organisations. They drive change across a broad spectrum that includes addressing environmental issues; promoting local economic growth; tackling unemployment; supporting vulnerable people; challenging health inequalities; and enabling arts and cultural activity. Crucially, they deliver things that local people know will make a difference. During the recess, I visited a number of community anchor organisations throughout Scotland and saw what they were doing for the people and how they worked together to make a real difference for their communities. That is the kind of work that we all want to see. Recently, the Scottish Government set up its people and communities fund, which aims to help a wide range of community anchor organisations to deliver outcomes that meet and respond to the needs and aspirations of local communities. It is important that we have organisations that focus on up-skilling, because people’s capability to move things forward varies among communities. We need to ensure that everyone gets those opportunities and chances.

Okay. We could do a lot more if we had more powers to do it. Mary Scanlon mentioned the tax uplift, but unfortunately the UK Government has, by its other actions, taken that away from people.

I am sorry—I did not answer Mary Scanlon’s point about health. Yes, health is devolved, and the Scottish Government has a mental health strategy. It takes mental health very seriously and recognises the challenges that many people with mental health issues face, which is why we have that strategy in place. This Government is ambitious for Scotland’s communities, which is why we are introducing a community empowerment and renewal bill that will strengthen community planning, simplify the operation of the community right to buy and make it easier for communities to buy public sector land and buildings. However, despite our efforts, our social policies continue to be undermined by the UK Government’s welfare reforms, which have been discussed a great deal today. Over the five years to 2015, Scotland will see £4.5 billion taken from hard workers on low incomes, families, those with a disability, social housing tenants and people in the most vulnerable circumstances. Those are precisely the people whom society should be helping, not harming, and protecting, not pillaging. For our part, we are doing what we can to mitigate some of the worst impacts. Through the council tax benefit successor funding arrangement, we are providing, with our partners in local government, an extra £40 million to protect people from the UK Government’s 10 per cent cut. If we had not done that, the most vulnerable people in Scotland would pay an increased amount of council tax when others did not, which is simply not acceptable. Members will not be surprised to hear me say that extending the achievements of this Parliament around fairness and equality would be best served by independence. Independence would give us the powers that we need to build a fairer and more prosperous Scotland and ensure that the key decisions about what we want from our society and about Scotland’s future are made by the people who live and work in Scotland. Meeting closed at 18:24.

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on her new role shadowing the welfare portfolio. Like my health colleagues in the past, I look forward to some lively spats. The Scottish Government supports access to affordable, healthy and sustainable food for all and acknowledges that, with the current economic climate, welfare reform and increasing food prices, that access is becoming a greater concern for many people. The Scottish Government has provided an additional £9.2 million to the Scottish welfare fund, which means that we are providing the capacity to award an additional 5,600 community care grants and more than 100,000 crisis grants in this financial year. That fund will provide people with emergency support, so the necessity for food banks should be reduced. However, my concern is that the United Kingdom Government benefits reform programme unfairly impacts on some of the most vulnerable members of our society. In particular, I am concerned that the cuts and changes to the welfare system will undermine the long-term approach that we are taking to tackle the causes of poverty. The solution is for the Scottish Parliament to have control over welfare matters so that we can devise policies for the benefit of the Scottish people.

The Scottish Government has taken forward a number of actions to reduce child poverty in Scotland—an issue that is of great concern for me and for the Scottish Government. As I said, we have put in place a number of activities to provide support, including the Scottish welfare fund, our social wage—the social wage helps families that are struggling—and free prescriptions. We are against the UK Government’s welfare cuts, as Jackie Baillie well knows. As I laid out, if we had our own welfare system and were in charge of our own economy, we could ensure that our policies in health, housing and welfare were integrated to ensure that we could deliver the best possible opportunity for all the people of Scotland, and particularly our children.

Rather than criticise the Scottish Government on the Scottish welfare fund, Jackie Baillie should congratulate us on establishing that fund and topping it up by £9.2 million. The Scottish welfare fund, which came in in April this year, is a new fund that has not bedded in yet, but we are doing everything that we can to encourage people to use it. I spent the summer recess travelling up and down Scotland speaking to local authorities, third sector organisations and community groups to promote the fund and to encourage take-up. An officer within the Scottish Government is monitoring the fund for consistency and to look at how we can do things better. Jackie Baillie should join us in promoting the fund and, rather than criticise us, congratulate us on introducing a fund that protects our poorest people.

There is regular correspondence with the UK Government on those issues. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth wrote to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in March, ahead of the UK Government’s budget statement, to set out the Scottish Government’s concerns about the failure of the UK Government to grow the economy. I share the finance secretary’s concern about the cuts to benefit incomes for families across the country at a time when many are having to deal with sharp rises in the cost of living. I will continue to raise those issues with UK Government ministers at every opportunity, both in person and in writing. As I said, the solution is for Scotland to have control of its own economy and welfare system. We might then see a reduction in food banks in this country.

As set out in the current statement on charging for water for 2010 to 2015, the exemption is available only to those organisations that received an exemption in 1999, so it is not currently available to new organisations. However, Scottish Water recognises the issues that that creates and is working with the Scottish Government to look at introducing a revised scheme from 2015 that would be open to all small charities. Therefore, I accept the point that Elaine Smith has made.

The Scottish Government’s budget for fuel poverty and energy efficiency in 2013-14 is £79 million. The majority of that, £60 million, is being spent on council-led area-based schemes to tackle fuel poverty. Following agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, half of the £60 million was distributed among all 32 councils based on their levels of fuel poverty and the energy efficiency of their stock. The other £30 million was set aside for more ambitious projects by councils. The remaining £19 million will be used to deliver our national affordable warmth and energy assistance schemes and provide funding to the Energy Saving Trust and others to help support the home energy Scotland hotline and advice centres to provide advice and guidance to people about the energy efficiency of their homes and the support for which they might be eligible.

Yes, I do. Aberdeenshire got £4.4 million of the HEEPS money. It is clear that it is a national scheme that is being delivered locally. Local authorities can determine what is required in their area. The projects in Aberdeenshire take account of the area’s rurality, which was the intention of the scheme.

The draft “Scottish Planning Policy” is currently out for consultation until 23 July 2013. The subject policy on enabling the delivery of new homes proposes that plans should be informed by robust housing need and demand assessments and that those assessments should consider the needs of housing for older people. When a need is identified, planning authorities should prepare policies to support the delivery of appropriate housing and consider the allocation of specific sites.

We are always looking at the issue of housing for older people. The housing need demand assessment makes it very clear that local authorities should consider it. The five-year supply is looked at initially, but local authorities should look 20 years ahead with regard to land for housing and the housing need for their areas. They should identify trends in people’s increasing longevity. We expect that any requirements for an increase in specialist housing needs will be identified through that process.

The Scottish Government is supporting activity in the private housing sector through a range of actions, including our low-cost initiative for first-time buyers—LIFT—shared equity schemes, the National Housing Trust initiative, the housebuilding infrastructure loan fund and our guarantee support for the MI new home mortgage indemnity scheme. In addition, we have announced £120 million of funding over two years to support a significant Scottish new build shared equity scheme, which is part of an overall commitment to invest an additional £290 million in loans and equity support for housing.

I am aware of the issues that the member raises and the Scottish Government is looking at ways of assisting second steppers more than we are at present. We hope that the new scheme that we are looking at will be able to assist second steppers. However, they are also assisted through the open market shared equity scheme—when someone buys and moves into a house for the first time, that allows someone else to move on and move up the housing ladder. We are assisting second steppers and that issue will also be considered as part of the £120 million scheme that we are currently working up.

The Scottish Government has procured the services of five registered social landlords to administer the open market shared equity scheme throughout Scotland. The scheme is being promoted to all first-time buyers through local authorities, advice agencies, local financial advisers and estate agents. Some registered social landlords plan national newspaper advertising in the summer, and other media advertising is planned for the autumn.

We are aware of the challenges that relate to the delivery of affordable housing in rural areas and island communities, where small numbers can make a difference. Although a number of other Government initiatives are specifically for rural areas, we will continue to look at the matter. I am more than willing to discuss in more detail the open market shared equity scheme with the member, but we think that the 10 per cent uplift in the threshold has taken account of rural areas.

Analysis by Inclusion Scotland estimates that the changes from disability living allowance to personal independence payment, together with the real-terms cut in the budget, will significantly reduce the number of people in receipt of disability benefits in Scotland. Those changes, along with other coalition welfare cuts, will have a significant detrimental impact on poverty in Scotland and undermine our efforts to tackle its causes. The solution for that is for the Scottish Parliament to have control over its own welfare matters, so that we can devise policies for the benefit of the Scottish people.

The Scottish Government analysis that was published earlier this year estimated that the UK Government’s welfare reforms, including the change from DLA to PIP, could reduce welfare expenditure in Scotland by up to £4.5 billion in the five years to 2014-15. Today we published the expert working group on welfare’s report and the Scottish Government’s response to it. In our response, we mentioned “Scotland’s Balance Sheet”, a report that we published in April, which highlighted that expenditure on social protection as a share of GDP is estimated to have been lower in Scotland than in the UK in each of the past five years. The Scottish Government is aware of that and we are aware that we have powers only to mitigate, not to change. Mitigating the full impact of the cuts will not be possible until the Scottish Parliament has full control and can put in place policies that benefit the people of Scotland.

I certainly share the member’s concern and am very much aware of the cases and the stories that the Welfare Reform Committee has heard, which are a concern to all of us. We know that the work capability assessments are causing a great deal of distress to many people. Lessons have to be learned from a process that is currently being carried out by Atos Healthcare. That process is flawed, and it has been flawed for a considerable time. The UK Government must ensure that it takes the necessary steps to make the PIP assessment process fair and effective for all, and the Scottish Government will continue to monitor the implementation of PIP in Scotland, because we are extremely concerned about the anxiety that people currently face. It is not only the Welfare Reform Committee that has heard about that; I think that every MSP has heard about it in their surgery.

I, too, thank Christina McKelvie for bringing the issue to the chamber. She is a great champion for those with motor neurone disease. As she has explained, it is something that she cares deeply and passionately about. We have heard many heart-rending stories about the impact of the condition on people and their families. I thank MND Scotland for its invaluable support for people living with the illness. Given the prognosis, we know that people with MND need immediate support and care. It is important that they get the right support at the right time from the health service and social services, and that support is all the more important as the UK Government’s ill-judged cuts and changes to the welfare system take effect. I know that those reforms are causing a great deal of worry and upset for many people. One of the biggest concerns continues to be the flawed work capability assessment. The DWP has made it clear that, unless a condition is terminal under its definition—which is when a doctor says that life expectancy is six months—there is no automatic exemption from assessments, regardless of disability or health condition. However, the DWP can decide whether to refer someone for an assessment at the start of a claim based on the evidence provided by the person making the claim and their healthcare professional. We have heard from everyone tonight about MND and life expectancy with the condition. In many cases, it is an absolute nonsense that people are sent for an assessment. I would agree with all the members who have said that—Kenneth Gibson described it as “plain daft”. Nevertheless, the DWP seems to be failing to take account of the evidence that is being provided to it. That is backed up by the many letters that we all receive on the issue. The Scottish Government has raised concerns about the welfare reforms with UK ministers on several occasions. Recently, the Deputy First Minister wrote to Iain Duncan Smith specifically about the work capability assessment process. Despite three independent reviews, that process is still not working and yet another review—to be carried out by Dr Paul Litchfield—is under way. We have pressed the DWP to ensure that the latest review finally produces a process that is fair and equitable. As we have heard from many members, the bedroom tax is another flawed policy that just will not work. The example included in the motion is a tragic case that demonstrates perfectly the indiscriminate effect of this shameless reform. The bedroom tax takes no account whatever of the circumstances of the individual concerned. Of those households in Scotland that are affected by the bedroom tax, 79 per cent contain an adult who has a disability that is recognised under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. During the passage of the Welfare Reform Bill, the Scottish Government made clear our objections to the reforms and asked for them to be withdrawn. We were especially mindful of the impact on disabled people, so we pressed for a specific exemption to safeguard those whose houses have been substantially adapted, often at considerable cost to local authorities. Although the UK Government acknowledged the issue, its preferred response was to increase discretionary housing payments so that local authorities could deal with what it described as the “hard cases”. The response was specifically aimed at those who have substantially adapted housing, but it does not provide the safeguard that a statutory exemption would provide. If exemptions can be made for foster and kinship carers and for those who serve in the armed forces—and I welcome those exemptions—surely people in substantially adapted disabled houses should also be exempt. Scotland receives 6.5 per cent of the total DHP budget. Scotland and London have the same number of claimants who are affected by bedroom tax, but for 2013-14 Scotland will receive £10 million in DHP compared with £56.6 million for London. That is not fair, especially given that the original problem existed not in Scotland but in the south-east of England and in London in particular. I have repeatedly asked, and will continue to ask, for an increase in discretionary housing payments to alleviate the impact on our most vulnerable people and those with an illness or disability. The bedroom tax simply has no place in Scotland. I note that the expert working group on welfare has today published its report, which I am sure will be an important staging post in the debate to come. I welcome the working group’s contribution and I note some of the themes emerging from its report, such as the need to treat people on benefits with respect. I echo those calls. People who are too ill to work or who are unable to obtain work should not be stigmatised. They do not choose to be in the position that they are in, so they should not be penalised for it. At heart, the independence debate is about choices. It is about ensuring that the key decisions about what we want from our society and about Scotland’s future are made by the people who live and work in Scotland. We will be able to achieve a fairer welfare system for Scotland that ensures fair and decent support for people only through independence and with full control over welfare issues. I know that this is not a political debate, but, in response to Drew Smith, I point out that all parties in Westminster are now committed to keeping the bedroom tax and to keeping the benefits system as it is. There will be no improvement there, so the only option is the one that we are putting to the people of Scotland. That option would give us control of our own welfare system and would allow us to make decisions that are right for Scotland. We have already set out measures that the Scottish Government will take in the event of a yes vote, such as repealing the bedroom tax and separating housing benefit from universal credit. As a Scottish Government, we have a high level of ambition for Scotland and our people, and we are determined to address the root causes of poverty and inequality by bringing about the change that our nation and communities need. People who are suffering from illnesses and long-term conditions should not need to go through the indignity that they currently go through under the present welfare system. Meeting closed at 17:34.

I, too, thank Paul Martin for bringing the subject to the chamber. I do not want to shy away from the issue, which is important. This morning, I returned from the SFHA’s annual conference, where I paid tribute to housing associations for the positive differences that they make to people’s lives and communities. I know that that would not be possible without the dedication and commitment of the voluntary board members and the professionalism and hard work of their staff. I am pleased to reiterate that for the community housing association members who are here. As we have heard, vibrant communities are about more than the houses that people live in. The Scottish Government recognises the huge contribution that community-controlled housing associations make to the wellbeing of their tenants and their neighbourhoods. For example, in north-east Glasgow, Wellhouse Community Trust’s peoples gateway project, which is supported by Wellhouse Housing Association and Provanhall Housing Association, is helping to tackle antisocial behaviour and to provide positive outcomes for young people. Our £7.9 million people and communities fund will contribute to the total project cost and support that important work. I think that Bob Doris said that Glasgow receives a significant share of Scottish housing resources. It has a three-year housing supply budget of £181 million. That is not all that we are spending in Glasgow. There is separate funding of over £28 million for Glasgow Housing Association, and there is the recent greener homes innovation scheme, under which housing associations got funding of over £5 million. We have shared-equity programmes that help first-time buyers. Over the past six years, the funding to Glasgow City Council has been in excess of £800 million. To meet national targets, Glasgow needs to deliver strongly on housing, and the role of community-controlled organisations is vital in that. Housing associations face significant pressures. There is the impact of the cuts from the Westminster Government, which we have heard about, and there are the impacts of welfare reform. Alex Johnstone’s party in Westminster has imposed those things on Scotland, and he had a bit of a neck to suggest that, in some way, it is the Scottish Government’s fault and my fault in particular. We are taking no lessons from the Tories and what they are doing. Housing associations have responded magnificently. They understand the pressures that we are under. We will continue to encourage those strong community anchor organisations to explore further financial and service innovations.

If Paul Martin can come up with a strategy and show me where that money is in our settlement from the Westminster Government, which is the same settlement that your Government is going to carry on with, I will talk to you more strongly.

Despite swingeing UK Government cuts to our capital budgets, more than 6,000 affordable homes were completed in the last financial year. That brought the total additional affordable homes delivered in six years of SNP government to more than 40,000, which compares with the fewer than 32,000 that were delivered in the previous six years by previous Administrations. Some 8,000 more families have been helped into affordable homes by the SNP Government. The figures back that up. Members may be aware of the lobby outside Parliament today by the Glasgow and West of Scotland Forum of Housing Associations—indeed, some members may have attended it. Its paper from last autumn called for rolling three-year housing programmes, which we announced in March. It asked us to look again at subsidy rates, funding for acquisitions, payment on completion and management of risk, and we are discussing all those issues with the sector, including the GWSF, right now. I am clear that we need to address those challenges and to do so together. I recently set up a short-life working group to advise on issues such as affordable rents and financial capacity, and housing associations and councils are represented on the group. We look forward to receiving the group’s advice. Its first two meetings were positive and took full account of the evidence on current issues from all involved. I emphasise that, every time that the Scottish Government has had an opportunity to increase housing investment in Scotland, we have done so. By the end of April, we had allocated £200 million of additional funding for new affordable homes, bringing the total investment to almost £860 million in the three years to March 2015.

Absolutely. The houses are being built to very high standards. When I visit housing associations and new developments, I take great pleasure in seeing that we have those standards and that people have homes.

Sorry. I would have taken an intervention, but I am running out of time, and I have a few things to say. The Scottish Government has been criticised, but we are working with the sector to try to deal with the challenges together. We have not said that there are no challenges. Specifically on welfare reform, I have written to Westminster’s Scottish Affairs Committee with evidence of the problems that the reform will create for social tenants and landlords in Scotland. I will continue to press the UK Government as hard as I can on that, and particularly on the bedroom tax. As political issues have been raised in the debate, I have to say that the SNP is the only party that has said that it will scrap the bedroom tax. No one else has said that. That should get out there. The Labour Party has not said it. The other day, we heard Ed Balls making it clear that Labour would continue with the bedroom tax, as will the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats. Members say that they want some truth and facts, and that is a fact. We are doing all that we can to lessen the impacts of welfare reform, but there are no easy answers. We still need strong programmes to meet growing housing needs, and we must continue to use public money effectively. We might be five years on from the credit crunch, but we are still dealing with the problems from its fallout, not least of which are the problems that housing associations face with bank lending conditions. I will raise that matter next week with lenders, because they have to be told about the issues that the situation is causing for jobs and for housing associations and financing. At this time of financial constraint, the focus should be on what we can achieve together and not just on providing the same amount of money as in the past. It is about how we deliver efficiency and value in the housing programme while continuing to meet housing needs across Scotland to ensure that people live in high-quality affordable homes in sustainable communities. 13:28 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Reducing winter fuel payments would put more Scottish households at risk of fuel poverty and undermine the Government’s determined efforts to eradicate that scourge. Our new home energy efficiency programmes for Scotland are focused on addressing the areas that are worst affected by fuel poverty. We are providing £79 million to support our area-based and national schemes and lever in energy company investment to create a £200 million fund. As part of that, we have invested £60 million this year in the energy efficiency scheme, which provides heating and insulation measures to the most vulnerable and poor households in Scotland. Along with direct help from energy companies through the affordable warmth scheme, it is estimated that more than 300,000 poorer households will be eligible for free insulation and heating. We are also continuing to fund the home energy Scotland hotline, which provides tailored and trustworthy advice on the assistance that is available to them.

Yes. The Labour shadow chancellor’s announcement suggests that his party wants to restrict financial support for fuel poverty even further than the United Kingdom Government by means testing older people. An independent Scotland would be able to take decisions on welfare that ensure that people receive fair and decent support. We need only compare the approaches taken by the Scottish and UK Governments to helping people have warm homes. As I have said, in 2013-14, we have allocated £79 million to our fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes whereas over the past few years the UK Government has been reducing funding for its warm front programme to the point that, from this year, fuel poverty households will get assistance only from the obligations placed on the energy companies.

As I have said, the Scottish Government is committed to tackling fuel poverty and over the spending review period will spend a total of around £250 million on fuel poverty and domestic energy efficiency. Winter fuel payments help older people heat their homes, and since their introduction in the late 1990s—which was something that, as the member has made clear, Margaret Ewing campaigned hard for—they have provided a welcome source of financial support. I am sure that, like me, Margaret Ewing would be appalled at the way in which the UK Government is trying to remove them.

I, too, thank Patrick Harvie for bringing the issue to the chamber for debate. It is clearly important to all of us. I have listened carefully to what has been said and I will respond to some of the points that members made. I share the concerns for tenants who are treated unfairly when the time comes to lodge or return deposits. That is why the Scottish Government introduced tenancy deposit schemes. So far, the uptake has been strong, although that might not be how it is portrayed. The final deadline for all existing deposits to be lodged with one of the three schemes was 15 May 2013 and, by that time, 146,300 deposits with a value of £93.75 million had been lodged with the approved schemes. I have read the Evening Times article about private landlords failing to lodge deposits with one of the approved schemes. I know that not all landlords take a deposit from tenants. However, when we compare the number of deposits lodged with the number of private rented properties registered with local authorities, the suggestion is that some landlords still need to lodge deposits. The Scottish Government will therefore continue to work with the scheme providers and other stakeholders such as Citizens Advice Scotland and Shelter Scotland to encourage compliance with the law.

Landlords must lodge deposits with an approved scheme—that is why the schemes were set up and those are the rules of the schemes. If a landlord does not do that, the landlord is breaking the law. As I move on, I will cover some of the points that Patrick Harvie made about how the law can be enforced. I believe that, as Kezia Dugdale and others said, good information and advice can lead to an improvement in consumers’ confidence and in the quality of the service that they receive. Like Patrick Harvie, I think that it was important that the Evening Times highlighted the Glasgow Central CAB’s work. Like Vincent Chudy, the manager of that CAB, I urge all private tenants to check that their deposit has been paid to one of the three approved schemes. All of us who are elected to the Parliament should highlight that at every opportunity. We encourage tenants to think of themselves as consumers who can raise standards in the sector. That is one reason why we recently introduced the tenant information pack, which provides key information for tenants and landlords in an easy-to-read format and includes information on tenants’ rights to deposit protection. As Marco Biagi mentioned, the launch of the pack is supported by the new Renting Scotland website, which is co-funded by the Scottish Government and Shelter Scotland. The website rentingscotland.org is an industry-wide information hub that offers practical guides for tenants and landlords. I have checked it out and can confirm that it provides key information and—an important point for someone like me—is user friendly and easy to access. I will answer some of the questions that were asked. Clearly, private landlords have a duty to protect tenants’ deposits under one of the schemes. If the landlord fails to do so, the tenant can apply to the sheriff court to enforce the law and the court has the power to fine the landlord up to three times the amount of the deposit. Local authorities can take such a breach of housing law into account when considering the fit-and-proper-person test for landlord registration and for the licensing of houses in multiple occupation. Last week, I launched “A Place to Stay, A Place to Call Home”, which is the first strategy since devolution that is solely for the private rented sector. The strategy sets out what further action we will take “to improve the quality of property management, condition and service” to deliver a sector that works for tenants and landlords. We want to work with good professional landlords to help them to prosper, but we are also determined to take action against the minority of landlords who damage the image of the sector and our wider communities. The strategy proposes a more focused regulatory system for the sector. We will identify new ways of targeting tougher enforcement action against the worst landlords using existing legislation. On the point that Malcolm Chisholm made, we will also look at a tie-in between the tenancy deposit scheme and registration. The fit-and-proper-person test can cover a number of things. For example, if someone was illegally evicted and lost access to the property as a result—as can happen—the local authority should look closely at whether the landlord is a fit and proper person to be a landlord. We will look at that kind of tough enforcement action using existing legislation.

We have set up a working group. The strategy makes it clear that we will work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, given that local authorities will need to enforce the strategy. The working group will look at how local authorities use the registration fee, how they operate the scheme in their area and what they check when someone applies to be a landlord or when someone reports something. Often, the first place that people go to is not the sheriff court or a solicitor but the local authority, which must understand that it has an obligation to take some action. As we have said previously, when regulation is needed, we will take action. As has been mentioned, the strategy sets out our intention to regulate the letting industry, but we want to take the sector on board with us. The strategy has been welcomed by Shelter and the Scottish Association of Landlords, and we want to work with them to get it right. We want to keep the good landlords and letting agents on board, but we will ensure that those who are not performing well are aware that they cannot continue like that. We know that the private rented sector is growing and that tenure is an issue. The strategy sets out our intention to consult on the tenure regime for the private sector. If it is necessary to regulate on that, we will do so. The sector has an important role to play in delivering the Scottish Government’s vision that all the people of Scotland should live in a high-quality home. Meeting closed at 17:44.

I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for bringing this debate to the chamber and I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee. I genuinely welcome the debate and I thank the committee for addressing youth homelessness, which is an important issue for us all. As the convener said, I wrote to the committee in November with the Scottish Government’s response to its recommendations. I will outline some of the action that we have taken forward since then. The Scottish Parliament’s historic 2012 homelessness commitment has been met, which means that all unintentionally homeless people are entitled to settled accommodation. We are keen to continue our focus on the prevention of homelessness, through the housing options approach. Addressing homelessness among young people is an important part of that. Our approach has contributed to a significant fall in recorded homelessness in recent years, but young people still make up around a third of all homeless people. The figures reduced from 15,000 in 2009-10 to fewer than 12,000 during 2011-12, but I know that that is not enough and that a lot needs to be done to bring down the numbers further. We will continue to work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, so that we learn from practice and work to improve homelessness policy in Scotland.

I absolutely recognise that we have what I think is the best homelessness legislation in Europe. That does not make us complacent. The Government recognises that we must work hard on the issue, because too many people, particularly young people, are homeless. I will talk about the range of partners with whom we are working to prevent homelessness. I welcome the reference in the committee’s report to the work of the five local authority housing options hubs and its significant impact on reducing homelessness in Scotland and preventing young people from becoming homeless, which is important. If we can prevent homelessness in the first instance, that is the key. The convener talked about the benefits that can be gained through family mediation. From my visits to organisations and conversations with homeless people, it has become clear to me that relationship breakdown is often a main factor in someone becoming homeless, whether the relationship is with a family member, partner or someone else. As the convener said, mediation is not the solution for everyone, but it certainly works for some people, particularly young people. The convener mentioned respite. The steering group is considering the recommendations of the supported accommodation implementation group in that regard. I recently visited a homelessness project and spoke to a young person who was about to be reunited with her parents. She said that the space that the project had provided was all that she had required. I think that she had found that living on her own was not all that it was made out to be, so going home had become a more attractive option. I think that her parents had been spoken to and everyone had sat down and discussed the situation. Such opportunities should be there for everyone, and the steering group is considering the matter. It is important that all our policies are joined up and that we are clear about the importance of approaches such as getting it right for every child. GIRFEC is a multi-agency approach, which puts the child or young person at the heart of all policies and service planning in Scotland. There are no easy solutions to the varied and complex issues that lead to homelessness among young people. One approach is the work of the Scottish Government-funded national co-ordinators, who promote four key issues: employability; rebuilding social networks; service user involvement; and accessing furniture. Those issues are crucial for young people who face homelessness. As the convener said clearly, there is no point in just handing over the keys to an empty house—that is not the solution to the problem, but the start of many new problems. We all recognise that; it is what I find when I talk to people. I set out to go around and speak to as many homeless people—young and old—as I could to discuss what support they get and the circumstances that make them homeless in the first place. I will continue to do that, because I very much recognise that many young people need support to help them sustain their tenancy, to live independently in their communities and, more important, to prevent them from becoming homeless again. As a result of our concern about the issue, we established the supported accommodation implementation group. Last year, the group issued its final report, which took an in-depth look at housing support for homeless people. Its proposals will be considered by the Scottish Government and COSLA homelessness prevention group, which we have kept going to progress the recommendations in the committee’s report. Another development is the new housing support duty, which comes into force on 1 June. That means that local authorities must assess the housing support needs of certain homeless applicants and ensure that housing support services are provided to all those who need them. We are working with local government and other key stakeholders to develop guidance to help councils implement the duty. The feedback that we have had so far has been very positive. The committee report expressed concern about life skills and the resources that are available to teach young people financial management skills from an early age. Education Scotland and its partners are developing a series of half-day workshops for secondary school teachers to discuss financial education in the context of curriculum for excellence. The committee noted that a lot of work has been done by local authorities and their partners to address housing education in schools. The housing options hubs are actively sharing practice in that area. The availability of suitable accommodation can make a huge difference to a young person’s outcomes leaving care. To look at that issue, we established a throughcare and aftercare activity hub on accommodation for care leavers as part of the looked-after children strategic implementation group. The group has an important role: it is looking to develop a model housing protocol for care leavers based on existing best practice. That issue will be discussed at a national event for care leavers in October, which will be attended by the Minister for Children and Young People. The committee report highlighted the fact that welfare reform presents a significant threat to sustaining the success of the housing options approach. I am not in any way complacent about the potential impact of welfare reform on the most vulnerable, including young homeless people. The housing options hubs are well placed to address the challenges, and they are proactively engaged in identifying the best options available to help those at risk. That work is crucial, so we have committed to fund the hubs for the next two years so that it can continue. The committee had concerns, as has been mentioned, about the operation of the previous social fund and, in particular, community care grants. I am pleased to say that the Scottish welfare fund came into force last month and that the Scottish Government has committed an additional £9.2 million to it. The fund has been going only since April, but the feedback on how the fund is operating and the assistance that it is providing has been very positive. The Scottish welfare fund can help young people by providing a safety net in emergencies, or where there is an immediate threat to health and safety. We are monitoring its implementation to ensure that it is working for those who need it most, including our vulnerable young people. The guidance makes particular reference to that group of people. Tackling youth homelessness is a priority for me and the Scottish Government. I have highlighted the actions that the Scottish Government, along with local government and third sector partners, is taking and will continue to take to tackle and prevent youth homelessness in Scotland. I, too, look forward to hearing members’ contributions to the debate.

We have certainly had a wide-ranging debate and a number of views have been expressed, but in the main the debate has been very consensual. There is clearly real concern about youth homelessness in Scotland. I want to cover some of the points that have been raised. I start by saying to Alex Johnstone that the first fact is that as many social houses are being built now—with very restricted funding—as were being built when funding for the Scottish Government was increasing. The second fact is that there are far fewer people in bed and breakfast accommodation now than there were in 2005. Alex Johnstone suggested that that is not the case, so I should correct the record. I will deal with welfare reform later. Malcolm Chisholm asked a couple of questions. One was on the prevention monitoring tool. That tool has been developed and so far 31 of 32 local authorities are very supportive of it and are willing to take it on on a mandatory basis. We are in discussions with COSLA about that. I hope that by next year we will be able to proceed with that tool. It is an important element, so he was right to raise it. Malcolm Chisholm also asked about certain groups of homeless applicants having to be assessed in line with the new statutory obligation. I was referring to those who are assessed as unintentionally homeless and whom the local authority has reason to believe need support. Clearly not every homeless applicant will require mandatory support, guidance and advice. However, it is very clear that a young person would come into that category. If they did not, I would certainly want to know about it. Respite was raised a number of times. I thought that I had made it clear in my opening speech that we are looking very seriously at respite as part of mediation. That was one of the recommendations of the supported accommodation implementation group, whose recommendations are being taken forward by the Scottish Government and COSLA homelessness prevention group. I hope that it is quite clear that we are taking that forward. I think that everyone is agreed that focusing on prevention is the way forward. The focus that we have had so far with the housing hubs is having an impact. The Scottish Government will continue to support that approach, which has now taken root across Scotland. Meeting the needs of young people, including those leaving care, is an important part of the preventative approach that is being taken through the hubs, which are also involved in taking forward the recommendations of the supported accommodation implementation group. More than ever, we are aware of the wide range of issues that can impact on young people who find themselves homeless. A number of speakers have said that it is clearly not just a housing issue. We know that there is a need for a joint response across all sectors and services. As the committee highlighted, curriculum for excellence has a key role to play in improving the life chances of all young people. Young people are entitled to support to help them realise opportunities and reach their potential. Through the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, the Scottish Government is considering extending up to the age of 25—which is beyond the current cut-off age—the right of young people leaving care to receive support. That will be more in step with ordinary families, who provide support to their children throughout their early adult lives and sometimes—as in my case—beyond that. As has been mentioned, we have provided an additional £9.2 million for the Scottish welfare fund. Siobhan McMahon raised some points about that—and she has done so before. The Scottish welfare fund is a national scheme, but it is localised, so it has much more flexibility, and local authorities have the power to award a grant in principle. Even when the house is not yet allocated, the local authority knows that an allocation is coming. As has happened in one case, it can award a grant in principle to ensure that, when the person moves in, the necessary resources are there. That is happening just now.

At the moment, it is a national scheme. We have produced guidance for it, and it will be monitored. It has to have the flexibility to meet local needs, but, as the member says, we do not want a postcode lottery. Every aspect of the scheme will be monitored, as we have said before. A number of members have mentioned welfare reform, which will clearly have an impact on some young people. However, it is wrong to suggest that we must consider shared accommodation as an option because of welfare reform. Many organisations are looking into shared accommodation because it is the right thing for particular young people, not because of welfare reform.

Yes, I am aware of that. We are considering the point. Loads of organisations are involved. Members have mentioned the third sector, and third sector and voluntary organisations are doing pioneering work through projects dealing with youth homelessness that I and others have visited, some of which have been mentioned in the debate. They are considering the issue of shared accommodation, and we are considering the information that they are providing to us. For some young people, shared accommodation is right: it stops the isolation and is a good solution. However, it is not that they have to go into shared accommodation because of welfare reform. It is not correct to say that welfare reform has given us that option. The option is there when it is right for the person concerned. In all this, it is the individual and what is right for them that we are considering. We want to continue with the getting it right for every child approach to improve outcomes for children and young people in Scotland. That approach helps to deliver our social frameworks, which include equally well, early years and achieving our potential. I think that it was John Finnie who said that GIRFEC cuts across portfolios—it is not simply a housing matter. We have prioritised work that supports partners to develop the whole-system approach to young people under 18 who offend. It applies across all agencies, bringing key policy frameworks together into one holistic approach for young people who offend. Experiencing homelessness can be damaging for anyone, but particularly so for a young person. As I said, I have visited a number of projects across Scotland in recent months, and I have met many young people who are looking to rebuild their lives after periods of homelessness. There are some very positive stories. Some people have come from places of absolute desperation, sometimes with mental health problems or addiction problems. They had been unable to sustain a tenancy, but they have been supported into one and will continue to be supported. Some great work is going on in relation to employability skills, voluntary work and preparation for work, and I commend all of it. Through the housing voluntary grant scheme £1.9 million of Scottish Government funding goes to projects such as those that I have been talking about to address housing support issues, including homelessness. If a young person becomes homeless, it is critical that they have early opportunities to access advice, information, housing and support to help them rebuild their lives and futures. That is the important bit—it is about rebuilding their lives. This Government’s commitment to tackling and preventing homelessness remains as strong as ever. In these challenging times, we must all intensify our efforts for young homeless people and continue to be creative and innovative in our approaches. Scotland is a progressive nation and can rightly be proud not just of the changes that we have already made in addressing homelessness, but of the direction in which we are travelling. We are complementing a strong legislative framework with an ability to work together to promote new approaches to prevention and to achieve positive and sustainable outcomes that all homeless people in Scotland should expect. I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for a well-evidenced report, and I thank the people and organisations who gave that evidence. I look forward to our working together as we continue to develop and embed innovative approaches to tackling youth homelessness in Scotland.

I welcome the report and its support for the action that the Scottish Government is taking to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty—in particular, the continuation of direct Government funding to tackle fuel poverty and for energy efficiency schemes in Scotland, in contrast to the withdrawal of Government funding in England, where the United Kingdom Government’s fuel poverty programme budget has been reduced from £366 million in 2010-11 to zero in the current year.

The Government is committed to enabling all parts of Scotland to benefit from Great Britain-wide programmes that consumers pay for through levies and bills. CERT and CESP provided no protection or incentive for investment in rural and remote areas but, with Scottish Government funding, we helped to mitigate the effects of that in Highland, the Scottish Borders and Eilean Siar. Recent figures show that the percentage of homes that received professionally installed loft or cavity wall insulation increased more than threefold between the first and final rounds of CERT. At the fuel price summit in January, I told Ed Davey that Scotland must receive its fair share of the new energy company obligation. Our new home energy efficiency programmes for Scotland are focused on addressing the areas that are worst affected by fuel poverty. We are providing £60 million to councils to lever in the energy company investment, which councils can use to assist with the higher costs of delivery in remote areas if they wish to do so. Evidence from the pilot schemes, which were launched in December, suggests that rural and remote areas are able to develop schemes and attract investment. The Scottish Government is currently funding a pilot project in Argyll and Bute, and we are scrutinising the report that has been provided by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets on the delivery of ECO to ensure that all parts of Scotland are benefiting.

That work is still on-going. A discussion has yet to take place, but I reassure Liam McArthur that I have not forgotten about the commitment that I made. It will be discussed at the next meeting of the fuel poverty forum.

The Scottish Government is committed to working in partnership with local authorities and housing associations to develop much needed, high-quality social and affordable housing. We are investing £860 million in housing supply in the current three-year period and, last year, we introduced a three-year resource planning approach, bringing the council and registered social landlord funding streams together into one budget for the first time. That approach enables each council to exercise its strategic role more flexibly.

We are doing all that we can to boost housing supply throughout Scotland. Despite Westminster’s cut in our capital budgets, we will deliver at least 30,000 affordable homes during this parliamentary session. We have been able to allocate funding of more than £18 million for Renfrewshire Council in the current three-year period. I understand that the vast majority of that will be invested in the Paisley area, including, for example, in a further phase of the Shortroods development near Glasgow airport, which will deliver 42 affordable homes and help the area’s regeneration. The resources that are available for future allocations will depend on future budget decisions, but we have been able to provide a minimum planning assumption of more than £9 million for Renfrewshire Council for the next three-year period to March 2018.

Up to the end of April this year, more than 140,000 deposits, with a total value of £89 million, had been lodged with one of the three approved tenancy deposit schemes. Those are the most up-to-date figures that are available. A comparison with the number of properties that private landlords have registered with local authorities suggests that some landlords still need to lodge deposits. The Scottish Government will continue to work with the scheme providers and other stakeholders to encourage compliance with the new law in that regard.

Private landlords have a duty to protect tenants’ deposits under one of the three schemes. If they fail to do so, a sheriff court may order the imposition of a financial penalty on the landlord of up to three times the deposit. In addition, local authorities have the power to take appropriate action where there is evidence of unregistered landlords or properties, or of non-compliance with tenancy deposit legislation. That may be taken into account as part of the fit and proper test for houses in multiple occupation licensing and landlord registration. We are promoting the scheme, and we are keeping a close eye on what is happening.

I, too, thank Anne McTaggart for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is always important to recognise the pioneering women who took vital steps in politics on behalf of all of us who have followed since. It is right that the debate stretches outwith Glasgow and Govan to other parts of Scotland. I imagine that when Mary Barbour became the first female councillor in Glasgow in 1920, she thought that gender equality in public and political life would have been secured by 2013. However, almost 100 years later, that is not yet the case. The gender balance in this Parliament is considerably better than that at Westminster, and we are making headway with public appointments, but there is still a lot more for us to do. There is little doubt that Mary Barbour’s passion and success in driving forward policies to improve the lives of many of the poorest people in our society helped to shape the country in which we live today. Although we have come a long way since she was active, we can still draw on her for inspiration to deliver our aim of creating a fairer and more equal country. The Scottish Government’s commitment to reducing inequalities is echoed in the national performance framework’s solidarity and cohesion targets as well as in our commitment to the principle of universal entitlement, which I firmly believe maintains the sense of togetherness that should be the cornerstone of any society as of the society of which Mary Barbour was proud. For example, through our “Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland”, we express our commitment to focus on the need to tackle the long-term drivers of poverty through early intervention and prevention to break the cycles of poor outcomes. That is something of which Mary would approve. Despite everything that we are trying to do, our social policies continue to be undermined by the welfare reforms that are being introduced at Westminster. A few members have mentioned that. I wonder what Mary Barbour would have thought of something as unfair as the bedroom tax. Could she have envisaged that, 100 years on, something like that would happen? Over the five years to 2015, Scotland will have £4.5 billion taken from hard workers on low incomes, families, people with a disability and social housing tenants—precisely the people whom society should be helping, not harming, and protecting, not pillaging. Those are the people about whom Mary cared so passionately as she worked so hard to improve their lives. Whether we are discussing the changes to tax credits that were introduced by the UK Government last year, which have been hitting the budget of more than 100,000 working families in Scotland, or the fundamental changes to child benefit, there is no longer a universal bond from one generation to the next—there is just a muddle of unfairness. The sad reality is that reducing the value of tax credits and child benefit will result in a lower income for those with caring responsibilities, the vast majority of whom are women. A hundred years ago, that was very much the sort of situation that Mary Barbour fought to improve. Like Mary Barbour, the Government remains dedicated to supporting those who care for children, through measures such as increasing the amount and flexible delivery of free early learning and childcare from 475 hours to a minimum of 600 hours a year. That action will improve outcomes for children and will support women in Scotland into work. Issues hindering women’s access to and participation in employment are a key priority for us. Working closely with the STUC, we held the first ever Scottish women’s employment summit in 2012 to consider the issues and to identify actions to tackle them. Such measures will provide tangible benefits for women and families across Scotland. Like Mary Barbour, I recognise the vital role of social housing in providing people with an affordable home and a platform for getting on in life, and in delivering a community that people want to live in. We have heard about Mary Barbour’s community spirit and her working for her community to keep it together. To me, that is a significant part of what she did. Mary fought very hard for the hardest hit. I wonder what she would think about the one-size-fits-all bedroom tax. It does not matter about someone’s age or disability, the availability of smaller houses or the economic conditions—the poorest will be hit the hardest. The UK Government’s reforms call into question the role of housing support in a civilized country. Access to decent housing is a fundamental need and right, which Mary Barbour recognised 100 years ago. I am sure that she would be pleased about what the Scottish Government is doing to try to address that. The challenge facing the social housing sector in particular is the reason why we have given money to social landlords to help them to advise their tenants. However, many impacts of the UK Government’s welfare reforms go beyond what we currently have powers over in our own country. It saddens me that the reforms that the Government chose to introduce go against the vision that people such as Mary Barbour had for this country. I passionately believe that the best solution can be found by the Scottish people having control over such matters. We must ensure that no one is held back because of discrimination or disadvantage. Until then, the Scottish Government will continue to act and intervene where we have the powers to do so. Mary Barbour was indeed an inspirational woman, and a monument is a fitting tribute to her.

That is something that I will take back and look at. I cannot comment on that at this stage but, as I have said, she was certainly an inspirational woman, and a monument is a fitting tribute to her. I have no connections with Govan or Kilbarchan—perhaps we could stretch it down to Ayrshire—but I wish Maria Fyfe and her group every success in their fundraising efforts. I am glad that I will not have any say in where any monument—if that is agreed to—is placed, but it would be a very fitting tribute to a woman who has done so much for Glasgow and for women in Scotland. 13:10 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I, too, thank Clare Adamson for bringing the issue for debate. She has highlighted the importance of ensuring that private tenants are able to live in safe homes with a reduced risk of electric shocks and fires from poorly maintained installations and appliances. A number of speakers have mentioned the work of the Electrical Safety Council. The council should be commended for raising awareness of the issue and actively campaigning for improvements in safety standards. I know that the points that have been raised were recently discussed at the round-table event that Clare Adamson and the council held in the Parliament. As Alex Johnstone said, the private rented sector in Scotland has more than doubled since 1999, and current projections suggest that it will continue to increase its share of the housing market. There is also an increase in the number of home owners moving up the housing ladder who are becoming landlords, often because they are unable to sell their home due to problems in the housing market caused by the recession. Those landlords, who are sometimes called reluctant or accidental landlords, are not professional landlords with large property portfolios, so we need to ensure that they understand their responsibilities as landlords. We also need to ensure that the bigger landlords know about and carry out their obligations to their tenants. It is particularly important that both landlords and tenants are aware of the dangers of electrical fires and electrocution. One of the responsibilities of private sector landlords is to ensure that the homes that they let comply with the statutory repairing standard that is set out in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006. They should ensure that their homes meet that standard before a tenancy begins and at all times throughout the tenancy. One part of the repairing standard is that landlords must ensure that the electrical installations and appliances that they provide are in a reasonable state of repair and in proper working order. If landlords are unwilling to carry out the work that should be done to meet the repairing standard, tenants can get help with enforcement from the private rented housing panel, as has been said. The best way for landlords to demonstrate that the homes that they let comply with the electrical safety elements of the repairing standard is to provide tenants with a certificate from a qualified electrical engineer. In relation to gas safety—I note that health and safety is reserved—it is true that private landlords have a statutory duty to carry out regular annual inspections to make sure that gas appliances, fittings and flues are safe. I know that the Electrical Safety Council would like to see a similar duty for private landlords in relation to electrical installations and appliances. However, members will be aware from recent news reports of the survey carried out by Shelter and British Gas, which suggests that one in 10 private landlords does not know about, or does not comply with, their statutory duty to carry out safety checks. That demonstrates to me that more than regulation is required: we need education and awareness. All of us should highlight that whenever we can, as the Electrical Safety Council is already doing. It is for such reasons that we introduced the tenant information pack, about which Bob Doris and others have spoken. Private landlords now have a legal duty to provide new tenants with that pack, which contains a summary of the legislation that applies to them and includes information on property condition and the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants. The pack ensures that tenants are made aware that electrical safety is important, that they should ask their landlord about the electrical safety of their home, and that they can ask for a copy of any current electrical safety certificate. That is important, because this is about responsibilities, although when people are aware of their rights, they can exercise them. It is important that everyone is aware of the matter and works together. The private rented sector will continue to play an important role in meeting Scotland’s future housing needs and in delivering our vision that everyone should live in high-quality, sustainable homes that are safe to live in. As was said earlier, later this month the Scottish Government will publish a strategy for the private rented sector. We know that we need to create a regulatory framework that works for both tenants and landlords: one that is effective, proportionate and sets the right standards to ensure quality, but which is also affordable and does not constrain the growth in private rented housing that is needed. We want to encourage tenants to think of themselves as consumers who can drive improvement within the private rented sector and support landlords to deliver the improvements that are needed. Before the summer recess, we intend to respond to our recent consultation on a sustainable housing strategy. The Scottish Government sought views on our vision for warm, high-quality, affordable, low-carbon homes. Part of that vision is for people to value and take responsibility for the condition of their home. The vision will cut across tenures: it will engage with the private rented sector, social housing and owner-occupiers. It will cover energy efficiency, physical condition and the need for safe and secure homes. We will continue to work with all stakeholders, including private landlords, tenants and the Electrical Safety Council, to raise housing standards and to deliver our vision, because we want people to live in homes that are warm, comfortable and safe. Meeting closed at 17:33.

I, too, thank Clare Adamson for bringing the issue for debate. She has highlighted the importance of ensuring that private tenants are able to live in safe homes with a reduced risk of electric shocks and fires from poorly maintained installations and appliances. A number of speakers have mentioned the work of the Electrical Safety Council. The council should be commended for raising awareness of the issue and actively campaigning for improvements in safety standards. I know that the points that have been raised were recently discussed at the round-table event that Clare Adamson and the council held in the Parliament. As Alex Johnstone said, the private rented sector in Scotland has more than doubled since 1999, and current projections suggest that it will continue to increase its share of the housing market. There is also an increase in the number of home owners moving up the housing ladder who are becoming landlords, often because they are unable to sell their home due to problems in the housing market caused by the recession. Those landlords, who are sometimes called reluctant or accidental landlords, are not professional landlords with large property portfolios, so we need to ensure that they understand their responsibilities as landlords. We also need to ensure that the bigger landlords know about and carry out their obligations to their tenants. It is particularly important that both landlords and tenants are aware of the dangers of electrical fires and electrocution. One of the responsibilities of private sector landlords is to ensure that the homes that they let comply with the statutory repairing standard that is set out in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006. They should ensure that their homes meet that standard before a tenancy begins and at all times throughout the tenancy. One part of the repairing standard is that landlords must ensure that the electrical installations and appliances that they provide are in a reasonable state of repair and in proper working order. If landlords are unwilling to carry out the work that should be done to meet the repairing standard, tenants can get help with enforcement from the private rented housing panel, as has been said. The best way for landlords to demonstrate that the homes that they let comply with the electrical safety elements of the repairing standard is to provide tenants with a certificate from a qualified electrical engineer. In relation to gas safety—I note that health and safety is reserved—it is true that private landlords have a statutory duty to carry out regular annual inspections to make sure that gas appliances, fittings and flues are safe. I know that the Electrical Safety Council would like to see a similar duty for private landlords in relation to electrical installations and appliances. However, members will be aware from recent news reports of the survey carried out by Shelter and British Gas, which suggests that one in 10 private landlords does not know about, or does not comply with, their statutory duty to carry out safety checks. That demonstrates to me that more than regulation is required: we need education and awareness. All of us should highlight that whenever we can, as the Electrical Safety Council is already doing. It is for such reasons that we introduced the tenant information pack, about which Bob Doris and others have spoken. Private landlords now have a legal duty to provide new tenants with that pack, which contains a summary of the legislation that applies to them and includes information on property condition and the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants. The pack ensures that tenants are made aware that electrical safety is important, that they should ask their landlord about the electrical safety of their home, and that they can ask for a copy of any current electrical safety certificate. That is important, because this is about responsibilities, although when people are aware of their rights, they can exercise them. It is important that everyone is aware of the matter and works together. The private rented sector will continue to play an important role in meeting Scotland’s future housing needs and in delivering our vision that everyone should live in high-quality, sustainable homes that are safe to live in. As was said earlier, later this month the Scottish Government will publish a strategy for the private rented sector. We know that we need to create a regulatory framework that works for both tenants and landlords: one that is effective, proportionate and sets the right standards to ensure quality, but which is also affordable and does not constrain the growth in private rented housing that is needed. We want to encourage tenants to think of themselves as consumers who can drive improvement within the private rented sector and support landlords to deliver the improvements that are needed. Before the summer recess, we intend to respond to our recent consultation on a sustainable housing strategy. The Scottish Government sought views on our vision for warm, high-quality, affordable, low-carbon homes. Part of that vision is for people to value and take responsibility for the condition of their home. The vision will cut across tenures: it will engage with the private rented sector, social housing and owner-occupiers. It will cover energy efficiency, physical condition and the need for safe and secure homes. We will continue to work with all stakeholders, including private landlords, tenants and the Electrical Safety Council, to raise housing standards and to deliver our vision, because we want people to live in homes that are warm, comfortable and safe. Meeting closed at 17:33.

We are investing £860 million in housing supply in the current three-year period. Last year, we introduced a resource planning approach for the three years to March 2015, bringing council and registered social landlord funding streams into one budget for the first time. Our approach will enable each council to exercise its strategic role more flexibly, and to bring to Government a programme of social and affordable housing developments, based on its local housing strategy.

We will, of course, engage with Angus Council and all other local authorities across Scotland to improve access to affordable housing. Angus Council has been allocated resource planning assumptions of just under £9 million for the three years to March 2015. For the longer term, all councils have been asked to draw up strategic housing investment plans for affordable housing completions over the next five years. We have also been able to provide minimum planning assumptions for the three years to March 2018 to permit the necessary advance planning. I gave Angus Council that assurance recently at the opening of a new development in Inveraldie in Angus at which the member was present. The development is of the first new council houses in rural Angus for more than 30 years. The message is clear: the Scottish Government is committed to working in partnership with local authorities to continue to develop the same kind of much-needed high-quality, affordable housing that has been delivered at Inveraldie.

The recent announcement is correct, and that is still under discussion but, yes, we hope that there will be some consequentials to housing associations.

Recent action by the Scottish Government has improved protection for tenants and landlords. In 2012, we clarified the law on premium payments, making it clear that tenants should be charged only rent and a refundable deposit when a tenancy is granted, renewed, or continued. Last year also saw the introduction of three national tenancy deposit schemes to safeguard tenants’ money and provide a free dispute resolution service. At the end of this month, the Scottish Government will launch a new strategy for the private rented sector. The strategy has been influenced by dialogue with landlord and tenant interests, and will outline the action that the Scottish Government plans to take to improve standards in the letting agent industry.

I share the member’s concern. It has certainly been brought to our attention that some letting agents are flouting the law. We have recently consulted on our strategy for the private rented sector, including options for further regulation of the letting agent industry to raise standards of practice. We are now actively considering that matter.

I refer to my entry in the register of members’ interests and my long past association with Citizens Advice Scotland. I thank Christina McKelvie for bringing this important issue to the chamber as a members’ business debate. I commend Citizens Advice Scotland for another excellent “Voices from the frontline” report. CAS is doing a superb job highlighting some of the issues that people face as a result of the UK Government’s welfare reforms. The report that it published this morning—“Offline and left behind: Digital exclusion amongst Scotland’s CAB clients”—is more powerful evidence of the same. From what has been said so far, there are very few members with whom I would disagree. Digital delivery of benefits clearly concerns many members—and not only those who are present, as it has been raised on a number of occasions in the chamber. What concerns me most is the way that the DWP is choosing to deliver benefits through the digital channel. Digital provision in itself is not the problem. I hope that digital is the future. In the future, and increasingly now, many of us expect and demand efficient and responsive public services that are delivered online. However, some of the stories in the “Voices from the frontline” report are quite shocking, and I hope that they are not an indication of how universal credit will be delivered. As I have said before in the chamber both as a back-bench member and as a minister, when the DWP changed the delivery of benefits from paper to telephone applications, it was a shambles. People were sent from pillar to post. They were not allowed to make their applications using phones in the job centre but were sent to other agencies and, in some instances, to public phone boxes. I am disappointed to see that something similar is happening with digital applications. People have been rejected by the job centre and sent to the citizens advice bureau or another service to make their application. Therefore, I am not as confident as Alex Johnstone. I saw what happened in the past, and I have argued strongly for the situation to be changed. The emerging evidence is saying something different, and I will certainly be keeping an eye on it. The research that the Scottish Government published last year shows a similar situation to that shown in the Citizens Advice Scotland research. We found that the people who are more unlikely to go online are those who, as we have heard, have a low income, live in deprived areas, have a disability or a long-term health condition and have numeracy or literacy difficulties. In other words, they are the same people who need the welfare state to be there for them—and CAS identified the same groups of people. I also take issue with Alex Johnstone’s view that the CAS report simply looks at its customers. Its customers are the people who need and use the welfare system. They are the ones who have been pushed into making applications, including job applications, online. We need to acknowledge that. Of course they will make up a bigger percentage, because they are the very people who need the services. That must be taken into account. I say to the DWP that those people deserve a benefits system that meets their needs, rather than one that only meets the needs of the 80 per cent—an arbitrary target—who make claims online. I know that the figure, which is highlighted in the CAS report, has caused some concern. In simple terms, we can think of three groups of people who claim benefits. There is a group of people whose circumstances are difficult and complex. I expect and sincerely hope that the people in that group would be in the 20 per cent who cannot use digital, but who will get support in other ways. We all recognise that there is another group who will want or be able to manage their claim online. They will be in the 80 per cent, and there needs to be a good service for them. There is also a group in that 80 per cent who might not yet have the skills or the access to the technology, but whom the DWP still expects to get online. That could put people at risk of making a claim that is late or, if they are not confident on a computer, of making mistakes, which could result in delays in receiving payment or, potentially, benefit sanctions. It was clear from the stories that Christina McKelvie told—other members have highlighted this—that we are talking about real people. If they do not get their income at the time they need it or it is late, they have no other source of or access to money. They are stuck in a position that they should not be in. Forcing people to do something in a way that they have no access to or do not have the skills to use is simply unfair and discriminatory. “Voices from the frontline” tells us about the 18-year-old claimant whose health suffers because although they can use a computer, they cannot access one. People in that group will be most affected by digital by default: people who perhaps can do it, just not quite yet. They need to be given the skills and the support. It is because of that challenge—this might be a response to Drew Smith’s comments—that a number of local authority pilot projects funded by the Scottish Government are looking at digital issues. There are specific barriers in rural areas, as Dennis Robertson highlighted. We have given funding to a project in Aberdeenshire to look at rural issues. There are also issues in urban areas. We have heard about the low take-up of broadband in Glasgow, Clyde and Lanarkshire, which is much lower than the Scottish or UK average. A project in South Lanarkshire is testing one approach through one-stop-shop council advice centres. We also recently announced funding of £170,000 for a new two-year project in Glasgow to help people get online. I also confirm that the making advice work fund can support projects to help people claim online. Stream 1 of the fund is designed specifically for the transition to the new benefit system and to help people access welfare benefits. I encourage all interested advice organisations to make a bid for that funding. A further stream of funding has been ring fenced for social landlords, to help them deal with digital by default. That is some recognition from the DWP, although it is not enough. I do not question the necessity of the digital delivery of public services, including benefits, but it is simply not good enough to introduce digital by default without providing the support and resources to ensure that those services are accessible to everyone. The Scottish Government will continue to raise our concerns with the DWP about the implementation of digital by default and about the intent of the welfare reforms that are behind it. Meeting closed at 17:40.

Section 32 of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Act 2011, which came into force on 30 November 2012, clarified the law in relation to the charging of illegal premiums in the private rented sector. It makes it clear that landlords, and letting agents acting on their behalf, should not charge tenants anything other than rent and a refundable deposit not exceeding two months’ rent in relation to the granting, renewal or continuance of a tenancy.

We have already made it very clear that charging tenants for credit checks is not acceptable. When we clarified the law, it was made clear that that would be an illegal charge. It is an offence to make such charges and tenants have the right to go to court to have their money refunded. The fit-and-proper-person test for private landlords can be used to ensure that such charges are not applied.

I thank the Welfare Reform Committee for commissioning the report from Sheffield Hallam University and for bringing this debate to the chamber, because every opportunity that the Parliament has to make its voice heard on such an important issue is valuable. We have heard a lot of passionate views and stories. The heartbreaking stories that Michael McMahon mentioned at the start sum things up for me, because they are not isolated stories; such cases are to be found throughout Scotland—in every constituency. I know that there are cases in other parts of the UK as well, but we are here to talk about the impact of the reforms in Scotland. Anyone who thinks that there are just a few cases really needs to think again. Linda Fabiani made the point that we all know people who are affected by the benefit changes and welfare reforms. It is not the case that they are all people who are skiving from work, and it is not right to suggest that the people we know are in an unfortunate situation but that everyone else is skiving. We all know that such people are not in a position of their making and that they deserve to be protected by the state. The bedroom tax has been talked about a lot. There is not a great deal of disagreement between us and the Labour Party on the bedroom tax, but I say to Labour that within Scotland there will be a £65 million cost from the bedroom tax alone, with a one-off estimated negative impact of £87 million. Where does the Labour Party think that the £55 million shortfall can come from? Even if it were to suggest that we should top up the £10 million of discretionary housing payment, there has been no suggestion of where the money has to come from.

The debate, in the main, has been quite consensual, but issues have been raised that we have to take on. Iain Gray is saying, “Let us sit down and see the books.” We have heard so much the Labour Party in this Parliament about what we need to do to sort out problems—for colleges, for everything—but there has not been one concrete suggestion about where the money is coming from. We have also heard about the difference between what is happening here in Scotland and what is happening with the Labour Party in England. [Interruption.]

There have been comments that we want to rewrite on childcare and we want to rewrite on benefits—[Interruption.]

We have to look at that, and what we are saying is that, where we can help lessen the impact of the UK Government welfare reforms, we will. We will listen to others’ suggestions of ways of doing that.

Patrick Harvie has been honest in making a point. On council tax, we have given a commitment to the people of Scotland that is helping many households throughout the country. In England, people have seen an increase of 10 per cent in their council tax since 2007, whereas in Scotland council tax has been frozen. We will continue with that commitment.

No, I will not give way at the moment, because I have hardly moved on in my speech. What I am saying is that we are now hearing the reality about what is happening. Patrick Harvie is right that the issue is not simply between Labour and the SNP, but that is what it is boiling down to at the moment. Labour is not being honest on the issue and we are hearing different stories at different times from Labour members in this Parliament, in local authorities and at UK level. On discretionary housing payments, the UK Government is not telling the truth. The UK Government claims that discretionary housing payments will be sufficient to deal with the hard cases, but that is ridiculous when we know that as many people will be affected by the bedroom tax in Scotland as in London and yet we are getting a lot less money—we are getting £10 million whereas London is getting £56 million. In anybody’s books, that is not fair. Nor is it our problem, yet we are paying the price to solve a problem that exists in the rest of the UK. As well as the impact of the bedroom tax reform, there is more to come because we still have significant concerns about universal credit. Some of the problems that we foresee will compound the harms that are already being caused by other reforms, but there are still more problems that we have not yet faced. Local authority-led pilots and demonstration projects in Scotland, including additional pilots funded by the Scottish Government, are looking at specific areas of concern to try to bottom out the issues.

I am pleased to confirm to Parliament that, as the Deputy First Minister announced this morning, the Scottish Government will award £170,000 to Glasgow City Council for an additional two-year pilot to help people across the city to use the library network’s public access computers to make benefit claims. The pilot will build skills and capacity in advance of the introduction of universal credit. We all know that Glasgow will suffer from the welfare reforms and we know that Glasgow has a higher than average percentage of people who lack access to online facilities. I would like to say much more about the damaging cuts that will come alongside PIP, but I must also mention the legislation that we have introduced. I am pleased that the Welfare Reform Committee has welcomed what we have done on passported benefits and what we are trying to do with the Scottish welfare fund, which came into force this month.

As I have said before in the chamber, I honestly believe that we cannot get the welfare system that we want if we start by saying just that we want to save money. We need to look at what is required and build it up from there while protecting the most vulnerable. I believe that we can do that properly only with an independent Scotland in charge of our own economy.

The Scottish Government is taking all reasonable action that it can. We have written to the United Kingdom Government on numerous occasions since December 2010 to protest at the imposition of a measure that is neither supported nor warranted in Scotland. I put our objections in the strongest terms to Lord Freud when we met only two weeks ago. In January, we announced a £5.4 million package of funding to help front-line advice services as they support people, individuals and families who face the reality of the cuts. We will also make £2.5 million available for social landlords to help to ensure that their tenants have the advice and support that they need. We are also providing a £590,000 training, guidance and support package to boost the capacity of social landlords and homelessness prevention services to deal with housing benefit reforms. I set all that out in a letter that I recently sent to social landlords. In that letter, I encouraged landlords to follow the example of Dundee City Council, which has agreed to use all legitimate means to collect rent due, except eviction, for people who are in rent arrears because of the bedroom tax, after the director of housing has examined individual cases. I also highlighted the flexibility that exists in housing benefit legislation for reclassifying bedrooms.

The Scottish Government opposes the bedroom tax and is arguing to have it scrapped. That is the only solution to the bedroom tax, and Margaret McDougall knows that well. Perhaps Margaret McDougall should know that discretionary housing payments are a social security matter and therefore reserved. Also, there is a limit to discretionary housing payments so, even if councils topped them up to the maximum, Scotland would still be £40 million short. That is not the solution. The solution is to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Scottish Government in taking to the UK Government the case for scrapping the bedroom tax and, if that cannot happen, to fight for more discretionary housing payments. Alternatively, Margaret McDougall should join us and vote yes in the referendum.

As I just stated, I wrote to all social landlords last weekend to remind them of the action that the Scottish Government is taking in respect of the bedroom tax and wider welfare reforms, and to highlight actions that they may wish to consider to help tenants who are due to be affected. The Scottish Government and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities joint housing benefit reform group met on Friday. Members include a range of landlord and, indeed, tenant representatives. We established the group in autumn 2010 when the United Kingdom Government first announced its welfare reforms. The group has met 14 times since then, sharing information and discussing ideas on how to reduce the impact of the welfare reforms.

I agree with the member that the bedroom tax is one of the most pernicious legislative measures that the UK Government has ever introduced, but I am pleased to be able to inform her that, following concerted pressure from the Scottish Government, the Department for Work and Pensions has now confirmed that formal kinship carers will be exempted from the tax. That is a welcome concession by the UK Government, but I will continue to make the case for each and every person who looks set to be penalised until the bedroom tax is scrapped altogether.

The Scottish Government is doing all that it can within its devolved powers to help those who will suffer as a result of the bedroom tax. We have pointed out the limitations of discretionary housing payments and how assistance can be provided with that. We have also encouraged local authorities and landlords to look at how they can manage sympathetically the rent arrears that may accrue because of the bedroom tax, but I think that Patrick Harvie should join me and the whole of civic Scotland in taking the case to Westminster, where the problem lies.

We are looking at all situations. The concern that Malcolm Chisholm raises is a legitimate one. The situation that he identifies is just another example of circumstances in which families will be affected by the bedroom tax. We are addressing issues as we find them, as we have done with kinship carers. We have also had concessions on foster parents and veterans. We will continue to look to assist anyone who is affected by the bedroom tax. I would have liked it if the Labour Party could have stood shoulder to shoulder with the whole chamber against Westminster on the bedroom tax. Labour has picked the wrong target this time. The target as far as the bedroom tax is concerned is the UK coalition Government, not the Scottish Government.

Yes, I agree with Christine Grahame on that. The UK Government seems unconcerned about the matter. As I said, I would have thought that all parties in the Parliament would have joined together in opposing the bedroom tax. At the Liberal Democrats’ conference at the weekend, we had the absolutely nonsensical situation whereby their members in Scotland all opposed the bedroom tax and the only Liberal Democrats who seemed to support it were those who were elected to represent the people. I find that position sad.

We cannot be certain what the United Kingdom Government cuts to welfare will mean in terms of homelessness. The extent to which people are likely to become homeless will depend on tenant and landlord behaviours. That is why we are doing all that we can to help landlords and tenants respond in a way that minimises impacts on homelessness. We have been working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others since the UK Government first announced its reforms in August 2010 to protect tenants and help landlords prepare. However, should it come to it, we have one of the best homelessness safety nets in Europe, of which we are justly proud. All households that are deemed to be unintentionally homeless are entitled to settled accommodation.

The Scottish Government does not want to see people running up debt from rent arrears, but the member’s question is based on the presumption that there will be mass evictions because of rent arrears, which is simply not the case. I speak to landlords throughout Scotland and I know that they look at evictions and rent arrears on an individual basis, which is how it should be. It is about the individual and their circumstances, and whether it is appropriate to take the ultimate action of eviction, which will not happen often. We cannot look at rent arrears arising from the bedroom tax separately from rent arrears arising from any other part of welfare reform. We have to look at the issue of rent arrears in total and consider what is happening to individuals and their full circumstances. We do not want to see people building up ordinary debt and then being pursued for it and having their bank accounts arrested or, ultimately, being bankrupted. That is why we have put £5.4 million into advice services to assist people who are struggling in the current circumstances. We also continue to lobby the Westminster Government, because we should not forget that the welfare reforms are UK legislation that we have constantly asked the UK Government to scrap. We have highlighted to it the points that have been raised about that legislation. I was in London yesterday, as was the Deputy First Minister, and we made some very strong points on behalf of the people of Scotland to the UK Government, which is well aware of the feeling here on the issue. I do not want people suggesting that there will be mass evictions because of rent arrears—that is simply not the case. Everybody who is struggling to pay their rent will be looked at sympathetically. Through the pre-action requirements that we set last year, we will ensure that people will get every support if they are struggling to pay their rent.

I absolutely agree. The suggestion was ludicrous. Nobody could put houses up in the timescale that was suggested by the Margaret McDougall. However, there is a serious point to be made. The Labour Party is accepting the UK legislation and allowing it to impact on the policies that we decide are right for Scotland. For example, we have a policy of two-bedroom houses—a house for all. Yesterday, I asked Lord Freud to treat that as the minimum requirement in Scotland. Housing is a devolved responsibility and the UK legislation is impacting on it negatively.

That is nonsense. The changes to housing benefit mean that we are suffering because of a problem in London and the south of England. That is highlighted by the fact that the Department for Work and Pensions and the Westminster Government say that a minimum of 80,000 people will be affected in Scotland, when we know that the figure is more than that—it is 105,000. In London, 80,000 people will be affected, and it is getting £56 million in discretionary housing payments. Scotland, however, is getting £10 million. It is not a problem in Scotland; it is a problem in the south of England, but we are suffering because of it.

We have been working with a wide range of social landlords and other stakeholders since the United Kingdom Government announced its welfare reforms, to identify ways to lessen the impacts. We are investing in training and guidance for housing associations to help them deal with the bedroom tax and we will continue to support housing associations and tenants where we can. We should not forget the impact on those who are most affected. The measure has an unfair impact on vulnerable Scottish households. Seventy-nine per cent of households that will be affected by the bedroom tax report an adult in the household with a disability. I have written again to Lord Freud and Iain Duncan Smith to ask them to look at this again and abandon the bedroom tax part of the welfare reforms, as it continues to cause problems for the most vulnerable citizens in Scotland.

The Government is doing what it can within its devolved powers to lessen the impact of the UK Government’s damaging welfare reforms. However, the member is right to point out that welfare budgets are reserved to Westminster and that the welfare reforms are not of our making. From our limited budget, we have already made up the shortfall in council tax benefit, added £9.2 million to the Scottish welfare fund and invested £5 million in advice services and we will continue to consider all reasonable ways of lessening the impact of reforms such as the bedroom tax on Scottish households and our economy. As I have said, the member is correct: these reforms are not of our making and we are doing what we can to mitigate their impacts. However, the reality is that those impacts are becoming greater and greater; no sooner do we plug one hole than another one opens. Mr Paterson is absolutely right. With its devolved resources, the Scottish Government does not have the money to mitigate all the welfare reforms or the bedroom tax. The only way we can get rid of the bedroom tax— Members: Oh! Let me finish. The only way we can get rid of the bedroom tax is by trying—as I have done again this week—to persuade the UK Government to abandon it. It is recognised throughout the chamber that the tax is wrong and not fair in any way. The other alternative is to vote yes in the 2014 referendum so that we can take charge of the benefits system.

The Scottish Government is looking at all ways of dealing with this issue. We and indeed landlords are investigating the size of bedrooms, their reclassification and so on. We will continue to look at the matter and will report back when we have reached a conclusion.

Although we have had no recent discussions with local authorities regarding the distribution of food from food banks, it is of great concern that many families in Scotland now have to rely on food banks. Many low-income families who have never needed help before are now facing real hardship—welfare reform and rising fuel prices are adding to that. We continue to work with local authorities, third sector partners and others to mitigate the worst impacts of welfare reform for those on the lowest incomes. From April, our new £33 million Scottish welfare fund will provide an additional 5,600 community care grants and more than 100,000 crisis grants for those in need. In January, we announced an additional £5.4 million for front-line advice services such as citizens advice bureaux, which will go directly towards helping people—[Interruption.]

That money will go directly towards helping people understand the changes to the United Kingdom Government benefits.

I join Maureen Watt in congratulating that initiative in Aberdeen. I have been looking at some other food distribution charities and social enterprises and they are certainly worth looking at, as they provide a vital service to local communities. The Government is doing all that it can to tackle poverty and inequality in Scotland. We are committed to tackling the long-term drivers of poverty through early intervention and prevention. Our approach includes funding interventions that are designed to maximise household incomes and to improve children’s life chances: examples include £11 million for 2013 to 2015 to build on the success of the family nurse partnership initiative and the establishment of £272 million early years change funds over this parliamentary session. Scottish Government officials have convened a health impact delivery group—comprising representatives of NHS Scotland, local government and the third sector—to identify the impact of welfare reforms on health and the mitigations that can be put in place. That will include the provision of advice and support and the identification of good practice that is already in place for health boards so that that good practice can be shared more widely.

We estimate that 105,000 Scottish households are set to lose an average of £600 per year. More than three quarters of those households include someone who is disabled, and 15,000 families with children are affected. We have been consistent and clear in our opposition to this United Kingdom Government measure.

Yes—I agree with George Adam. We have made it clear to the UK Government that only 26 per cent of occupied social rented properties in Scotland have one bedroom, and we know that 60 per cent of tenants need one-bedroom properties in order to meet the Department for Work and Pensions underoccupancy rules. This Government is doing what it can, within its devolved powers, to mitigate the impact of the UK Government’s damaging welfare reforms, and we will continue to consider all reasonable ways to lessen the impact that reforms such as the bedroom tax will have on Scottish households. However, a Scottish Government in an independent Scotland could make decisions about welfare that would support the economy, incentivise work and protect vulnerable households. That is not possible under the current constitutional arrangements.

This Government has its affordable housing supply and we have said that we would build 30,000 houses by the end of this session of Parliament. Richard Baker is trying to suggest that we are responsible in some way for the bedroom tax and its impacts. We are not, and that has to be made clear. The suggestion is that the answer to the UK Government’s bedroom tax is for us all of a sudden, out of the blue, to build enough one-bedroom houses by 1 April. As has been said, we cannot do that. The answer is to have no bedroom tax and to have the Scottish Parliament in control of the welfare system in Scotland.

Alex Johnstone is trying to trivialise a serious matter. Whether it is called “bedroom tax” or “underoccupancy rules”, the effects will be the same, and our vulnerable citizens will suffer from those effects.

I am talking to housing associations and local authorities throughout Scotland. All of them are taking the matter seriously and are seeking ways to mitigate its impacts and to protect their tenants, as well as their rental income.

The Scottish Government will take seriously any proposals—as mentioned by Malcolm Chisholm—that we can legitimately use to mitigate the effects of the bedroom tax and protect our tenants. The issue is actively being looked at. We want to ensure that anything that we suggest or propose, or that local authorities propose, will not make the position worse for tenants. We will certainly look at every possible option to reduce the effects of the bedroom tax on our tenants.

We have written to the United Kingdom Government on a number of occasions about the budgetary impact of the bedroom tax. The bedroom tax does not make economic sense. In the short term, it reduces UK Government expenditure by taking money away from vulnerable people and families. In the long term, it is likely to result in a net economic loss of more than £100 million from the application of the measure in Scotland alone. There has been concerted opposition to the bedroom tax from stakeholders throughout Scotland. No one disputes the need to reform the welfare system. It is the way in which it is being done that we disagree with, particularly with unfair measures such as the bedroom tax.

I share the member’s concerns about the impact on refuges. A significant number of refuges are categorised as support-exempt accommodation, and, as such, the bedroom tax will not apply to them. However, we are concerned that some women’s refuges might not be so categorised. We are seeking clarification from the Department for Work and Pensions and, as with all the changes, we will seek to have Scottish interests taken into account. I will certainly update the member with any response.

The Scottish Government is committed to the regeneration of all of Scotland’s most disadvantaged areas and to the strengthening of local communities. “Achieving a Sustainable Future: Regeneration Strategy” outlines our vision for a Scotland where such communities are supported and where all places are sustainable and promote wellbeing. The Scottish Government has a key role in setting the vision and strategic direction for regeneration across Scotland and in providing an overarching framework for delivery. The community planning partnership and Glasgow City Council have responsibility for delivering local economic development and local regeneration, including in Glasgow Kelvin. The Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities recently issued joint guidance to community planning partnerships on the scope and content of their strategic outcome agreements. The guidance highlights the need for a clear and evidence-based understanding of place to drive improvement, to identify priorities for interventions and to promote better partnership working and more effective use of resources.

The Scottish Government is engaging with Glasgow City Council on the Buchanan quarter tax increment financing scheme, which includes improvements to George Square. We expect that a package of improvements to the square will be delivered in time for the Commonwealth games in 2014. Overall, we hope that the TIF investment, which is worth £80 million, will regenerate Glasgow city centre by levering in private sector investment of £310 million and generating about 1,500 jobs. The member is right that her constituency contains some more disadvantaged areas but, as I have said previously, it is for Glasgow City Council and its community planning partnership to identify priorities through discussion with local communities and groups. However, I am happy to meet the member to discuss how her constituency can benefit from various initiatives and funding supports that cover the city and adjoining areas.

Okay. We published “Age, Home and Community: A Strategy for Housing for Scotland’s Older People: 2012-2021”, our 10-year strategy for housing for Scotland’s older people, jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in December 2011. We are working to deliver the strategy with our partners across the housing sector and beyond.

We are grateful for the recommendations of the adaptations working group and we will shortly respond formally to its report. We will work to take forward the group’s recommendations on the future organisation and funding of adaptations.

In order to ensure that the programmes achieve positive outcomes for Scottish households and the energy efficiency industry, Scottish ministers have engaged regularly over the past two years with UK Government ministers on the transition from the Great Britain-wide carbon emissions reduction target, which ran from 2008 to 2012; on the development of the new energy company obligation, which replaced CERT; and on the development of green deal, which is a GB-wide programme that provides a market-driven finance mechanism to support individuals and businesses to install wider energy efficiency measures in their properties.

We recognise that any change from one major programme to a new programme can impact on the delivery market. United Kingdom Government actions delayed from 1 October to 1 January the introduction of the energy company obligation, which replaces the carbon emissions reduction target scheme. I agree with the member that that will not have helped the situation and will have put additional pressure on the insulation industry. Although we have no specific information on the total number of jobs that are affected, we are concerned about any job losses in relation to these programme changes. Scottish ministers have been lobbying the UK Government on the design of the ECO and the green deal in relation to a number of issues, specifically to ensure that Scottish small and medium-sized enterprises can fully benefit from the programmes. Recently, Fergus Ewing wrote again to the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change to outline his concerns that, unless householders are able to choose their own installer under the green deal, uptake will suffer. It is our view that, unless local trusted tradespeople are fully engaged in the green deal, householders will be less willing to undertake the necessary improvements to their homes, which, of course, will have a direct impact on installers’ level of activity. In addition, anyone facing redundancy will get help through the Skills Development Scotland co-ordinated local response team.

I am not sure whether, in 10 minutes, I will be able to respond to everything that has been said, but I will certainly try to cover the major points. The debate has been about child benefit but, more importantly for me, it is about child poverty. Jackie Baillie just paid a disservice to that. Child poverty matters. We are tackling it, and it is a priority for the Scottish Government. We are doing what we can within the powers that we have—I know that Jackie Baillie does not like us saying that. The Labour Party has been open and candid today about its solution: sit back and wait until we get a Labour Government in the UK. That is what Labour members said earlier in the debate. Labour can sit on the Opposition benches with that as its policy, but we are doing something about child poverty. I say categorically that children matter to me and child poverty matters to me. Drew Smith indicated that we care only about children in Scotland. I care about children who are in poverty or disadvantaged anywhere in the world, but the only place where we can do something about it and lead the way is here in Scotland. That is what we will do. I will get round to Alex Johnstone’s comments later. A lot is going on in Scotland, and we are doing what we can within our powers to tackle poverty. We have heard how the Labour Party would deal with poverty: spend money. It says that we are not spending enough on education, childcare and housing. It says that we are not spending enough on every single thing that has been talked about, but it has come up with no ideas and has not told us where we are spending too much money. We are on a fixed budget, so the Labour Party is basically saying that we are spending too much on something but has not yet told us what. That is what I want to know. I will wait for the answer. Willie Rennie asked what the SNP would do when it has to work on a budget. The SNP is working on a budget in the Scottish Parliament. We are balancing the budget and will do the same when we have powers to raise our own finances.

At the moment, Scotland pays that £2.5 billion into the UK economy. It is not gone yet; the UK Government is cutting it. As a number of members have mentioned, taking £2.5 billion out of the economy affects not only people on benefits, low-income earners or even high-income earners. When we take money out of the economy, it goes out of the pockets of those who spend it in their local shops and businesses. In all our constituencies throughout Scotland, local shops and businesses will lose that money as well. I see Alex Johnstone nodding his head in agreement with that as a good idea. I do not think that it is a good idea. He is keen to promote the number of people who are being taken out of tax. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has said that, taking the tax and benefits measures into account, there is still a regressive tax and the low-income groups are losing out more. A bigger gap is being created between the poor and those who are not poor. We are trying to close that gap, but all the efforts that we are making are being undermined by what is happening in other measures. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report on poverty and social inclusion said that we are unlikely to make progress because of the damaging welfare reforms. We cannot get away from the problem with welfare reform. We take it in context. Liz Smith has given her view on it. Our view is that we should start with the kind of society in which we want to live—a society that cares about people, in which people look out for one another, that protects our poorest and most vulnerable and that, most importantly, puts children at its heart because children are our future. I regret a bit that the debate has gone the way that it has, because we should be talking about children and the future. I find it difficult to come to terms with the figures that have been given about the additional children who are going into poverty. They are figures from the UK coalition Government. It tells us that that will happen, but it still goes ahead with the changes to child benefit. I ask it how much it cares about children. It knows that it will put more children into poverty, and yet it is still ploughing ahead with its measures. I cannot agree with that; I think that that is a disgraceful position.

I think that someone described the Welfare Reform Act 2012 as a shambles. Even the Tories and the Liberal Democrats would have to agree. It is an absolute pig’s breakfast of a piece of legislation. It makes no sense whatever. The Conservatives have said that those with the broadest shoulders will carry the burden, but the way in which the act is being implemented means that those with the broadest shoulders are not carrying the burden. A family in which one person earns £60,000 a year gets no child benefit, whereas a family in which both partners earn £49,000—which will have a household income of almost £100,000—gets child benefit. Those with the broadest shoulders are not carrying the burden. The Conservatives are missing that point. I would prefer it if the UK Government just said, “We got it wrong.” It tried to fix things and David Cameron tried to sort out the situation, but it made things worse. The Conservatives should admit that they got it badly wrong, but they are ploughing ahead, and the Liberals are supporting them. I think it was Mark McDonald who mentioned the number of things that the Scottish Government is doing. He mentioned the social wage. Jayne Baxter asked what we are doing to help people to deal with welfare reform. We are doing quite a lot. [Interruption.] What are we doing? We are setting up the Scottish welfare fund, as has been mentioned. The council tax freeze is helping every family in Scotland. The social wage is an example of how we, as a Government, are helping people. We are mitigating the effects of welfare reform through the Scottish welfare fund. Along with local authorities, we are making up the 10 per cent cut in council tax benefit to ensure that the most vulnerable do not lose out to an even greater extent. We have put money into the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland to provide training and information.

No. I have taken several interventions and I will not give way to members who would not take interventions. Jackie Baillie said that she would not take an intervention and told us to listen. I will do the same: I am not taking an intervention; the member should listen. We are mitigating the effects of welfare reform. We have introduced the social wage, which is helping every family in Scotland. I want to talk about the effect that some of the welfare reform changes are having on people in the housing sector. Kevin Stewart said that we should talk about what things are like for people in our constituencies. This week, I spoke to someone—not from my constituency—who had a mental health problem and who had regained the confidence to go to work through volunteering. She got a temporary job and then another temporary job before her health went backwards and she lost the job. She will now be subject to the bedroom tax because her grown-up son has left the house, which is in the area where she got all her support. That is what Alex Johnstone and his Liberal colleagues are doing to people. It is not incentivising them into work; it is acting as a disincentive to work. The Conservatives and Liberals should think about that. I think that I am running out of time.

I know that members of the other parties will not like this, but the Scottish Government is looking to have a system that is about fairness and which is a mark of a just society. Like the Scottish Government, I believe that to fully achieve that, the Parliament must have control over the powers that are needed to deliver it, which will come only with independence.

I welcome the opportunity to reconfirm to the Parliament the Scottish Government’s commitment to tackling fuel poverty. The most recent fuel poverty figures for Scotland, which were published in December 2012, show that Scottish Government action is mitigating swingeing fuel price increases. Despite punishing 14 per cent increases in autumn 2011, improved household energy efficiency prevented 35,000 households from falling into fuel poverty. However, it gives me little comfort that 684,000 Scottish households were in fuel poverty in October 2011. Without improvements in the energy efficiency of homes and a small increase in household income, many thousands more households would be in fuel poverty. The statistics show that income growth brought fuel poverty down by 2.2 per cent and that energy efficiency improvements brought it down by 1.5 per cent. However, the increase in fuel prices put fuel poverty up by 4.7 per cent, which cancelled out much of what we had achieved. Our target to eradicate fuel poverty as far as is reasonably practicable by 2016 remains challenging, given that it is predicted that energy prices will continue to rise. However, we will not shy away from striving to make energy bills more affordable. Nor will we redefine fuel poverty, as Westminster seeks to do, by reclassifying poor households as too poor to be fuel poor. I spoke to a constituent, the week before last. She is in her 70s and she worked all her life from the age of 15. She has a small pension from her work and a state pension; her total income is just under £200 a week. She is struggling to make ends meet. The fuel company asked her to increase her direct debit, but she is currently spending 17.8 per cent of her income on fuel. That is simply not acceptable in 21st century Scotland. My constituent’s experience starkly illustrates why the Parliament needs the powers to tackle a situation that is a disgrace in an energy-rich nation such as ours. In autumn, all the large energy suppliers announced price increases of between 7 and 10.8 per cent. The Deputy First Minister is meeting each supplier to express concern about energy price rises, press for action to protect vulnerable consumers and secure suppliers’ commitment to investing in Scotland’s national retrofit programme. Specifically, we are asking the energy companies to commit at least a pro rata share of energy company obligation targets for Scotland, based on their market share; to tell us what further steps they intend to take to assist vulnerable households; to automatically switch vulnerable customers to the lowest tariff; to implement as soon as possible the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets retail market review proposals that were published in October; and to continue funding for energy best deal plus roll-out throughout Scotland. Tomorrow, I will host a summit in Scotland jointly with Ed Davey, Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, and Michael Moore to seek further solutions from the big energy companies. I am sure that the Parliament will support me in urging them to do more for struggling families in Scotland. However, the most sustainable way in which to tackle fuel poverty is by raising the energy efficiency of homes, thus providing greater comfort and lower bills.

I thank the member for that question, which concerns a matter that I have already taken up with the Energy Saving Trust and officials. There is a real concern that vulnerable people are losing out because they are being cold called; they are frightened and do not trust who calls them. We are looking at how we can ensure that we get the message through to such people. For example, trusted intermediaries or organisations can be used, or someone whom a vulnerable person knows and can trust, so that they know that what they are being offered is genuine. We certainly do not want anyone to lose out simply because they are afraid to take up what has been offered. The cold calling causes me some concern in that regard, so I have been looking at it. We announced last month that there would be £27 million for national retrofit pilots to transform more than 2,200 older, colder properties across Scotland. Scottish Government investment of £3.5 million will lever in a further £13 million from major utility companies. The projects will also support an estimated 150 jobs across Scotland.

We introduced the pilots because of the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s delays in telling us how the energy company obligation will work and how to leverage in the money. What we have done through the pilots is a step forward. However, we hope that we will have the arrangements with DECC soon. Part of tomorrow’s discussion will be about how we can get that moving. We are not holding back the arrangements; they are being held back by DECC and the United Kingdom Government. The national retrofit programme will have an initial focus on areas of fuel poverty and related deprivation across Scotland. It will be delivered by local authorities because they are best placed to direct such schemes, given their knowledge of the communities that are in greatest need. The programme will prioritise fuel-poor areas and cover the whole of Scotland in around 10 years.

I was coming to that point on the next page of my speech. We are aware of the Energy Saving Trust’s view in that regard. The Government and I are keen to ensure that people do not lose out in the way described, so we are actively looking at a programme for vulnerable groups who do not fit into the national retrofit scheme. We have taken that on board and we have consulted the Energy Saving Trust, which is happy with what we are doing. The majority of the Scottish Government’s fuel poverty budget goes to the energy assistance package, which Elaine Murray just mentioned, and most of the money allocated to that is used to fund central heating and insulation measures for households at risk of fuel poverty. The EAP was designed to integrate with the previous carbon emission reduction targets, which have now been replaced by the energy company obligation. Elaine Murray asked us to ensure that vulnerable people do not lose out and we will do that. From April, the Scottish Government’s energy assistance package will be superseded by the national retrofit programme, which is designed to get the most for Scotland out of the energy company obligation. The majority of the £65 million fuel poverty budget for 2013-14 will go to local authority area-based schemes. The Scottish Government is committed to continuing to provide the home energy Scotland hotline and the energy advice, tariff and benefits checking that form stages 1 and 2 of the energy assistance package. The home energy Scotland hotline will integrate with the national retrofit programme. It will provide a route into the support for vulnerable households that are outside area-based schemes, as well as directing households within the areas served by local authority schemes to those schemes. As I said, we have not made a final decision on the best means of providing support to vulnerable households. There are a number of issues around rural areas. A number of funds can support the development of renewable options for individuals and communities in off-gas areas. They include the warm homes fund, the community and renewable energy scheme and the home renewables loan scheme. Those schemes are designed to fit with the United Kingdom financial framework for supporting domestic renewable energy and are aimed at supporting a range of applicants, including individuals, community groups, rural businesses and registered social landlords. We proposed a community-based approach to tackling fuel poverty in our 2011 manifesto, which earmarked £50 million over the course of this parliamentary session for a warm homes fund to promote district heating and renewables options. The first project, which is supported by the warm homes fund, is at West Whitlawburn, in Cambuslang, which I hope to visit soon. The project is expected to become operational in July 2013. We have other schemes in the pipeline that we hope to announce shortly. RSLs will use the income received from the UK schemes to promote renewable energy to improve the energy efficiency of housing and give people warmer homes. District heating networks can provide low-cost heat to households, particularly in multistorey blocks and off-gas-grid areas. Heat networks mean that we can use heat more efficiently from a range of sources such as gas-fired combined heat and power plants, renewables, and heat recovery from industrial processes. Fuel poverty is a blight on our country. This Scottish Government will continue to urge the UK Government, which has responsibility for this area, to do more to drive down energy costs and ensure that our households are better protected. However, members of this Parliament—and the people of Scotland—can be assured that their Scottish Government has done and will continue to do all that it can within our existing powers to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty. I move, That the Parliament recognises the Scottish Government’s efforts in tackling fuel poverty; welcomes the continued investment in energy efficiency and fuel poverty and the contrast with the UK Government’s cutting of its fuel poverty budget and withdrawal of any taxpayer-funded support from April 2013; recognises the early indications from the National Retrofit Programme “go-early” pilots that energy companies view Scotland as an attractive place to invest; notes the economic benefits of such programmes and the contribution that they make to reducing carbon emissions; supports the Scottish Government’s call on the UK Government to tackle the energy market to provide a better deal for consumers, and notes with concern the expected impact on household incomes arising from the UK Government’s welfare reform plans, which it believes will lead to an increase in inequality.

That is a good thing.

The debate has shown that the issue of fuel poverty is very important and emotive, and that we all feel strongly about it. We have all agreed that fuel poverty is an absolute scourge, that Scotland is an energy-rich nation, and that fuel poverty should simply not be happening here. I want to pick up on some things that have been said in the debate; I then want to concentrate on a couple of particular issues. I think that Richard Baker asked how the go-early pilots are going. For £3.5 million of Scottish Government money, the go-early pilots have attracted in a further £13.5 million and £10 million from the local authorities and RSLs. That shows that we are getting more than the 2:1 that we anticipated in the retrofit programme. We therefore believe that we are on target to make the £200 million, as stated. It has been mentioned a number of times that we should not talk about what the UK Government is doing, because it is doing such marvellous things. The contrast is that the Scottish Government, with the powers that it has, has committed Scottish Government money to the retrofit programme, whereas in England the UK Government has scrapped any support to any energy efficiency programme from next year. We are getting the story that the UK Government is doing well down south with the money, the ECO and everything else. It is putting nothing into it and is expecting to get a lot back out of it that it cannot say that it will get. We are putting something into the programme. We are running pilots and showing that the targets that we expect to be met are being met.

The member is absolutely right. Fuel poverty is such an important issue and such a priority for me and the Government that we are putting money into addressing it. We have not dropped the money, as Anne McTaggart suggested; rather, we have increased it again. We are spending more in real terms than Labour spent, and we have levered in money.

No. It is my turn. There has been a lot of criticism of the Scottish Government and me in the debate, which I will respond to. That is what I am doing. I have taken up Richard Baker’s point. I absolutely disagree with Anne McTaggart. We talk about what is happening. With the existing programmes, the Scottish Government has put a considerable amount of money into dealing with fuel poverty. We should not forget the things that we have already done. Some 122,000 households have had assistance, 400,000 houses have been insulated, and 382,000 households have received other forms of assistance. We have a national energy scheme that is assisting people.

We increased our spending to £68 million in this year, and we have levered in more money. That is in our fuel poverty budget. We are also putting money into other energy-efficiency measures, so it is simply not true to say that the Scottish Government is not spending on fuel poverty and fuel poverty measures. We are supporting families that are struggling. Welfare reform and what the Scottish Government is doing about that have been mentioned a number of times. We have been asked what we are doing with the powers that we have. We have done a lot in welfare reform with those powers. We have the Scottish welfare fund, and we have protected people on council tax benefit. We have the social wage, and we are protecting people with free prescriptions. We are doing a lot for people. We are doing what we can with our powers to ensure that their incomes are not reducing any further.

This debate is about fuel poverty, but I will answer that point. My point is that people who were on the edges or the margins, such as people who were off work, lived only on incapacity benefit and needed several prescriptions a month, had to pay for prescriptions, but they do not now. That is the reality. It is not just about people like the member and me; it is about people who are really struggling on low incomes. Some members should think about that. The one thing on which I agree with Liam McArthur is that we both feel passionately about fuel poverty. I did not agree with much else that he said, although he made good points about fuel poverty being much higher in rural areas than in some urban areas. We recognise that and we have a number of schemes to help rural areas. The national retrofit programme is being done on a scale, but we recognise that we need to look at ways of protecting rural areas.

I am willing to consider any ways to reduce energy bills for people anywhere in Scotland, so I will look at that. We will do all in our power to maximise income and assist households to access lower tariffs and reduce their energy bills. We are also asking the UK Government to do more with the big companies to ensure that prices are better regulated and that people get a better deal on tariffs. Members have mentioned the variety of tariffs. Ofgem has recommended that the number of tariffs be reduced to four, which we support, and we will push Ofgem to get that through as quickly as possible, because lower tariffs are important. It is important that people understand the tariffs that they are on and what they mean. I recently spoke to a constituent of mine whose fuel provider had explained to her that she could get a better tariff that would be fixed for a year and so would not increase. She went along with that, but she did not understand that, although the price of a unit of fuel would not increase, that did not mean that her direct debit payments would not increase during the year. We must realise that many people do not understand that. That is a difficulty. We want to ensure that people, particularly vulnerable people, understand their tariffs and know which is the best one for them. That is why we support the roll-out of Citizens Advice Scotland’s energy best deal plus programme. We hope to have positive news on that soon, as we are actively talking to Citizens Advice Scotland and fuel suppliers about that. As I said, we are pressing Ofgem to deliver a simpler, clearer, fairer and more competitive energy market for consumers. We will continue to provide support through the home energy Scotland hotline and through the energy advice and tariff and benefits checking that form stages 1 and 2 of the energy assistance package. Through the benefit checks that are provided by the energy assistance package, we have already saved households more than £5 million, or increased their income by £5 million. That is important and it will continue. We continue to take advice from the Scottish fuel poverty forum on progress towards the 2016 target and the most effective means of targeting our support.

I am about to close, or I would have given way. We will continue to work closely with the fuel poverty forum on how we can get towards the target. Meeting the target is a challenge but, as I said at the start of the debate, we will not shy away from it. We will take it on because, as we all agree, the issue is important. Am I running out of time, Presiding Officer?

We are fully committed to tackling fuel poverty. I am whipping through the pages of my speech, but I will conclude. Within the powers that we have, we are dealing with the issue that we can deal with, which is energy efficiency. We cannot deal with all the drivers of fuel poverty. We have heard that the two main causes of fuel poverty are the rise in fuel prices and low incomes, but those matters are outwith the Parliament’s control. Therefore, the Government is right to say that, if we had full powers, we could work with the companies. We are an energy-rich nation. We should say that independence would be better for the people of Scotland and that they would have better fuel prices.

We are tackling fuel poverty from every angle possible and we will continue to do so until the battle to end fuel poverty is won.

The Scottish Government provisionally approved the business case for North Lanarkshire Council’s Ravenscraig phase 2 tax increment financing project in March 2011. It is expected that the public sector infrastructure investment, worth £73 million, will lever in £425 million in private investment. The Scottish Government looks forward to signing the final agreement with North Lanarkshire Council for the TIF project this year.

It is correct to say that Ravenscraig was never accorded a national status by a Labour Administration. The second national planning framework, which was published by the Scottish Government in June 2009, recognises Ravenscraig as a key location for regeneration and renewal. We are giving careful consideration to the representations that we have received on the content of the third national planning framework and any development to which ministers are minded to accord national development status in that framework will be identified in the main issues report, which will be published in spring. I am sure that, with his interest, the member will follow the progress of that report.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth advised Parliament yesterday that an additional £50 million will be allocated to housing in 2013-14 from the consequentials that flow to the Scottish Government as part of the United Kingdom autumn statement. One of our highest priorities is taking action on housing in Scotland, which is why the Scottish Government is implementing a range of measures that not only increase the supply of affordable and social rented homes but support our construction sector, which is helping to create jobs and stimulate economic growth. I will confirm shortly how we will allocate the additional funding for the coming year.

With less money, the Scottish Government is building as many houses as previous Administrations built. We are committed to the social rented sector and to the affordable housing supply. We will continue with our progress. We are committed to delivering 30,000 new houses and we will shortly intimate how many more we will build with the additional funding.

A range of important provisions in the act have commenced, including increased fines for offences under houses in multiple occupation licensing, and landlord registration. Section 32, which clarifies the law on premiums, will commence tomorrow. That means that landlords and letting agents will be permitted only to charge a tenant rent and request a refundable deposit. In the near future we will produce a strategy for the private rented sector, as well as introducing the new mandatory tenant information pack to improve the accessibility of information available to tenants.

I agree with James Dornan that both local authorities and landlords have a responsibility to improve standards in the sector. The Scottish Government has also offered support to local authorities in their work to tackle the issues in the private rented sector. For example, we have recently provided a third year of funding to Glasgow City Council for landlord registration enforcement activity in Govanhill and surrounding hotspots in recognition of the unique combination of issues in the area. We are also in dialogue with the local authority to ensure that it has the powers that it needs to address the issues. I assure James Dornan that the Scottish Government continues to monitor the implementation of the legislation and that it will take further action when required.

The Scottish Government has undertaken communication activity to raise awareness of the legislation. That includes working with local authorities to ensure that landlords are aware of their duties relating to housing, houses in multiple occupation and landlord registration. We recently highlighted in the press that the new legislation on the charging of premiums in the private rented sector comes into force from 30 November. We will work with stakeholders, including advice agencies, to ensure that people are aware of what the legislation means for them.

The Scottish Government does not support amendments 14 and 18. As Mr Mackay indicated in the discussion on a similar stage 2 amendment—and as Mrs Mitchell has made clear just now—practice and case law already play their part in determining whether a property should be included in the valuation roll. Although Mrs Mitchell now proposes that that be done through regulations rather than guidance, as was proposed at stage 2, these amendments still risk confusing rather than clarifying assessors’ work. In any case, regulations cannot contradict the definitions in the relevant primary legislation about the properties that should be included in either the valuation roll for non-domestic rates or the council tax register. If they did, they would be ultra vires; as a result, they would need to be restricted in the detail they provided. The Scottish Government considers that the existing definitions in the primary legislation remain appropriate. We want neither to reward those who have allowed their properties to fall into disrepair by potentially allowing them to be exempt from local taxation nor to encourage others to let their properties to get into a poor state of repair or even to vandalise them just to avoid paying council tax or non-domestic rates. As these amendments do nothing to tackle empty properties and could, in fact, create a perverse incentive that would contradict the bill’s very intentions, I encourage Mrs Mitchell to withdraw amendment 14 and not to move amendment 18.

The Scottish Government does not support amendments 6 and 7, which relate to the level of council tax being charged on empty properties. As Mr Mackay indicated during stage 2, we intend to give councils the flexibility that they need to set the council tax increase at a high enough level to encourage owners to bring their empty homes back into use as a house for people who need it. In some cases, that may mean an increase of 50 per cent or less, but in others the council may feel that a higher increase of up to 100 per cent is appropriate in its area to provide sufficient incentive to owners. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee broadly welcomed the proposal in its stage 1 report. Our proposal has always been to give councils discretion to impose a maximum increase of 100 per cent of the standard rate of council tax. We received strong support for a 100 per cent increase in the consultation on our proposals and Shelter yesterday confirmed its support for the proposal in a news release. I therefore urge the Parliament to reject amendments 6 and 7.

The Scottish Government is willing to support amendment 16, although we do not support amendment 19. As was said at stage 2, we agree with Margaret Mitchell that social landlords should not generally be exempt from paying council tax or a council tax increase. It was never our intention to give more favourable treatment to social landlords than to private home owners. Both councils and housing associations should seek to minimise void periods in order to help to reduce waiting lists. We are willing to accept amendment 16, as it would prevent councils and social landlords from using the broad discretion given to them by the regulations to treat social rented housing more favourably. However, as is clear from our recent consultation on the draft council tax regulations, there are no plans to exempt social landlords from council tax, so we believe that amendment 19 is unnecessary. We also believe that there could be difficulties in specifying a reasonable period of time for properties to be left empty before they are demolished.

I am saying that we are making no exemption for social landlords. We are treating social landlords and private residential property owners in the same way. The discretion will still apply, but we are not differentiating between them. That was also said at stage 2. I will finish by saying that the issue can vary from case to case, particularly for large tower blocks, given the need to place existing tenants in a new block of homes. Sometimes, for example, there is a need for the compulsory purchase of homes that owners occupy in the same block. Therefore, we cannot accept amendment 19.

At stage 2, the Minister for Local Government and Planning said that negotiations with Shetland Islands Council would take place; those negotiations have been on-going. We cannot accept amendment 2, in the name of Tavish Scott, because it would effectively hold the Scottish Government to ransom on the abolition of housing support grant. However, I confirm that we have talked to the leader of Shetland Islands Council and, before we came to the chamber, an offer was made to, and accepted by, the council leader. We will write to the council shortly with confirmation of the payment details. Given those developments, I hope that Tavish Scott will withdraw the amendment.

I am pleased to open the stage 3 debate on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, in particular, for its scrutiny of the bill throughout its parliamentary stages, and I thank all those organisations and individuals who provided oral and written evidence to the Parliament. The bill is a key part of our wider work to reduce the number of empty properties, whether homes or non-residential properties, so that we can make best use of existing buildings and minimise the number of properties that fall into disrepair and become a blight on our communities. Long-term empty homes frequently fall into disrepair and can attract vandalism and other forms of crime. They reduce the value of surrounding properties and can affect the perception of a neighbourhood as a good place to live, which, in turn, reduces residents’ quality of life. At the same time, we are determined to reduce the number of homes that sit empty in the long term—of which we have more than 25,000—while around 140,000 families are on waiting lists for a social rented home. Bringing many of those homes back into use will help, directly or indirectly, to free up more homes for those who really need them. Giving councils the flexibility to increase council tax charges for certain long-term empty properties will help, encourage or, where needed, push owners not to leave their property lying empty. Councils will also be given the flexibility to target any additional revenue at delivering key local priorities, which will provide a useful additional tool, alongside the other measures that councils can already use. For example, the Scottish Government has been funding the empty homes partnership to provide support to councils in tackling empty homes. In addition, we are part-funding three empty homes officers, who are shared across seven councils, on a pilot basis. Those officers are having considerable success in developing a blueprint for successful empty homes engagement work that could be replicated across Scotland, and we should all support the fact that their interventions have already seen a number of empty homes brought back into use. We recognise that some owners need financial assistance to bring their homes up to a standard that makes them suitable for letting. That is why we have made £4 million available through the empty homes loan fund. The fund will make at least 160 empty homes available for affordable housing—more, I hope. I am pleased to say that we have had a good response to our call for bids for the fund. Many of those homes could be made available for intermediate rent, which, in turn, would help to grow a more vibrant private rented sector, providing tenants with a greater choice of good-quality homes. We have listened to stakeholders—Parliament and others—throughout the development of our proposals for the council tax increase and we have amended our proposals as the policy has been developed through active engagement. Examples of changes include limiting exceptions to the increase to only those who are actively trying to bring their homes back into use—whether they intend to sell or rent them—and bringing forward stage 2 amendments to increase the maximum level of penalty charge. A council can charge an owner if they fail to provide information about whether their home is unoccupied. That charge has been increased from £200 to £500. There is also now a limit in the bill itself, restricting the maximum amount of council tax increase to 100 per cent of the applicable standard rate, rather than placing that restriction in regulations. We have also recently consulted on our proposals for draft council tax regulations and I thank everyone who gave their views. Responses are currently being analysed and we are considering some changes in the light of the comments that have been made. I recognise some of the administrative challenges that implementing a council tax increase is likely to bring and I am keen to make sure that the new regulations can be enforced to help tackle owners who deliberately leave their property empty. At the same time, I want to leave enough flexibility to avoid penalising those who are genuinely trying to bring their property into use, for example by renting or selling it. I hope to be able to lay a set of revised regulations in December. The bill will enable us to bring forward regulations to reduce the level of empty property relief for empty commercial properties once they have been empty for more than three months.

Many of those businesses would be exempt from business rates in any case, but the Minister for Local Government and Planning has said that he will review the regulations, and that issue may form part of his review. As the Minister for Local Government and Planning—I keep mentioning him—has said, he is continuing to talk to stakeholders about the provisions as the regulations are taken forward. Regulations made under the bill will allow reductions to be made to the discount that empty properties receive after the first three months to 10 per cent from April 2013. However, unlike in England, industrial and listed properties will continue to receive 100 per cent relief for as long as they are empty. As a result of a stage 2 amendment lodged by Derek Mackay, we also intend to provide a new relief for properties that have been empty for a year or more and which are subsequently brought back into use. Together, those changes will create new incentives to reduce the prevalence of empty properties that blights our high streets. I am grateful to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its strong support for the abolition of the housing support grant. The grant has become an anomaly since the introduction of the prudential borrowing regime, as the regime requires councils to ensure that they borrow funds only if they are confident that they can pay them back without seriously compromising service levels. Ending the housing support grant will allow us to make better use of our funding for housing by focusing only on key priorities, including funding new homes for people who need them rather than helping to pay interest on councils’ historic debts. We recognise, however, that Shetland Islands Council has continuing high levels of housing debt and that the council has been working hard to reduce that debt. As I said earlier in response to Tavish Scott’s amendment 2, I can confirm that the Scottish Government has made Shetland Islands Council an offer of transitional funding that will assist the council in tackling its housing debt. I am pleased to say that that offer has been accepted by the leader of the council. If members vote to pass the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill, they will be voting for a key tool to assist and complement our wider efforts to reduce the number of empty properties, whether they are homes or shops or other commercial premises. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I congratulate Rod Campbell on securing this debate and thank him for drawing wider attention to the work of the Vivarium Trust to publicise and develop co-housing for older people. I also welcome the members of the trust who are observing the debate from the public gallery. The motion gives me the opportunity to highlight the benefits of co-housing in enabling older people to live independently in a community with mutual support and control. It also allows me to set out the Government's wider work on housing and support for older people, to which Vivarium's work contributes.? “Age, Home And Community: A Strategy For Housing For Scotland's Older People: 2012-2021” contains our 10-year strategy for housing for Scotland's older people and was published last December. We were delighted to be able to include as a case study the work of the Vivarium Trust to develop co-housing in Scotland. We have heard from Fiona McLeod and Alex Johnstone about the challenge of the ageing population. It is forecast that the number of people who are aged 75 and over will increase by 82 per cent by 2035. It is also important to note that, as was mentioned, the Vivarium Trust is thinking about people who are aged 50 and over. Perhaps we should be thinking about the issue before it is too late. We heard from Clare Adamson about the importance of people being involved in the project from start to finish. That is an important issue for me. In my short time as Minister for Housing and Welfare, I have found, when I am going around housing associations and new developments, that the ones that have involved the tenants and the community are the most successful and are comfortable places to be, even upon arrival. That is what we get from what is being proposed by the Vivarium Trust. Who knows better what is required in design of homes than those who will live in them? As Clare Adamson said, we should be thinking about that in relation to all our housing. We also continue to face tough economic conditions, with real-terms reductions in the Scottish budget of more than 11 per cent over four years—a loss of more than £3 billion, which is not insubstantial. It is therefore vital that we have the right housing support for older people. Our getting that right will enhance people’s quality of life and their wellbeing. It will also make better use of our resources by reducing the number of falls and other accidents in the home, and consequently the number of emergency hospital admissions. Our national strategy for housing for older people is built around four themes that are exemplified in the co-housing model. Those themes are: older people as an asset, choice, planning ahead and preventative support. Our starting point is that older people consistently tell us that they want to remain living in their own homes and communities for as long as possible. It is right that older people, as everyone else does, should have that choice. Where older people are able to live independently in their own homes, wider society benefits as well as the older people themselves. Scotland’s older people are an asset. Co-housing provides an environment where older people can remain active. We heard from Dr Elaine Murray about the activities in older people’s housing complexes in her constituency. Those sound very interesting, and I think that we would all like to join the parties there. Co-housing allows older people to contribute to their communities and to retain control over their lives. I should make it clear—as others have highlighted—that there is no single model of housing and support that meets the needs of all older people. Older people are as diverse as any other section of society, with differing needs and expectations that reflect their individual life experiences. That means that we need a range of different types of housing and support services to meet those needs and expectations. Co-housing is one of the newer and more innovative housing models that we are keen to encourage. It showcases age-appropriate design, affordability and, as we have heard, energy efficiency as well as a mutually supportive community. One of the central themes of our work on housing and support for older people is prevention. The importance of preventative work has been widely recognised, including in the Christie commission report and in our response “Renewing Scotland’s Public Services”. We cannot pretend that we can always prevent falls or deterioration in health, but there are many preventative services related to housing that support wellbeing and reduce the likelihood of traumatic and costly hospital and care-home admissions. Co-housing demonstrates many of the features of the best preventative support services for older people in terms of the control that it gives residents and its personalisation to their individual circumstances. The publication of our national housing strategy for Scotland’s older people was an important milestone. The strategy was put together with the help and support of a number of housing and older people's organisations, including the Vivarium Trust, as well as—this is an important point—older people themselves. However, the strategy did not mark the end of our work; in many ways, it was just the beginning. As a Government, we are committed to the development of preventative support services for older people. We are also considering options for the future delivery and funding of housing adaptations, which play a key role in helping older people to maintain independent living, as we have heard in relation to the evidence that was put to the Finance Committee. In conclusion, older people’s issues have rightly gained prominence in the housing agenda. We need to sustain the momentum that we have built up and to increase it as we implement our strategy and deliver our vision. With its major contribution to the development of co-housing in Scotland, the Vivarium Trust is part of the rich mix of housing and support that we seek to build in order to help enable older people to live independently. I have been delighted to hear about the progress that has been made and I will follow the pilot with interest. Tonight, I wish Vivarium well as it continues its work to develop co-housing in Fife. Meeting closed at 18:04.

The Scottish Government is committed to the regeneration of Scotland’s most disadvantaged areas and to strengthening local communities, including Inverclyde. Although overall responsibility for local regeneration and economic development rests with Inverclyde Council, we continue to support Riverside Inverclyde urban regeneration company and the council in taking forward their plans for the benefit of the people and communities across the area. We have already committed to continuing grant funding for the URC, with £2.5 million in 2012-13 and £1.5 million in 2013-14. Thereafter, funding is likely to be available to the URC from a range of sources and my officials are working with the company on revising its business plan and considering potential funding streams to support Inverclyde’s on-going regeneration. We have also provided it with accelerated funding of £3.4 million for a number of shovel-ready projects in the area that will improve the environment, improve employability, safeguard existing jobs and create jobs in construction.

The member makes a good point. The cruise industry is expanding, particularly in the Inverclyde area, and I understand that the member has met the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, and other members to discuss how the matter might be progressed. I also understand that Transport Scotland officials have met Clydeport to discuss the potential to increase cruise-ship capacity and extend the quayside and I am willing to meet the partners to discuss the issue further.

In November 2011, we announced a £20 million contract for two state-of-the-art diesel electric and battery-powered vessels designed for use on the Caledonian MacBrayne Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. In securing the contract to build the vessels, Ferguson Shipbuilders in Port Glasgow has not only created 20 new apprenticeships but been able to support around 175 shipbuilding jobs in Port Glasgow and Inverclyde.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress has been made regarding college mergers. (S4O-01233)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the new Ayrshire college will be a merger of Ayr College, Kilmarnock College and the Kilwinning campus of James Watt College, which is in my constituency and is the largest of the Ayrshire campuses. There is a genuine willingness among all parties to make the merger work for the benefit of learners in Ayrshire. However, there are still concerns about the Kilwinning campus, which is, in effect, part of a college and does not have parity with the other two colleges. What reassurances can the cabinet secretary give to the staff and students of the Kilwinning campus that it is a true merger and not a takeover? Will he come to Kilwinning campus with me to hear those concerns?

I refer to my register of interests in respect of my long-standing relationship with Citizens Advice Scotland and the citizens advice service in general. I, too, congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing this debate on the success of the armed services advice project, which rightly deserved to be raised in the chamber, particularly in armed forces week. I was still involved with the citizens advice bureau service when the armed services advice project was first mooted, and I confess that my initial reaction was not that favourable. That was not because I thought that veterans and serving personnel did not need advice—I knew that they did, and thought that the local citizens advice bureau was the place to provide it, as that is what citizens advice bureaux do. However, I was not convinced that a special project was needed, as it was likely that those people would need advice on the same issues on which most CAB clients need it—benefits, debt, employment and housing. However, after listening to Poppyscotland and other veteran organisations, I was persuaded that many veterans experience complex social and health-related issues in trying to move back into civilian life. Research suggests that many veterans experience such issues for years without accessing support or assistance. I was then convinced that a project specifically for veterans, serving personnel and their families would fill a gap and provide a vital service to an important and sometimes forgotten section of our community. The excellent “Civvy Street: The New Frontline” report from Citizens Advice Scotland, which was published today and which Christina McKelvie referred to, demonstrates the value of the project. The report recognises that the majority of serving personnel make a successful transition to civilian life, which is good, but it also highlights that a significant minority of veterans and their families experience challenging problems. The project focuses on that minority. As we heard from Paul Wheelhouse, there are around 1 million people in the wider veteran community in Scotland, including families, so the minority is substantial. In addition to the presenting problems, we have heard about other complex issues, such as people’s inability to find employment, their few transferable skills, their lack of a partner sometimes, their lack of financial capabilities, little or no family support, mental health issues and social isolation. One of the things in the report that struck me is the number of veterans who face real difficulty in getting back on to civvy street. Mark Griffin referred to the regular routine for those in the services, with meals prepared for them and bills deducted straight from their pay, so that they do not have to pay them on their own. One veteran is quoted in the report as saying: “You’ve never had to go hand and foot looking for anything, because it’s all been done for you ... You come out and it’s like a different planet… like planet of the apes.” That is what service personnel feel. I have heard people say many times when talking about somebody coming out of the services that at least they will be used to doing things for themselves, so they should cope all right on their own, which is a perception that is clearly well off the mark, as the report highlights. I commended the success of the armed services advice project and congratulate all those involved with it. I hope that it continues to provide vital services to our veterans, service personnel and their families. As we approach armed forces day, I am sure that we would all like to record our gratitude to our veterans and serving personnel across the armed services and to take time to remember those who have paid the ultimate price in the course of duty. We owe them an immense debt.

Drew Smith is right when he says that his suggestion has been discussed before: it was discussed at stage 1 and again at stage 2. On both occasions it was rejected, and with good reason. I welcome the support of all stakeholders for the overarching aim of the bill, which is to ensure that vulnerable people continue to get access to passported benefits from April 2013, when the UK Government’s welfare reforms will kick in. We are operating to a timescale set by another Government that can make changes at any time without consulting the Scottish Government. It is therefore essential that Scottish ministers have the power to act quickly, if required, to ensure that people do not lose out on passported benefits, which are a lifeline to many. As it stands, the bill will allow affirmative procedure to be used when doing so is merited, and negative procedure to be used otherwise. Amendments 1 and 2 would remove the use of negative procedure entirely, with the risk of the UK deadline being missed if changes were made late in the process. Although the 40-day time limit for scrutiny applies to both types of procedure, the negative procedure allows regulations to come into force sooner—I am sure that people who know more about that than me will explain it in more detail. The approach that the bill sets out is sensible, given that we are in a unique situation. We simply cannot put vulnerable people at risk. The cabinet secretary has given a clear commitment to consult widely with stakeholders, and the consultation was launched this week—I encourage everyone to take part in it. She has also offered to discuss the outcome of the consultation in detail with the Welfare Reform Committee, so that we can hear the views of people on the front line. The stakeholders share our primary aim of ensuring that we have the legislation in place by April 2013, which must be our main objective. The legislation needs procedural flexibility so that we can ensure that the required changes are made on time, given the lack of detail from the UK Government and any last-minute changes that it may make. I urge members not to support amendments 1 and 2.

I, too, am a member of the Welfare Reform Committee and I thank all the stakeholders who contributed to and informed our discussions. I have been in a stakeholder voluntary organisation, and I know exactly where they are coming from. I also know that we must get the legislation through in time, because the impact on those stakeholders’ work will be worse if we do not get it through. Michael McMahon said that the affirmative procedure would not always have to be used. However, the amendments that Labour lodged would have made the affirmative procedure the only one that could be used, which is where the problem would have lain. The debate on that is over—those amendments have been rejected, so we should move on. I take issue with some of the things that Alex Johnstone said. I do not think that it was ever said in the Welfare Reform Committee or the chamber that we do not want to have a better welfare state, reformed in a better way. What we do not want is for it to go the way that it is going under the Tory Government. At the moment, we are getting to grips with the current changes in welfare reform, which have not even bedded in yet, but we heard about further changes this week that will be much worse. Those changes are not about getting people into work; they are about saving money. My concern about that is as we take people off the unemployment books, more will go on them because of the Tories’ policy. Jamie Hepburn pointed out that the Tories seem to think that everyone who is on welfare is not working or has never worked. A huge proportion of people who get help from the state are in work. They are in low-paid work, and their working tax credits and child support have been cut. Everything has been cut for people in work. People on housing benefit work; they just do not earn enough to be able to pay the full rent, yet we are taking that benefit from them. It is shocking that the Tories have not got to grips with that. As I have said in the chamber before, I believe that the Tories want to wreck the welfare state. I am concerned that Labour members think that that is better than this Parliament being in charge of its own welfare system—I just do not get that. The Future of Scotland survey that was published this week shows that 67 per cent of people in Scotland want welfare benefits to be devolved, because they know what is happening to them. Labour should reflect on that. The reforms are driven by the wish to save money, and that is all. A report from Sheffield Hallam University on incapacity benefit reform that might interest Alex Johnstone came out in November last year. It tells us that there are more people on incapacity benefit than there are claiming unemployment benefit. Alex Johnstone might say, “Well, they should be off it and working,” but the reforms mean that all those people—in Scotland, it will be 36,000—will, at the stroke of a pen, be put on to the unemployment register. Those people are in the industrial areas where unemployment is already high. We should not forget that many of the people on long-term incapacity and invalidity benefit were encouraged on to those benefits by a Tory Government and successive Labour Governments that were trying to hide the true level of unemployment in the industrial areas. That is why so many people in those areas are on sickness benefit and have been left there. Our problem now is that we cannot take all those people off benefit at once and put them on to jobseekers allowance—that just will not work. I welcome the steps that the Scottish Government has taken to mitigate the reforms as far as it can. Those include the provision of funding—along with local authorities—to cover the 10 per cent cut in council tax benefit; the proposals that are before us today to protect passported benefits; and the social fund successor arrangements that the Government has made. Those measures, along with the council tax freeze, free prescriptions, free eye tests, free childcare and promoting the living wage will help our vulnerable citizens within the existing powers of the Parliament. The mark of a civilised society and a civilised country is how it cares for its vulnerable citizens. I believe passionately in a welfare system that is fair and compassionate: a system that makes work pay, which supports and encourages people into work, which helps the low paid and which provides a reasonable standard of living for those who are unable to work because of illness, disability or caring responsibilities.

Like many members in the chamber, I believe that that can be achieved only when we are in charge of our own destiny and Scotland is an independent country.

In Auchengate in my constituency, there is a small development of 76 residential properties that were previously owned by the Ministry of Defence. The residents of those properties are responsible for the sewerage system and the pumping station. In discussion with Scottish Water about Scottish Water adopting the system, it transpired that the residents are also responsible for about a mile of the sewerage system, until it reaches an adjacent village. Scottish Water has refused to adopt the system until it is upgraded, which the residents have been told could cost upwards of £0.5 million. Will the cabinet secretary look at the specifics of the matter and perhaps discuss it with me and Scottish Water to look for some resolution?

I can only imagine the stress and anxiety that are felt by women who have PIP breast implants. For some time, they have lived with that worry day and daily. Although the expert advice suggests that there is no evidence to support routine removal of PIP implants, I absolutely understand why some women who have them want them to be removed and replaced. Those women know that they have in their bodies implants that are made of a material that is not approved for medical purposes, and they fear that those implants might rupture at any time. In such circumstances, I would be angry and worried and possibly a bit frightened, so I understand the sentiments of the action group. I am sure that all members support the on-going criminal investigation in France into Jean-Claude Mas, the former owner of PIP. We must not forget that that fraudulent manufacturer has the ultimate responsibility for the distress that has been caused to so many women throughout the world, including, as I understand it, about 1,300 in Scotland. As stated in Lord Howe’s review, the company covered up its deceit and showed complete disregard for the welfare of its customers, which is absolutely shocking. The people who are responsible must be brought to justice. I welcome the Scottish Government’s actions in responding quickly and giving a commitment that the NHS will provide help and support—including removal of implants, if that is clinically appropriate—for women whose private surgery provider refuses to do so or has gone out of business. Private providers of the procedure throughout the sector have a duty of care to all their patients. Women should not be charged for replacement and removal of PIP implants. People who are affected by the scandal have enough on their plate without having to worry about how they will get the money to put things right. I hope that any clinical assessment of whether to remove and replace implants will include an assessment of the mental health impact on the individual if the implants are not replaced. As many members have said, lessons need to be learned in order to prevent such an incident happening again. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s involvement in the existing UK-wide inquiries, which are covering a range of issues, including health issues surrounding the implants; improving adverse incident reporting; better communication methods on issues that cause public concern; regulation of the cosmetic surgery industry; and a register of implants, for which there is a strong case. There is also a European inquiry that is considering better information sharing between EU countries, increasing the scope for EU countries to work together, increased product traceability, and a European database to bring together information about medical devices, economic operations, market surveillance and clinical investigations. Those inquiries and the recommendations that will flow from them should ensure that a similar situation does not arise again. I understand the sentiments of those who call for a Scottish public inquiry but, as we have heard, the regulation of medical devices is a reserved matter and the licensing of the products is an EU matter. Therefore, a Scottish public inquiry could not properly investigate all the issues. I have no doubt that the Scottish Government and the Parliament will continue to do all that we can to ensure that people in Scotland who are affected by the scandal get the answers that they deserve.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with North Ayrshire Council regarding the economic situation in its area. (S4O-01111)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer—

Thank you. I have mentioned before in the chamber that North Ayrshire has among the highest levels of deprivation, unemployment and child poverty in Scotland. Of the 2,045 growth companies in Scotland, only 36 are in North Ayrshire, of which eight are significant for the local economy. Very few other companies are at a stage at which they can receive Scottish Enterprise support. What assistance is the Scottish Government offering to encourage businesses in North Ayrshire, in order to help to stimulate economic growth?

I am a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee and I thank the clerks and committee staff for all their work during our inquiry. I also thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for the briefing papers that it provided. Like Paul Wheelhouse, I was experiencing a parliamentary inquiry for the first time since becoming an MSP, and I thought that staff did an excellent and impressive job. I also thank everyone from inside and outside the Parliament who gave evidence, which helped to inform our discussions and deliberations. My first parliamentary inquiry meant a steep learning curve for me on parliamentary procedure, which is not the most riveting topic, however important it is. Some people might ask how someone who is just in the door can decide on changes to the parliamentary week, when they barely know how the current arrangements work. However, the combination of newbies such as me and members who were more experienced in the Parliament’s workings, along with witnesses who gave evidence, meant that we could look at the situation from every angle and, as the convener said, conduct a thorough MOT for the Parliament. The Presiding Officer’s commissioning us to conduct the inquiry and to look at the Parliament as an institution and its relevance was the right way to do things. During the inquiry, I was struck by the evidence from the Speaker of the southern Irish Parliament, which had recently reformed its week. The Parliament there and its politicians had been under constant attack by the press, which left the Irish public thinking that the Parliament was rarely in session and the deputies had an easy job. Because of that, every party in southern Ireland campaigned to increase the Parliament’s hours. That was done, but they are now struggling to fill the hours with relevant business, and the deputies are finding it difficult to find time for constituency work, which the public expect them to do. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee did not want to make that mistake. It was clear that changes should not be made just for the sake of making them. It has been said that there were valid arguments both for and against changing the sitting patterns for plenary sessions, but I believe that having plenary sessions three afternoons a week is the right way forward. After all, this is our national Parliament, and very few—if any—national Parliaments meet on only two days a week. It has also been said that the Parliament has additional powers from the Scotland Act 2012. No matter what happens in 2014, we know that the Parliament will have more powers, so it is essential that we gear up a notch in preparation for that. I also support the view that plenary meetings on Tuesday afternoons will increase the ability to respond to issues that have emerged over the previous five days. I want to take up some of the points that have been made about the committees. The committee recognised that reduced time for committees could have a negative impact on the parliamentary process, but the proposals should not adversely impinge on committee time, as there is sufficient flexibility to allow them to meet on Mondays or Fridays during particularly lengthy inquiries if they choose to do so. As we have heard, a committee can meet at the same time as a plenary session is going on in exceptional circumstances, with the approval of Parliament. The issue of scheduling is not for the committee, but we looked at the scheduling of committee meetings and how long they have met for. It was clear that not every committee meets for two or three hours on every occasion. Therefore, I think that the proposals can work without taking away committee time. The committee holds the view that plenary sessions on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons with committees meeting in the mornings strikes the right balance. The proposed question time changes, with questions at the start of every sitting, will provide more time to hold the Government to account, and shorter lead-in times for lodging questions will allow more topicality in the issues that are raised. I think that most of us have lodged questions that have been redundant by the time that we have got round to asking them. There will have been a debate on the issue the day before, or the question will have been answered previously. Therefore, I am sure that everyone will welcome the proposed question time changes. The proposals to allow more time for back benchers’ business, with an additional members’ business debate each week, should be welcomed. I would have liked to go further on that by allowing the member whose motion was debated an opportunity to respond to the points that have been raised, although the minister would still be given the last word. I would also have liked to see other changes to members’ business debates, but I accept that they are in the remit of the Presiding Officer, not the committee. To conclude, I believe that the proposed changes will meet the set objectives—that is, that they will improve the topicality of parliamentary business, lead to more effective scrutiny of the Scottish Government, and increase the ability to respond to emerging issues. We also have the assurance that the committee will keep things under review and propose further changes if they are required.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with local authorities regarding the right to buy council houses. (S4O-01048)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is looking forward to working with the new Scottish National Party administration in North Ayrshire, which is led by Councillor Willie Gibson. In North Ayrshire, the right to buy has reduced the stock of social housing by up to 47 per cent and put some areas under severe pressure. What measures has the Scottish Government taken to help to increase the supply of social housing in North Ayrshire, given the impact of the right to buy?

As a member of the Welfare Reform Committee, I, too, thank all the organisations and individuals who gave evidence to the committee. I am encouraged by their support for the bill and by their unanimous agreement that the bill be passed swiftly in order to ensure that the secondary legislation that follows is in place well before April 2013. The key aim of the committee is to ensure that people continue to have access to the passported benefits that, as we have heard, give a great deal of support to many of our most vulnerable citizens. We must not do anything that would delay that and let those people down. That is our priority and the priority of all the groups that gave evidence. I was a bit disappointed during Jackie Baillie’s speech; I wondered whether she had been at the same committee, because what she told us was not necessarily what took place. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to consult widely and her assurance that the views of stakeholders will be encouraged and considered. She has said that at the heart of the process are the views of stakeholders because they are on the front line. It is a bit disingenuous to try to put a wedge between the Government, the Parliament, the SNP group and the voluntary sector, which is what I think Jackie Baillie was trying to do. That is wrong. This is about people and people’s lives.

I read all the briefings and what I read was very clear: the voluntary organisations want to be able to participate and to have an opportunity to scrutinise. The cabinet secretary has said that she will give them that opportunity. The Government’s priority is to ensure that we have legislation in place by April 2013 and that no one misses out. That is certainly my priority. [Applause.] I will focus on a couple of areas of the report on which I think most of us agree. The report recognised that there is likely to be a significant increase in demand for advice and support services and recommended that the Scottish government examine whether it can provide additional support to organisations to which people are likely to turn for independent advice. We recognise that the DWP has responsibility to provide advice to help claimants to make adjustments and that it should provide advice on entitlements. However, in my view, independent advice is also essential, because that is where people can get practical assistance and assistance to challenge DWP decisions. Citizens Advice Scotland tells us that in March this year alone, citizens advice bureaux dealt with 122 new employment and support allowance inquiries every day. In tribunals at which CABx provided representation, in 69 per cent of cases the tribunal found in favour of the claimant. We have heard about the amount of general practitioners’ time that is being taken up in writing letters in support of appeals. The report of the GPs at the deep end group, which was published in March, tells of the negative impact of benefits cuts and austerity measures on patient health and GP workload in some of our most deprived areas. A GP commented: “I observe this again and again that I cannot address medical issues as I have to deal with the patient’s agenda first, which is getting money to feed and heat.” I ask the cabinet secretary to consider whether we should support agencies to provide advice services in GP surgeries in order to allow GPs to concentrate on medical matters. Siobhan McMahon mentioned online claims, which are the responsibility of the DWP. The committee’s convener raised the matter in a letter to the DWP. I found Lord Freud’s reply, which we received on 14 May, to be wholly inadequate. Lord Freud said: “Recent research ... found 78% of claimants currently use the internet”. However, we know that only 61 per cent of people in Scotland have access to broadband, and that the percentage is much, much lower in deprived areas. Lord Freud also made clear that he expects “alternative access routes to be reserved for the minority” and “kept to a minimum.” I remember the shambles when the DWP changed from paper to telephone claims. I saw at first hand how alternative access worked for people who did not have a phone. People were turned away from DWP offices; people were refused paper forms; people were not allowed to use phones in job centres and were told to go away and use family members’ phones; and people who had mobile phones could not afford the bills. People were being batted from pillar to post just to make a claim, and it took months of lobbying by front-line organisations before the DWP adopted a more sensible approach. We cannot allow that to happen again, so I would like the cabinet secretary to ask the DWP about its proposed alternatives to online applications. What are the alternative access routes? Will the DWP assure us that applications can be made in a DWP office? How will the DWP ensure that claimants can use the technology? What assistance will it provide to third sector organisations to help people to make claims? We need the answers, which are the responsibility of the DWP in the Westminster Government—not the Scottish Government. I look forward to hearing more evidence and to more dialogue with stakeholder groups and individuals who will be affected by the reforms. However, if we want for our people a welfare system that is fair and that looks after the vulnerable, we have to be in charge of our own social security.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on tackling obesity in Scotland. We must remember that obesity is not confined to Scotland and is a global problem. The World Health Organization has spoken of obesity as “the greatest health threat of the 21st century”. In 2008, 1.5 billion adults worldwide aged 20 and over were overweight or obese. In 2010, 43 million children were overweight or obese. That is worrying. We have heard the worrying statistics in Scotland on young people who are obese and in some cases severely obese. We have heard that adult obesity in Scotland is predicted to reach well over 40 per cent by 2030 if we do not deal with the issue. We have heard about the risks of being overweight or obese, which include a risk of serious disease and premature death. Obesity also contributes to an increased risk of osteoarthritis, low self-esteem, depression and psychological problems. Those latter issues apply to children as well as to adults. In 2007-08, the estimated cost to our health service was £457 million, and the figure is predicted to increase. It is therefore vital that we try to halt any further rise in obesity, while reducing existing obesity levels among the population. We need to put the issue in context and understand that preventing obesity is a complex matter. The 2008 report by Sheffield Hallam University that followed an earlier foresight report states: “There is no example anywhere in the world where the obesity trend has been reversed”. I say that not to argue that we cannot do it, but to point out that the challenge is huge. The same report talks about the obesogenic environment that promotes obesity and unhealthy weight levels. That is just by circumstance and not because of anything that has been done deliberately. Alison Johnstone referred to our reliance on vehicles and the fact that our built environment is designed around that. We have labour-saving devices, easy access to and availability of cheap, high-fat and high-sugar foods, internet shopping, eating out, fast foods and takeaways, super-sized products and genetic and social factors. Of course, there is insufficient physical activity. Therefore, the challenge is great and requires a complex and multifaceted solution. The cross-cutting approach in the Scottish Government’s obesity route map recognises that. It makes commitments to tackle all the factors that contribute to an overweight and obese population: food consumption and diet; behaviour in the early years; health and wellbeing in the workplace; and physical activity. Paramount in that is early intervention. Many members have made the point better than I could about the importance of intervening at an early age. Much of what I was going to say has been said, so I will say a little about my personal experience of the challenge of trying to maintain a healthy weight. Many people have said to me, “That is not a problem for you, Margaret,” but all my adult life, I have struggled to maintain a healthy weight. I have gone to every weight loss club known and reached the target at every one. I have been 2 stone lighter than I am now and 3 stone heavier. However, in the past seven years, I have managed to maintain a healthy weight. I have always had a healthy lifestyle and eaten healthy foods, but I believe that the difference is that I have sustained physical activity, which is walking. I appreciate the minister’s comments about walking and the national walking strategy. Physical exercise alone will not result in weight loss, and nor will changing eating habits. We need a combination of the two to maintain a healthy weight. The focus should be on maintaining a healthy weight, because it does not benefit any of us if our weight goes up and down. I know many people who are in the same situation as me. For me, there is evidence that walking has made a huge difference. It is not an easy task, even for people like me who were not overweight as a child. We must recognise that there is a lot more involved than just saying to people that they should cut down what they eat and take a bit of exercise. Lots of other factors must be considered. The minister outlined many of the initiatives that the Scottish Government, in partnership with local authorities and other organisations, is taking to increase physical activity among our population. The initiatives include investment in cycling, encouraging walking to school, two hours of quality PE each week—which we hope to achieve by 2014—and investing £25 million from cashback for communities directly in sporting facilities. In my constituency, Kilwinning benefited from that money. There is also the legacy of the Commonwealth games, which will ensure increased access to sports facilities and a more active nation. Regular physical exercise is important in the jigsaw of tackling obesity, but we are not all budding athletes or fans of the gym. We need to look at what activities are available. There has to be a variety: walking, cycling, aquarobics, swimming, Zumba, and keep fit, to name but a few. We have to aim for every section of the population. We must recognise Patricia Ferguson’s point about young girls, who, on reaching the age of 12 or 13, give up physical activity. That is a time when a lot of young girls’ body shapes are changing, and they do not want to strip off and take up gym. We need to look at a variety of physical exercise because that, I believe, will have a positive impact on our stated aim of having people live longer and healthier lives.

I, too, thank the Finance Committee for its work on the report. The summary of evidence clearly identifies the key issues and highlights the challenges ahead for the Scottish Government and the Parliament. Like Paul Wheelhouse, I think that we must start by looking at our values. What are the values of our people and what are our ambitions for our people and our country? The Scottish Government has the right vision, which is of a Scotland that is economically secure, prosperous, healthy and socially just. We should never forget that that is what we are aiming for. The preventative spend agenda, which has cross-party support, is supported by all the witnesses who gave evidence to the Finance Committee. Focusing on preventing problems by intervening earlier is the right approach to tackling many of the social issues facing us. It also secures better value for the taxpayer and ensures the sustainability of our public services. Several members have mentioned the Government’s preventative spend agenda, which will support adult social care with the introduction of an integrated health and social care system. If it is done properly, the hope is that the system will reduce emergency admissions to hospital and give children the best start in life with the early years and early intervention change fund. There are also plans for improved childcare provision, and the system will help us to cope with a growing elderly population. Everyone so far has mentioned that. We should not consider the growing elderly population to be a problem and it concerns me that we do. As someone said, older people can contribute to the workforce. We should welcome the fact that people are living longer and should ensure that they have quality of life. Preventative expenditure should mean that as people get older they will need less help from the NHS and social services. If we use preventative spending correctly at this stage, it should bring savings at the end of the day. I was interested in what has been said about tackling inequalities despite the Westminster cuts. I will focus on inequalities and universal services, which were topics of the committee round-table discussions. I was struck by the evidence of Peter Kelly of the Poverty Alliance, who said that unless sustainable growth was inclusive, we would retain the poverty trap and the gap between the top and the bottom 20 per cent. We must focus on that, because unless we remove the poverty trap and have real employment and jobs for people, we will not move forward and, as the report said, people will move in and out of poverty and will have no real advantage. James McCormick of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation highlighted that more children in poverty in Scotland live in families in which someone is in work—it is important to remember that. We should continue to promote the living wage because it is a way out of poverty for many who are in work, but I recognise the value of the social wage for many of our hard-pressed families. In addition, the council tax freeze, free prescriptions and free eye tests keep many families out of debt and poverty. There has been criticism of universal benefits such as free prescriptions, but we need to remember that many low-income families and people on long-term incapacity benefit had to pay for their prescriptions. Those with long-term illnesses and chronic conditions who required a number of medications found it particularly difficult to afford to pay for them. Some people went without because they did not have the money for their prescription. As Andrew Walker said in evidence, there is no evidence that free prescriptions or free eye care cost more. The point has been made that means testing some benefits could negate any saving that might be made. I consider free prescriptions to be preventative. I also consider concessionary travel to be preventative spend. As I said earlier, we welcome people living longer, but they need to have quality of life. Free bus travel has definite health benefits. It allows people to get out and meet other people and get fresh air; and it keeps them mobile, because they get around and walk to bus stops, for example. Means testing that benefit would mean that people on the margins would lose out. During the recent local elections campaign I talked to three people in their 70s who said that they could not do without the bus pass, which was a life saver for them. They are on the margins and do not qualify for pension credit, so they would not qualify for a bus pass under a means-tested system. They value their bus pass highly and know that it keeps them going. One said to me that if they did not have their bus pass and could not get out, they would be sitting at home looking at four walls. Is that what we want for people? That will not help, because it will cost us more at the end of the day. Individuals in such circumstances will require more healthcare and more interaction with our social services. As Paul Wheelhouse said, it is about values. We do some things because it is right to do them, and that is the case for the bus pass. I am sorry that I have to wind up, because I have a lot more to say. I agree with Paul Wheelhouse that we are living within a fixed budget and that only when we get independence and have fiscal autonomy will we get the Scotland that we want.

I, too, record my congratulations to George Adam on securing a debate on such an important issue. We have heard that Scotland has one of the highest levels of MS in the world; recent research shows that its prevalence in Scotland is 200 per 100,000 of the population. In Ayrshire, that increases to 240 per 100,000. Currently, 950 people are registered with NHS Ayrshire and Arran as having MS. It is therefore not surprising that Ayrshire has a very active branch of the MS Society, which is based in Kilwinning in my constituency. It is the largest branch in Scotland and it provides a range of support services to people with MS and their families. The service is managed and staffed solely by volunteers. It has been in existence for 42 years and has built up excellent relationships with the health board and the three Ayrshire councils. I spoke last week to branch members who told me that once they are diagnosed with MS, patients in Ayrshire receive excellent treatment and services. However, they also told me that the situation is not the same everywhere else in Scotland. We need to ensure that the very best treatment is available to all those who have MS, wherever they live. The Kilwinning branch has adopted a ward in the Douglas Grant rehabilitation unit at Ayrshire central hospital. It is a purpose-built unit that offers specialist services to people who have neurological conditions. The local MS branch supports it by donating furniture, furnishings, televisions and other items to enhance the quality and experience of the people who use the unit. With the help of the staff of Hunterston B power station, they have also been able to provide lifting hoists and a specialised shower that is of great benefit to both staff and patients. Many people may think that such things should be supplied by statutory sources, but the branch’s view is that it will take that matter up later because it wants to make things better in the short term for people with MS. I have not used the word “suffer” in relation to people with MS, because the local branch told me that they do not like to use it. However, the secretary, Harry, said to me, “To be honest, Margaret, I suffer. Some days I’m really suffering. The consultant said not to use the word, but I suffer.” We must recognise that. The Kilwinning branch resource centre is also a place where, as George Adam mentioned, people can go and just talk to someone. They can get help with forms, in respect of all the complications that are going to arise because of welfare reform, which is a concern to people with MS. We must recognise that, because of the variability of their condition, it has always been difficult for them when they are trying to get the benefits to which they are entitled. The branch also has a grants system. It distributes more than £25,000 a year to people in Ayrshire who have MS. The only criteria are that a grant should improve a person’s quality of life or alleviate crisis for individuals or their families. Outwith Ayrshire, the branch has donated £37,000 over the past two years to the University of Edinburgh’s J K Rowling research unit. As surveys continually stress, research to find a cure is the number 1 priority. I do not think that any of us would disagree with that. All of that is done by fundraising all year round throughout Ayrshire and Arran. We heard about the report that said that there is little public awareness of MS, but it is our job to improve public understanding and to remove preconceptions surrounding the condition. However, the Scottish public give generously every day to the MS Society. Parliament should acknowledge that. I pay tribute to all the volunteers, many of whom have MS, in Ayrshire and throughout Scotland who raise the funds and who work in and manage their local MS Society branches, because their efforts and dedication make a real difference to the quality of life of people who are living with MS.

Like other members, I congratulate the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee on its report “Homelessness in Scotland: the 2012 Commitment”, and I welcome the committee’s recognition of the progress that local authorities have made towards meeting the commitment. From my experience in the advice sector, there has been a seismic change over the past 10 years in local councils’ attitudes and approaches to homelessness. There is now a far better understanding of the reasons for homelessness, and councils have a genuine desire to work collaboratively with other agencies to prevent homelessness and to support vulnerable people in sustaining tenancies to try to redress the problem of repeat homelessness. That was not the situation 10 years ago. Then, there was almost a stand-off between local authorities and the advice sector. Neither the local authorities nor the advice sector really trusted the motives of the other, and each did their own thing, which was to no one’s advantage. We now know that collaborative working produces results, and there has been a welcome reduction in homelessness throughout the country. Like Shelter, I believe that those changes are due to the 2003 legislation, which all parties in the Parliament supported. It made everyone put their heads together and recognise that there was a real problem that had to be addressed. The reasons for homelessness are numerous and complex, as are the solutions, and we have heard about many of them today. Councils should be congratulated on their progress but, as has been said, there are still potential barriers ahead that could impact on their meeting their targets. Those barriers include welfare reform, which a number of members have mentioned, and the housing benefit changes, the single occupancy rules and the downsizing of houses, which will perhaps result in local authorities facing a lack of housing of the correct size. There are more mortgage repossessions due to the economic conditions, and we should not forget that poverty produces homelessness—particularly repeat homelessness. I acknowledge the Scottish Government’s approach in trying to get everyone into employment and to produce the sustainable growth in the country that will help to alleviate poverty. We will never eradicate homelessness unless we eradicate poverty. There is also a lack of funding for advice. Advice is a method of preventing homelessness, and I am encouraged that the issue was covered in the report and that the report recognised and recommended that advice should be part of the statutory procedure. Members will not be surprised that I want to talk about the key role that independent advice can play in preventing homelessness. The value of good money advice cannot be overestimated. Many people have been prevented from losing their home simply by getting good money advice on mortgage and rent arrears, by being put on to debt arrangement schemes, or by being assisted with mortgage-to-rent schemes. All that sometimes happens without the local authority knowing about the situation. Homelessness is being prevented by advisers doing their job, but sometimes the statistics do not reach local authorities’ books. No one can overestimate the effect that the threat of losing a home has on an individual. I will share with members one of the first cases that I saw when I was an adviser, which is well beyond 10 years ago. A woman approached the citizens advice bureau the day that her house had been repossessed. She had been put out of her house that morning. Her children were at school, and they had not been told. I will never forget that story or the stress in that woman. She totally broke down; she could not cope with the situation, which she had kept from everyone. Her children were at school, but they did not know that they were coming home to a house that had been repossessed and was boarded up. Such situations can no longer happen. The mortgage lender would have to tell the local authority that there was a possible repossession action, and the local authority and the other agencies could step in and prevent that from happening. We must therefore appreciate the improvements that we have made. We may think that there has been no improvement in homelessness, but enormous improvements have been made, and those must continue.

Yes.

I am sorry—I just had to share that story, because I will never forget it. We still need to move forward on homelessness, but we are going in the right direction. I certainly support the recommendations in the report and the actions that the Scottish Government is taking to improve the homelessness situation in this country.

I, too, congratulate Kenneth Gibson on securing this debate on therapeutic gardens and allotments throughout Scotland. Unlike Christine Grahame, I do not have green fingers. I do not intend to take up the spade, but I recognise the value of that for those who choose to do it. It should be promoted. It is right to acknowledge the environmental, health, recreational and other benefits that allotments can bring to plot holders, their families and the wider community. I will concentrate on a therapeutic garden in the part of North Ayrshire that I represent. As Annabel Goldie did, I received a letter from Trellis, which asked whether I would like to visit a therapeutic or community garden in my area. I admit that I did not know of that project. I said that I would like to take up its offer, and I was referred to Todhill Country Centre, which is situated between Kilwinning and Stevenston. Todhill Country Centre is a residential unit for men with learning disabilities. It also caters for day-care patients and respite patients who have learning disabilities. Its garden is part of their therapy. The centre, which is set in the country, has a beautiful garden. It has apple trees and pear trees—not being a gardener, I hope I get this right—and it has cauliflowers, cucumbers, courgettes, tomato plants, hanging baskets and flowering plants that it sells to the local community. The plants are all grown from seed by the residents. The benefits for the residents are incredible. The unit also has small animals; working with them is also therapeutic for the residents. The residents can choose whether to work with the animals or in the garden. Some of the residents have decided that they want to start making garden furniture and garden gnomes to sell to the local community on their open day. Centres such as Todhill offer natural therapy, the benefits of which include feelings of safety, security and increased self-esteem for the residents. There is also the restorative effect of the natural environment—as we have talked about, there is nothing better than fresh air. The natural therapy also gives the residents a sense of responsibility and pride. They feel that they are part of the community; they are producing things and the rest of the community is coming in, purchasing them and looking around the place. I was privileged to visit the Todhill Country Centre—I admit freely that I did not know it was there. It was one of those occasions when, as an MSP, one learns about something that is good and positive in one’s constituency. The residents and staff were all working together to prepare for their open day. They were excited about the plants that they were going to sell and they were considering what colours to paint their gnomes. All of that was being done with a great deal of pride. Community farms, allotments and therapeutic gardens provide tangible benefits to many people’s lives by increasing their wellbeing, their community involvement and their pride in their environment. Those benefits go a long way towards supporting the Government’s agenda in relation to health, education and social inclusion and they deserve the recognition of Parliament.

I say to Alex Johnstone that I will not apologise for talking about how the issue will affect people in my constituency and elsewhere in Scotland. We have heard from all the organisations from which he seems to have got a different message. Every organisation that sat round the table at a Welfare Reform Committee meeting said that the benefit reforms, including the housing benefit reforms, would have a detrimental impact on all the poorest and the vulnerable in our society. They went as far as saying that the reforms would push child poverty back to its 1999 level. The Official Report will show that that was said. I take issue with Alex Johnstone’s references to propaganda and scaremongering. There has been no more scaremongering than there was when the Conservatives talked about people who got £2,000 a week in housing benefit. The answer to a freedom of information request was that, of the 5 million people in the UK who receive housing benefit, about 10 receive £2,000, and they have particular circumstances. The Conservatives put out propaganda about that, which the tabloid press picked up. We should correct that image. We have heard from other members about the issues that will arise for local authorities. My local authority reckons that about 3,000 people will be affected by the housing benefit reforms and that people will lose as much as up to £10 a week, simply because of the single-occupancy rule. I have no issue with people moving house if they want to do so, but I am concerned about forcing people to move simply for the crime of having a bedroom that is not being used. Making such people move is fundamentally wrong and is against everything that I thought that we in Scotland stood for. People should be able to have their home for the rest of their life, if they want. Unfortunately, that will no longer be the case for somebody who is poor. I have an issue with that. We hear people say, “Let’s give people financial responsibility.” I say, “Let’s get real.” Nobody can teach us better about budgeting than those who are on low incomes or benefits. They could teach us all something about budgeting. Those people are really struggling just now. Every single penny counts. They simply cannot afford an extra pound in rent. They are struggling to pay for essential items; they are not buying luxuries or having a coffee. They are struggling to decide whether to buy a loaf of bread or a tin of beans for the kids—and sometimes the children go without. It is not right to put an extra burden on people who are in such circumstances by telling them, “There’s your money; sort out how you are going to pay your rent yourself.” They do not want that, and neither do the local authorities. From my previous job I know that there is nothing more distressing than witnessing the despair of someone who is about to lose their home. It is the final straw for them and comes at the end of a financial and mental struggle from which their health and relationships often never recover. Citizens Advice Scotland anticipates that demand for advice in such circumstances will increase, and it is right to point out that it is cheaper to provide good debt and welfare advice than it is to deal with homelessness and bankruptcy—and good advice has better social outcomes. I have seen it working at first hand and it truly makes a positive difference to people. The poorest and most vulnerable are being penalised simply because they are poor and vulnerable, and that is absolutely unacceptable. We have heard today about the Tories being for the working people. A lot of the people whom we are talking about today work but do not earn enough, so they get help with their rent. They will not be helped by today’s budget because any assistance that has been given through benefits is taken away through taxes. They will not be better off. The devolution of social security would allow this Parliament to do much more for the most vulnerable of our citizens.

I think that we all agree that supporting children in their earliest years gives them opportunities for learning and development that make a huge difference for the rest of their lives, and the SNP recognises that that needs to be integrated with good quality, flexible and affordable childcare in order to enable parents to work. We are here for families: that is the SNP’s clear message to parents. The First Minister’s announcement of 600 hours per year of funded early learning should have been welcomed with a bit more enthusiasm by the Opposition parties. The increased provision will be flexible, and will help to support parents who are seeking employment, while giving children the best start in life through increased learning opportunities. It is important that it will be enshrined in legislation, which indicates—in my view—the Scottish Government’s commitment to the future of Scotland’s children and their families. We know, however, that more needs to be done. Childcare provision is not uniform, and it is not affordable in many parts of Scotland. “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” says that, but while the Scottish Government is trying to address the issue, we have the UK Government—of which the Lib Dems are part—ploughing ahead with welfare reforms, thereby increasing pressure on families and raising the cost of childcare. I really cannot understand why the Liberal Democrats chose to lodge the motion.

What I accept is that through the Con-Dem Government people have lost out. Last year in North Ayrshire, 1,200 families lost an average of £450 a year. Incidentally, the cost of nursery provision there is 63 per cent of the average cost in England. Child benefit has been frozen, and increases in other work-related costs—for example, for travel—have meant that many people have had to give up work. The Con Dems have not finished yet, because—as we have seen in the Save the Children report—the impact of universal credit will be that many of our poorest families will lose up to £68 a week. Again, it is mainly women who will be affected. In addition, in Save the Children’s online poll 56 per cent of mums said that the main thing that is preventing them from working is the cost of childcare. The report that the Liberal Democrats refer to in their motion came out of the wider “Childcare Costs Survey 2012”, one of the key recommendations of which was to increase “the proportion of costs which can be claimed under the childcare element of Working Tax Credit ... to 80 per cent, with a higher rate of 100 per cent for families on the lowest incomes and those with disabled children.” The survey warns the UK Government that the decision to cut tax credits will mean that some families are no longer better off going to work, once they have paid for childcare. The survey’s authors state that “it is sheer folly that any parent has to leave work because they cannot afford to pay for childcare.” It is amazing that the Liberal Democrats have picked out some of the details, but not the bits that they do not like. They have a bit of neck asking for more affordable childcare here when their colleagues in Westminster are driving up the cost of childcare in Scotland and the rest of the UK. When the Scottish Parliament has control of the tax and benefit systems, we will be able fully to realise our ambitious vision for children and parents. We will be able to provide the wraparound service that is needed, by integrating early years education with affordable childcare, thereby ensuring the very best for our children and supporting parents by guaranteeing that work pays.

Can the cabinet secretary give us details of the female modern apprenticeships that are being delivered? Does the Government have any plans to increase the number of such apprenticeships?

I congratulate Mark McDonald on securing the debate and I welcome the opportunity to take part in it. However, I say at the outset that pay, timing of pay, and working conditions generally are matters for employees, their union representatives and employers.

I was going to address such issues later in my speech; I do not disagree with what John Wilson has said. Having said that it is a matter for employees and employers to discuss, I think that it is right that we highlight the difficulties with the January pay date when the December pay is paid early. We live in very difficult times, and people—particularly those on low incomes—need every penny of their money to make ends meet. Any changes to the timing of income, however small and whether it involves changing from weekly to fortnightly payments—as my colleague mentioned—or a benefit not being paid on time can have a significant impact on family budgets, and can often leave people in real financial difficulties months later. I appreciate that many employers pay early in December to facilitate the payroll, and I understand that many people depend on their December pay arriving before Christmas because that helps with the extra outlays that all of us—however careful we are—inevitably incur over the Christmas period. However, problems can develop if the next pay day is not for six weeks, because very few people can stretch their money that far. Often, the money to pay for essential items such as utilities, insurance and housing is used for food, travel and other everyday expenses. The family will often use credit cards, intending to catch up in January, but for many that can be the start of the debt trap. In February they are still short as another bill becomes due, and they are simply unable to catch up. Anyone who works in money advice will tell you that often something seemingly small, like being paid early or late, can result in financial problems further down the road, with all the associated misery. People will try for months and months to juggle whatever little income they can, robbing Peter to pay Paul, in the hope that their situation will improve. By the time they seek advice, they often have unmanageable credit card debts and have taken out a high-interest pay day loan—and we know about the problems that those can cause.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We could say that employers should not pay early before Christmas, but that could be unpopular with many employers, and it is also likely to be unpopular with those who rely on the December pay to see them through. It could also mean that people resort to credit cards or payday loans earlier, with the same miserable effects as I described earlier. However, if the January pay date was to be brought forward, I believe that that would make a difference. It would help families because they would have only an additional week to wait for their next pay day. That would, one hopes, prevent them from resorting to borrowing and being sucked into the debt spiral. Families would have the flexibility of the bit extra before Christmas without being overstretched in January. As I said earlier, something small can often make a big difference, and moving the January pay date could do that by preventing many people from getting into debt, which I do not want.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that the education and training of young people is appropriate to meet the future needs of the economy. (S4O-00731)

Irvine royal academy in my constituency has recently joined forces with the University of Glasgow in a partner school programme that will provide an innovative approach to the theory and practice of teaching. It will also lead to better links between the community, local schools and the university. Does the minister agree that linking schools and universities in that fashion will benefit pupils and students by raising aspirations, widening choices and increasing their future employment prospects?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with local authorities to progress the implementation of a Scottish living wage of £7.20 per hour. (S4O-00697)

North Ayrshire Council, which is in my area, has implemented the Scottish living wage. One of the reasons that it did so was to allow it to be in a position to encourage large employers in the area to embrace the concept. Does the minister agree that it is right that councils should lead by example on the matter? Will he tell us which other councils are fully signed up to the Scottish living wage?

It is clear that members across the chamber agree about the valuable role that prison visiting committees have played over the years in monitoring and improving prisoner conditions, but we must accept that prisons today are more accountable and transparent than they were when the visiting committees scheme was established. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement that consultation will take place on how best to meet our prison population’s complex and varied needs. The focus of a modernised service must be on rehabilitation and on ending the revolving prison door. In my previous job, I was involved in delivering an advice and information service for prisoners in HMP Kilmarnock. That started with an information day that involved prisoners, prison officers and representatives of local statutory and voluntary sector organisations. The object was to find out from prisoners what services they felt would help them to prepare to be resettled in the community. When I spoke to the prisoners, I was struck that many of their concerns were similar to those that people brought to the local citizens advice bureau, although prisoners’ problems related to the impact of their prison sentences on matters such as their bank accounts, benefits, housing and pets. Some such issues can be sorted out relatively easily by third-party intervention, but if they are left they can become a problem for the prisoner later down the line.

The cabinet secretary has said that he is going to consult on the service that he feels is best for our prison population. I am saying that I think that the advocacy service is the best service.

No. I have used up half my time by giving way. Many prisoners also have mental health issues and addiction and literacy problems. They require intensive support and mentoring to help to build confidence and skills and to develop links with the community. That does not happen through the prison visiting service. I was also struck by the number of agencies in prisons providing services to prisoners. Lots of good work has been going on but it has not been fully co-ordinated. Any prisoner support service will undoubtedly involve a range of agencies, and it might well involve some of those who are involved with prison visiting, but the service needs to be simplified, co-ordinated and, above all, effective for prisoners and their families. We need a holistic service that is tailored to the needs of individual prisoners to ensure that every prisoner who needs it gets effective and responsive advocacy that will give them the opportunity to improve their situation and access mainstream services. Any new service should be standardised throughout the prison estate, and should have the prisoner and their family at the centre. The same quality and depth of service should be provided in every prison, thereby allowing support to continue seamlessly should the prisoner be moved to another prison—which is not uncommon—or be released to somewhere other than their home area. It is essential that community links that are established be maintained. I believe that this modernised approach to our penal system that focuses on breaking the cycle of reoffending is the right way forward. I encourage all interested agencies and individuals to take part in the consultation. I support the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill.

I thank all the members who have supported my motion on high-interest pay day lending, particularly those from the Labour Party and the Green Party, whose support helped secure the debate. I am aware that consumer credit is a reserved matter, but the impact of debt on individuals and their families and debt solutions are the responsibility of this Parliament, so I am pleased to have the opportunity to bring the matter to the chamber. What is pay day lending? It has been described as a form of credit whereby the borrower gives the lender authorisation to make an automatic withdrawal from their bank account as security for a supposedly short-term loan, which has to be repaid in full, plus interest, on the borrower’s next pay day. That seems fairly straightforward and it looks like an easy way to access money, until we look at how it operates in practice—therein lies the problem. We should not forget that the proliferation of pay day lenders on our high streets and now online came about because states in Canada and the USA, where pay day lending originated, started to regulate the industry, which made it less profitable. What did the lenders do? They moved into Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom and have grown exponentially here ever since. It is almost unbelievable that nothing was learned from the US experience, where it was found that the cost of borrowing was so high that more than 70 per cent of borrowers could not pay back the loan and loans were rolled over time and again, with increasing penalties and punitive interest charges. It was also found that borrowers typically had loans from more than one pay day lender and that there were clear links between the growth of pay day lending and personal insolvency levels. Significantly, the experience in the US was that, despite arguments to the contrary, the pay day loan industry targeted lower-income and minority groups. Does all that sound depressingly familiar? It should, because that is exactly what is happening here. Successive UK governments have ignored the problem, as they did with the banks and the sub-prime lenders until it was too late, and they have still not learned. We all know that the companies target the vulnerable and low-paid. You only need to walk down the main street of any our towns, such as Irvine in my constituency, to see that. Irvine is a town in which personal debt levels are already high. When I walk the short distance from my constituency office to the station, I pass four pay day lending shops. On Tuesday, two on opposite sides of the road had billboards outside saying, “Got a job? Got a debit card? Get a loan.” That enrages me and it should concern all of us because it is people who are already in debt who are being targeted. The loans are given without regard to the borrower’s ability to pay. The borrower signs a payment authority as security and, worryingly, that type of agreement can be cancelled only by the lender, so the lender has it every way and the borrower is trapped. Let me give you an example from my time with the citizens advice bureau. I had a couple who were in financial difficulties and had borrowed £400 from a pay day lender. By the time they came to me, they were getting £400 every month before pay day from the lender to pay essential bills, then on every pay day the lender got £479 straight back from their bank account. The loan was being rolled over every month, and that had been going on for over nine months before we intervened. It had already cost the couple over £700 to borrow £400, and they still had an outstanding payment. That is the problem: the original loan just keeps getting rolled over again and again and the interest and costs just keep increasing. In my view, that is usury and exploitation of vulnerable people, and it has to stop. It is not hard to see how people in circumstances such as I have outlined are then forced into taking out a further loan from another high street lender as they get deeper and deeper into debt. That view is supported by evidence from Citizens Advice Scotland, which tells us that clients with pay day loans have an average of three debts more than those without pay day loans, suggesting that people in long-term financial difficulty are much more likely to take out a pay day loan. We cannot allow people to be trapped in a system that offers them little protection and inadequate access to affordable credit. Regulation is needed and it is needed now. We should ask the UK Government to consider capping interest rates, restricting the number of times that a loan can be rolled over, encouraging data sharing between lenders to ensure people’s ability to pay and referring borrowers to money advice services when it is clear that they are in financial difficulty.

Yes, I think that that would assist people with a short-term financial shortfall, which pay day loans clearly do not do. The advice to people thinking of a pay day loan is this: do not take it out. Our citizens need to have access to good financial and money advice and, importantly, to credit that is affordable. We need to ensure that credit unions become the money shops of first resort in our high streets. I give the example of the 1st Alliance (Ayrshire) Credit Union in my constituency which, like other credit unions, encourages saving and offers a range of services including current accounts, bill paying, low-cost credit and emergency loans. It also works innovatively with the local authority and money advice services in tackling rent and mortgage arrears, thus preventing eviction and homelessness. That is genuine financial support, which we should support and promote. To summarise, we need to protect financially vulnerable people from this type of high-interest borrowing and unmanageable debt, while at the same time ensuring that they have access to good money advice and affordable credit.

We have heard many fine contributions from members and compelling reasons why we must continue to persuade the UK Government to reconsider its Welfare Reform Bill. We have heard from everyone that the bill is purely about cost cutting. However, although I appreciate the consensual approach from Labour this morning, I must point out that it started the welfare reform cuts. Labour’s manifesto in 2010 talked about extending the “use of our tough-but-fair work capability test” to save “£1.5 billion over the next four years”. We must remember that Labour started it, but I am glad that its members in this chamber appear to have changed their minds. We have heard about the mountains of evidence presented to the committees of this Parliament from a huge number of Scottish national organisations, which Duncan McNeil referred to. Every last one of those organisations confirmed just how devastating the consequences will be for the most vulnerable people in our communities. Those organisations are at the coalface of Scottish society, and their evidence is based on real experiences of real people on a day-to-day basis. We cannot ignore their evidence. They are telling us that the UK welfare reform proposals will increase personal debt, unemployment, homelessness, discrimination and poverty. We have heard about the additional pressure on advice services. They are already struggling, but the evidence tells us that their advice will be needed more than ever before if the proposals go ahead. Advice centres will need to be funded to provide those services, which is another burden on the Scottish Government. Although welfare reform is a reserved matter, the cabinet secretary has outlined just how much it will impact on the matters that are the responsibility of this Scottish Parliament and the resulting effect on our local authorities in meeting their statutory obligations and homelessness targets. I want to talk about homelessness. A few members have mentioned it, but I do not think that we should underestimate the risk of increased homelessness. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations estimates that more than 60,000 tenants will be affected by the rule on so-called overoccupancy. Many will simply be unable to pay the difference between the actual rent and the benefit that they receive, forcing them into homelessness as rent arrears accrue and local authorities do not have the accommodation to take them in. Rent arrears in the social rented sector are likely to increase because, it is proposed, the payments will be made directly to the claimant as part of the universal credit and not to the landlord as happens at present. That is trying to fix something that is not broken. It is not necessary: the current system works. Has no one in London asked how people living in social housing want or need their housing benefit to be paid? The change will affect people who already have to juggle a limited income among items of essential expenditure; people who have no extra money and often have to make immediate but impossible decisions; and people who sometimes have to decide between a pair of children’s shoes and a power card—and, now, their rent. Incidentally, many people living on low income prefer using power cards—even though they cost more—because they can buy the card on the day they collect their benefit or wages and it is one less thing for them to worry about. It is a form of budgeting, as is the payment of rent direct to the landlord. It is a disgrace that fuel suppliers get away with charging more to vulnerable people who are trying their hardest to budget and keep out of debt, but it is also a disgrace that the UK Government, by paying housing benefit as part of the universal credit, will push people into debt and homelessness, putting more pressure on our local authorities and advice services. Has the UK Government thought about the practicalities that are involved and how many people will have access to a method by which they can pay their rent? How many people have a basic post office account or a basic, cash-only bank account, with no facility for direct debits or standing orders? For many people on benefits and people who have experienced financial problems, that kind of account is a vital budgeting tool. Those people have taken responsibility for keeping themselves out of debt and they should not be forced to take a different route, which could leave them in financial difficulties. As we all know, few people live next door to the rent office and are able simply to walk in and pay their rent. It is clear, from what we have heard today, that the matter of welfare reform requires continued analysis and scrutiny to assess the impact on our citizens and services. That is why I support the establishment of an ad hoc welfare and benefits committee for the duration of this session. I think that we should listen to the voluntary organisations that have asked for that. I welcome the Government’s stance on legislative consent.

I am not disagreeing with that committee; I am saying that there should be choice, but there is no choice under the proposals from Westminster. Social rented housing benefit will be paid under the universal credit, and that will increase rent arrears. I return to what I was saying.

Westminster needs to know that, if it introduces legislation without proper consideration of how it will affect issues that are the responsibility of this Parliament, the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament will take a stand and will not simply rubber stamp UK legislation. I support the motion.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to tackle high unemployment and stimulate economic regeneration in deprived areas. (S4O-00512)

The latest unemployment figures show that, after two areas in the city of Glasgow, Cunninghame South has the highest level of unemployment in Scotland. For North Ayrshire as a whole, the situation is no better and it has been steadily worsening since before the recession. We are consistently above the Scottish average for all the indicators of deprivation, so there is now a real concern in my constituency and throughout North Ayrshire that unemployment—particularly youth unemployment—has reached a crisis level and cannot be tackled purely by local measures. What assistance can the cabinet secretary offer North Ayrshire to help to address the situation?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has for the preservation of historic vessels. (S4O-00440)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the role that the Scottish maritime museum in Irvine plays in preserving Scotland’s maritime heritage. In addition to the collection of marine vessels, engines, artefacts and exhibitions, the museum contributes to the local economy by training apprentices, providing volunteer opportunities, hosting educational trips and attracting tourists to the area. Unfortunately, the museum cannot open in winter as it requires a new roof and is housed in a grade A listed building of historical importance. Is the minister able to give any assurance about continued Scottish Government support for the work of that important industrial museum and will he ask the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs whether she will visit the museum with me some time in the near future?

I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak on an issue that is important to all our citizens. In my first speech in the chamber, I said how honoured and privileged I was to have been elected to represent the people of Cunninghame South and that I would always stand up and speak on their behalf. Today, as an elected member and as a trade unionist, I am pleased to be able to speak out in support of public sector workers in Cunninghame South and throughout Scotland, and to do so here in our national Parliament, which is the right place to do it. I am disappointed that the Labour Party has chosen to boycott Parliament today, because that is what it has done. This is the national Parliament of Scotland and it deserves the respect of everyone who is elected to it. The Labour members should be here to speak out on behalf of their constituents against the UK Government’s treatment of public sector workers, whom they purport to support. When I look at the 37 empty seats, they show me the scant regard that the Labour Party has for this Parliament. It is quite simply a disgrace.

I do not want to be rude, but I do not think that they will be missed. I want to talk about the impact that the pension reforms are having on people in my constituency, particularly as the majority of those who have a job are employed in the public sector and many others are in receipt of public sector pensions. It is important to consider how the people of Cunninghame South and North Ayrshire will be affected by the proposed changes to public sector pensions. Last week, I spoke to many families in my constituency who told me that they are struggling to make ends meet and finding it difficult to cope. They are already experiencing the pay freeze, higher VAT charges, significant increases in energy costs, rising inflation and increases in national insurance contributions, and there are proposed cuts to working tax credits. They are now being asked to pay higher pension contributions, work longer and, in many cases, receive less when they retire. Is it any wonder that those families are telling me that they would rather have the money to spend now, because they have to make the choice now between heating and eating, or between buying shoes for their children and paying their house insurance? Make no mistake about it: those are the choices that the families in my constituency, and I am sure in other constituencies, are facing. My concern is that many of those families will simply choose to opt out of the pension schemes. That would be in no one’s interests, because it would leave individuals and families in a worse position in retirement and affect the viability of the pension schemes, because less money would be going in. I very much support the SNP Government’s position that the case for pension reform should be considered in a timetable that suits Scotland’s interests, not the UK Government’s interests, and that any reform must be affordable, fair and sustainable and—more important—must happen with the agreement of all those concerned. People who are currently in receipt of public sector pensions—let us not forget that the average pension is less than £6,000, and that the average for women drops considerably—will also have less money, because the basis for uprating pensions will change from the retail prices index to the consumer prices index. All predictions say that in the long term that will reduce the value of benefits paid out by 15 per cent. I referred to this matter affecting all the people in my constituency. I will try to explain that. In case anyone imagines that public sector pension changes and welfare benefit reforms are no concern of theirs, they should consider this: every benefit cut, every additional pension contribution and every failure to uprate pensions fully will cut the money in people’s pockets, reduce spending power in Cunninghame South and throughout Scotland, and therefore hurt businesses and threaten jobs that my constituency for one can ill afford to lose. Asking public sector workers to pay more towards their pensions at this time is, in my view, just plain daft. In contrast, the Scottish Government, within its existing powers, is helping hard-pressed families by introducing the Scottish living wage across the public sector where it has direct control; introducing a no compulsory redundancy policy in its public sector, which protects 10,000 jobs; continuing the council tax freeze for the life of this parliamentary session, bringing an average saving of £1,200 to band D households; introducing free prescriptions, when 600,000 low earners were struggling to pay the charges; and keeping Scottish Water under public control and allowing water charges to be frozen for a further two years. I could go on and on about the changes that the Scottish Government is making, with the powers that it has, to people’s lives.

That question has been answered. We saw the letter that Mr Swinney got from the Government about the impact that that would have. As I said, I support the Scottish Government’s position, which will help the people whom I have been talking about. The Con-Dem Government’s proposal to reform public sector pensions at this time and in this manner is an ill-thought-out, short-term measure to reduce the budget deficit. As has been said, that is the reality. As the motion indicates, long-term pension reform must be taken forward with consent and in partnership; it should not be done by threat and diktat. Let us be honest here: the Tories, aided by the Liberal Democrats, are using benefit and pension reforms to destroy the public sector and wreck the welfare state—that is what they are about. The cabinet secretary has outlined how things would be better for everyone in Scotland if we had control of our economy. From what we heard from George Osborne yesterday and from the absence of the Labour Party here today, I believe that the Opposition parties are making the case for independence for us. I support the motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that local authorities will maintain the council tax freeze in 2012-13. (S4O-00395)

The minister’s answer is reassuring, particularly as Labour politicians in my constituency—and recently in the chamber—seem to be confused about their party’s position on the council tax freeze. Will she confirm how much she expects the council tax freeze will save hard-pressed families in North Ayrshire between now and 2016?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to reduce unemployment and improve economic regeneration in Cunninghame South. (S4O-00338)

Will the minister join me in congratulating Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company on being given the United Kingdom roses design award for the work that it has done in transforming Kilwinning Main Street and pursuing to good effect other vital regeneration projects throughout North Ayrshire? Will the minister give reassurances about continued Government support to allow Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company to continue its work to improve the economic landscape of North Ayrshire in the years ahead?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure firework safety around bonfire night. (S4O-00304)

I thank the minister for her answer and trust that the measures she has outlined will see a reduction in numbers from the 38 incidents that happened in my constituency on the last bonfire night. Will the minister explain what the Scottish Government does to promote fire safety in Scotland with the aim of reducing the number of people who are killed or injured by fire?

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity to discuss the Welfare Reform Bill. It may be a devolved matter, but it will have lasting and detrimental consequences for many individuals, services and families throughout Scotland. It is therefore important that we discuss it today. A lot has been said about people not wanting to work, deliberately not working and faking illness. However, I worked in the advice sector for 25 years and rarely saw that. Most people want to work, but the programmes were not put together to allow them to do so by successive Labour and Conservative Governments, which did not create an environment for job creation or help those who needed support into work—that support did not exist. Now, the UK Government is saying that people simply do not want to work, but that is not true.

No, I will not, because Mary Scanlon refused to give way when she spoke. We must recognise that many of our citizens are unable to work and need to be protected on an income that keeps them out of poverty and gives them a reasonable standard of living. That is fundamental to any welfare system, and that should remain in any system. However, there is no clarity about how the Westminster bill will contribute to making work pay, to reducing child poverty or to protecting vulnerable groups. As some of my colleagues have said, the bill is simply about saving money: that was the starting point. The Tory-Lib Dem Government looked at Labour’s proposed welfare reforms and thought, “Gosh! We can go even further.” It took Labour’s proposals and added its ideology of giving up the welfare state.

No, I was not because, as the Government said today, the proposals will be discussed and scrutinised in committee and we will consider every way in which they could suit Scotland. It was said that dialogue has taken place to try to secure the best deal for Scotland. I tell members that if I have to choose who will get the best deal for Scotland, I will go with the Scottish Government. The bill will increase unemployment. The former Labour Government introduced employment and support allowance and the work capability assessment, which has never been fit for purpose. We have taken people off that allowance and put them on the unemployed register without any support, or assistance to obtain support. It is reckoned that the number of people who look for every job will increase by five in North Ayrshire, where 23 people already apply for every job. Labour wanted a reduction to three in the child’s age at which lone parents would come off income support and register for work, but it did not get away with that. It cannot turn around and blame all that on the Tories. The maintenance reforms that are to be introduced will increase child poverty, as will benefit caps. My colleague Bob Doris spoke well about how the proposed housing benefit changes will increase homelessness and affect the housing strategies of many local authorities up and down the country. The most vulnerable and disadvantaged are the people who are sick and unable to work; they feel that they are being persecuted. That happens every time welfare benefits change. The view is, “Let’s get the most vulnerable.” DLA will be removed and replaced by the personal independence payment. We have no idea how that will be assessed, but we know that 20 per cent fewer people will receive that payment, whether or not 20 per cent fewer people will need it. That is wrong. In the mental health debate last week, I talked about the impact of benefits changes on people who are mentally ill. I have seen that—I have seen people being driven back into hospital simply because of how the benefits system has treated them. The work capability assessment was not designed for people with mental health problems and some people have been pushed from pillar to post. I have seen people being taken off employment and support allowance and told to claim jobseekers allowance. When they claim JSA, they are told that they are not fit to work and that they should go back to claim ESA. People go round and round in that circle—it is still happening—and they receive no money. That affects people’s mental health, so that must be examined. It is clear that demand for the services of local authorities and voluntary organisations will increase, and we must deal with that. Exceptional pressure will be put on organisations that provide advice and assistance to the vulnerable groups and we must ensure that they are properly funded to deliver the service that is asked of them. I make a plea for a separate committee to scrutinise welfare reform, because of its importance. The reforms will affect people in all our constituencies, so I hope that such a committee will be considered.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I hope that I will keep within my time. I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate. Promotion of good mental health should be important to us all—that has come through clearly from throughout the chamber from everyone who has spoken. There is a consensus that we want to do something and to improve our mental health strategy. That is to be commended. It is right that our mental health strategy is focused on the individual, but it must also be effective and operate in a culture of continuous improvement. That is why we are looking at the strategy again at the start of this new session of Parliament. Many members have spoken about the briefings that we have had from Barnardo’s, SAMH, and Action for Smoking and Health Scotland. They are helpful and useful, and I hope that they will inform the debate and the strategy that we will finally agree. As the minister said, we should recognise that significant improvements have already been made. There has been a reduction in psychiatric admissions; we have the national dementia strategy; there has been an increase in dementia diagnosis by GPs; there has been a reduction in deaths by suicide; there has been a recognition of the role of families and carers in the treatment process—my colleague George Adam mentioned that; and more people are being treated in the community. The one thing we have all agreed is that we have not tackled the stigma completely. We should not beat ourselves about the head too much about that, because we are tackling generations of stigma about mental health; it is not just something that has occurred in the life of this Parliament. I remember 40-odd years ago a member of my family being diagnosed with a serious mental illness. It was not talked about and we were not allowed to mention it. My parents died and it was never spoken about in our family. That is sad, because there was no shame in it. I know, and always knew, that there was no shame in it, but we just did not talk about it—not in the house and not outside. That is what we are tackling, but we have moved a long, long way since then. I can stand up here and say that my father had a serious mental illness, and there is no shame in it. That is the message that we must get out to all the communities. I therefore support the see me campaign, what it has done in the field and the support that the Scottish Government has given it. I will concentrate the rest of my remarks on external factors that have a significant impact on mental health. We cannot have a debate on mental health that does not link with the social and economic issues, such as deprivation and poverty, that all impact on mental health. For me, the best illustration is my constituency in North Ayrshire. North Ayrshire community health partnership has a higher than average percentage of people living in deprivation, and it has the highest unemployment and youth unemployment of any community health partnership area in Scotland. It also has a higher than average number of patients who are being prescribed drugs for depression, anxiety and psychosis; a higher than average number of patients with psychiatric hospitalisation; and a higher than average number of deaths by suicide. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the work of the choose life strategy, which has had an impact on the suicide rate in North Ayrshire. The rate is still above the average, but has come down dramatically and is now at a 12-year low. I hope that that trend will continue. It is the work of the see me strategy and that of local groups and organisations, which are not all health-centre based but which work collaboratively for the common aim of reducing the number of suicides. That has worked in North Ayrshire and it must continue, and the strategy that we develop should take that into account. NHS Ayrshire and Arran has exceeded the 50 per cent HEAT target for suicide prevention training of front-line staff. I agree with other members that that training should go beyond health service staff to any public services and voluntary organisations that come into daily contact with people with mental health issues. We cannot hide from the fact that poor living conditions, worklessness and financial problems are contributory factors to or, sometimes, are the cause of the more common mental health problems. The spending review that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced last week looked to the long term in setting up new enterprise zones in deprived areas, the more choices, more chances programme and the social wage, which will prevent some of the minor mental health issues that we see just now from occurring. All those programmes are designed for long-term stability. For those who have more complex and enduring mental health problems, we still need a very integrated service, because external factors will impact on them. Changes to the benefits system, for example, will impact on people with mental health problems. They can be sorted out and their conditions can be stable, but having no money can have a knock-on effect and can have them back receiving more intensive treatment. Such external factors must be considered in any strategy. I support the motion in the name of Michael Matheson and look forward to seeing all the responses to the consultation.

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to maintain front-line policing levels. (S4O-00151)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and warmly welcome his proposals to streamline our police service and accountability structures. Currently in North Ayrshire, where my constituency is, only two councillors are involved in policing matters. Will the cabinet secretary indicate how many North Ayrshire councillors might be involved under a single police force, which would make it much easier for people to raise policing issues with their local representatives?

I thank Willie Coffey for bringing the debate to the chamber because it raises some important issues. Unlike Willie, I am not from Onthank, but I know the community well. I worked with the people of Onthank and others in Kilmarnock for more than 24 years. One of the first things that I learned when I took up my job was that Onthank considers itself to be a community. The people see themselves first and foremost as residents of Onthank. I remember that when I started working there, I suggested to someone that Onthank is still Kilmarnock; I was corrected and I never made that mistake again. Onthank is a very proud community and the people do not deserve to be treated in the way that they have been by the BBC. Vulnerable people were exploited and, as my colleague Willie Coffey has already said, they regret it now. Some of them are living with the consequences of their day of fame. The people of Onthank are proud of their community. They also know that there are problems in the community. They know about the drug and alcohol problems and that some people lead chaotic lifestyles, but they are a small minority of the residents. The people of Onthank, the community groups, the local authority, the health board and voluntary agencies are working actively to address those problems, which are not exclusive to Onthank; they are in every community in Scotland. We have a duty to work together to find long-term solutions to the deep-rooted problems in all our communities. My issue with the BBC is about the name of the programme. “The Scheme” focused not on a problem but on an area, and that was wrong. It concentrated almost exclusively on the problems of a small minority of people who are living chaotic lifestyles. There was no balance between that and all the good things that happen in Onthank, such as the schools that Willie Coffey talked about. This week, I read about the nursery school in Onthank getting a glowing report from the care commission, and that the parents were congratulated on their input and the effort that they put into the nursery school. A lot of what is going on in Onthank is good. Willie Coffey is right about the impact that the programme has had on the people and their families—I saw it. They took it as a slur on their community, which was portrayed as a community blighted by drugs and alcohol, as if there was nothing else there. That was very insulting to them. They saw the spectacle of people from many parts of Scotland driving around Onthank expecting to see a rammy in the street or people taking drugs in public, which, of course, they did not see. They saw a housing estate like any other housing estate in our towns and cities, with people going about their business as they would do anywhere. That is the reality of Onthank. The programme did highlight some important issues about drugs, alcohol and deprivation. Society needs to know about those issues and we must address them, so I do not have an argument with the BBC about that. My argument is with the way in which it tried to build that into some sort of reality TV programme. The programme had a negative impact on the majority of the Onthank residents, and on the wider community of Kilmarnock. The people saw their community turned into something akin to a soap opera. I urge the BBC and any other programme producers who want to raise issues in future to consider the impact that the programme will have. When they leave the town and walk away, they will, I hope, consider the problems, the negativity and the way that people are left feeling, and I hope that they will consult the wider community before they try to put a programme like that on again.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This is my first speech, so, not surprisingly, the first thing that I want to say is how honoured I am to have been elected to represent the people of Cunninghame South. It is a privilege but also a responsibility, which I will not shirk. I will always do my very best for the people of Cunninghame South. It is also appropriate at this time to say something about my predecessor, Irene Oldfather, who was the member for Cunninghame South for 12 years. Irene chaired the cross-party group on Alzheimer’s, which helped to shape our national dementia strategy, which was announced last year. It is therefore only right that we acknowledge her work in the field of dementia and assure her that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy is committed to getting it right for people with dementia and their families, as I hope we all are. I wish Irene well. I turn now to the debate. I will not say the title, because it is such a mouthful. I will focus my comments on employment. My constituency is in North Ayrshire, which consistently has one of the highest levels of unemployment in Scotland, which we need to change. It was the SNP’s proposals on jobs that got me elected. We heard from members last week that we did not mention jobs during the election campaign, but we did—it was jobs, jobs, jobs. That is why I am here—people liked what the SNP was saying on jobs. I want to say something about those who have no jobs, because it focuses on why we are all here. Every day in my work with the citizens advice bureau service, I saw the impact that unemployment has on individuals and their families—the relationships that break down, the mental health problems, the bills that cannot be paid, the homes that are lost and the intolerable strain on families. Our job creation programme will make things better for those people. Youth unemployment, which many members have mentioned, is at a crisis level in Cunninghame South, as it is in many other parts of Scotland, and is causing a large section of young people to become disengaged from their communities. I have spoken to many of those young people, who say that they lie in bed all day because there is nothing to get up for—they have given up. Those people are our future, which is why we need to make things better for them. The examples that I have outlined are not exclusive to Cunninghame South; they are everywhere in Scotland—just ask citizens advice bureaux. I will talk about the public sector, which is the biggest employer in North Ayrshire. We all acknowledge that there are tough times ahead, with the looming Westminster cuts. We need to persuade the local authorities to agree a policy of no compulsory redundancies. The Scottish Government has done that for its services; we need to make local authorities do it, too. My colleague the member for Cunninghame North said last week that in North Ayrshire Council dozens of classroom assistants and school staff are being made compulsorily redundant. I have to say that that was opposed by the SNP group on the council. Our public sector workers and their families need reassurance and stability, not uncertainty. There has to be another way for them. Many are looking to us to make things better, given their hopes and aspirations, so we must support the ambitious plans for jobs and sustainability that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has put before us today. That is the way forward. I say to the cabinet secretary that North Ayrshire is ideally placed to contribute to and benefit from the opportunities that renewable energy presents. I will also be asking him to find a place in future plans for the upgrading of the A737, which is one of the main routes into North Ayrshire. The local businesses there see that as their number 1 priority, particularly if they are to benefit fully from the business support package that has been outlined today. I return to our young people. The measures that are proposed for them on youth employment, education and skills, such as 25,000 modern apprenticeships a year for the next five years, will make the difference. The key point for me is that those apprenticeships will be linked to real jobs. In the past, we have seen too many supposed job-creation schemes from Westminster that have provided only what I call kiddy-on jobs, which offer the young person neither skills nor opportunities. We cannot allow that to happen again. We must ensure that the modern apprenticeships in our constituencies are linked to real jobs, as intended. I will certainly monitor that in Cunninghame South. The strategy that the cabinet secretary has presented today is the right way forward. We will get Scotland’s economy growing to deliver prosperity and a more sustainable future, but we all—members in the chamber, people in local authorities, businesses, our young people and every agency in Scotland—need to work together. It must be a collective effort. However, like many others in the Parliament, I believe that Scotland will really flourish only with the economic levers and powers of independence.