2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01869)

Not waving but drowning, and sounding increasingly desperate. I can see why the First Minister wants to throw the chaff out there—[Interruption.]

Today’s Justice Committee report makes clear that “the case has not been made for abolishing the general requirement for corroboration”, and asks the Government to look again at that hugely controversial proposal. That is a significant and rare intervention. Will the First Minister give his response?

I do not doubt the Government’s concern for victims. Every party in the Parliament is concerned about victims, but victims of crime are best served by secure and sound convictions. Removing the requirement for corroboration will change permanently a criminal justice system that has served this country for centuries. It should not be considered lightly. The Law Society of Scotland, the Faculty of Advocates, the Scottish Human Rights Commission and two former heads of the judiciary all say that the plan is wrong. We are now talking about the integrity of this Parliament. Members are being asked to vote through a bill that we know to be deeply flawed on the ground that Kenny MacAskill has said that he will sort it later. There is an obvious solution. We should leave the scrapping of corroboration out of the bill, ask Lord Bonomy to report on the whole issue and then look at it again. Surely it is better to make good law later than bad law now.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01849)

I am not sure, given the campaign that is running in one of Scotland’s national newspapers, that the First Minister is on the strongest ground in talking about intemperate statements that have been made. The previous exchange that we heard had a little bit more heat than light, so I suggest that we all take a bit of a step back as we look at the issue. The First Minister’s white paper says that an independent Scotland would have “full autonomy” over revenue and spending issues. Yesterday, Mark Carney said that an independent Scotland would need to cede national sovereignty. Those statements are diametrically opposed. I ask the First Minister a very specific question. Who should the people of Scotland believe: Alex Salmond or the governor of the Bank of England?

What is proposed in the white paper is a eurozone-style pact, which Mark Carney yesterday specifically said had not worked for Europe and would not work for us, either. More ceding of sovereignty and more pooling of fiscal resources is a two-way street. The First Minister is expecting the spurned spouse to agree to give up their independence over areas of tax and spend. Exactly what powers does he expect England, Wales and Northern Ireland to give up to join his currency union?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01830)

A new report from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has revealed that the number of students who are studying in Scotland’s colleges has plummeted by 140,000 over the past five years. That is a cut of more than a third in college places since the Scottish National Party came to power. How many women have been affected?

The most telling thing about that answer was that, although I asked the First Minister about women, he ignored them. I can tell him that the number of women who are studying part-time courses has been slashed. There are now 80,000 fewer women studying part time in Scotland’s colleges than there were on the day he took office. The First Minister says that he wants more women in Scotland back in the workplace; I agree with him. However, childcare is only part of the issue. For a woman who has had a family and has had a career break and who wants to get back into the workplace, a part-time course allows her to juggle childcare and find a route back into work. Mike Russell has, in the chamber, flippantly dismissed part-time courses as “hobby” courses. What does the First Minister have to say to the 80,000 women who cannot get college places?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01811)

On 26 November 2013, the white paper revealed the Scottish National Party’s plan to jump the queue into Europe. It claimed that Scotland could go through article 48 of the Treaty on European Union—[Interruption.]

—instead of through article 49, a route that no other state has used in the history of European Union accession. Then, on 12 December, Nicola Sturgeon appeared before the European and External Relations Committee and said—not once, not twice, not three or even four times but five separate times—that nobody had questioned whether that was a valid legal route. Does the First Minister stand by that statement?

I am glad that the First Minister brings up what has been written on Europe because I would like to enter some other writing in evidence. However, I return to Nicola Sturgeon, who also told the committee, “If you want to quote people who are saying that” that is not a legal route, “I am happy to engage in that debate”.—[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 12 December 2013; c 1598.] I have a copy of a new submission to the European and External Relations Committee by Jean-Claude Piris, who is the former director general of the legal service of the EU Council. He states: “it would not be legally correct to try and use article 48 ... for the admission of Scotland as a member of the European Union.” I am happy to put the entire submission into the public domain today so that everyone can see, in black and white, a leading European expert saying that the SNP’s plan is not lawful. The First Minister misled the Scottish public on EU legal advice—[Interruption.]

That was ruled on in the last week before Christmas and was admitted, Presiding Officer, or do I misunderstand? I will correct the record by saying that the First Minister was unadjacent to the truth in what he said on EU legal advice and in what he said on our route into Europe, so why should we believe anything that he says on the subject?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01804)

I thought that the Prime Minister’s performance yesterday showed a degree of humour and self-deprecation that is wholly foreign to the First Minister. Perhaps he could take note. This week, we learned that the head of Historic Scotland left her post, after just 30 months, with a £300,000 pay-off, plus pension. That is a huge amount of public money, and it comes straight from the Scottish Government’s coffers. Can the First Minister tell us which, if any, of his ministers cleared such a payment?

I take it that the First Minister is saying that no minister of his Government signed off the deal nor should have. Why is that the case? The rules on the issue are pretty clear. Those rules, as published by the Scottish Government, state: “Ministerial clearance must be obtained ... in relation to any potentially high profile cases.” By any definition, a quango chief being given a £300,000 pay-off after just two-and-a-half years in the job is a very high profile case, and it is one of a long list of pay-offs that have cost this country £56 million in the past two years. The Scottish taxpayer is footing the bill for those extravagant golden goodbyes and is entitled to some straight answers. Therefore, given the rules, why was the pay-off not approved by a Government minister? Who approved it? Does the First Minister really believe that anyone who voluntarily leaves a job after just 30 months should be walking away with £300,000 of taxpayers’ money?

I, too, add my new year’s wishes to the whole chamber. When I saw the motion for the debate, I was immediately transported to the heady days of April 2007, when Alex Salmond was still in self-imposed exile at Westminster, having tried the Scottish Parliament but found a return to the green benches in London impossible to resist; and when Wales enacted a smoking ban, Kent had an earthquake and BBC Scotland still lived at Queen Margaret Drive. It was a time when the First Minister’s favourite celebrity dieter, Beyoncé, topped the charts with a song called “Beautiful Liar”. That was the backdrop for the launch of the SNP’s 2007 manifesto. It was a manifesto brimming with ideas for the young people of this country—ideas on class sizes, physical education provision and school-college partnerships; a promise to pay off student debt; and, crucially, a pledge to develop Scandinavian-style childcare, the first stage of which would be free provision of 600 hours. There was also a promise of free school meals for pupils in primary 1 to 3, starting with a pilot and being rolled out to 40,000 youngsters across the country. Nearly seven years in government and let us look at the record. Class sizes are going up not down, PE promises have been broken and school-college partnerships are still in the in-tray, while the student debt write-off has landed firmly in the bin. What about the policies that we have heard reheated today? On free school meals, the pilot happened and our then education secretary, Fiona Hyslop, declared: “The pilot was a success with pupils, parents and schools and I have therefore introduced an Order to the Scottish Parliament today which will allow all local authorities to provide free school meals for P1 to P3 pupils.” That was back in 2008 and, somehow, there has been no roll-out of that policy. Mike Russell made sure that it was quietly dropped when it came to the manifesto of 2011.

I want to make some progress. A cynic might say that the SNP, having promised the earth and failed to deliver for years, has only now rediscovered its commitment to free school meals because the coalition Government is delivering it. Today, we have a Westminster policy delivered with Westminster money and the SNP playing catch-up but trying to claim the credit. [Interruption.]

Now that the First Minister is on his feet, perhaps he can tell me why, while the Scottish Government will receive consequentials for free school meals from April, he is introducing them only from next January?

We have seen broken promises on PE; broken promises on class sizes; broken promises on student debt; and broken promises on free school meals. Let us get to the childcare element of this and return to page 49 of the 2007 manifesto, which said: “Our ... goal is to deliver universal integrated early education and care services, similar to the Scandinavian model, giving every family access to affordable, high quality childcare”. On page 51, it said: “We will increase the provision of free nursery education for 3 and 4 year olds by 50 per cent. That means increasing the entitlement from 400 hours a year to 600 hours a year.” It has taken the SNP almost seven years, and that 600 hours of free childcare has still not been implemented. Furthermore, the SNP promised in 2007 that the revolutionary Scandinavian model was achievable under devolution, but now—suddenly and with September looming and a referendum on its way—the Government white paper is telling parents that they will get that Scandinavian model only if they vote yes. Two thirds of the women of this country believe that the SNP should get on and deliver improvements now, and the same YouGov poll shows that the SNP’s own voters do not believe that the Government needs to wait for independence to deliver better childcare. Moving the goalposts is nothing new. The front bench launched the campaign to break up Britain with a pledge to gather a million signatures, which was quietly shelved. Then ministers parroted the battle cry that the more people hear about independence, the more they will vote yes. With the polls flatlining at under one third, that line was also ditched.

Not in my final minute. Then there was the promise that everything would be in the white paper, except for any figures, any costings, any projections, or any sums. There is not so much as a dead cat bounce in support. With every approach that has been tried failing to cut through to a sceptical Scotland, what do we have now? We have a Government that is failing to govern. It is resorting to as much Britain-bashing as it can get away with, demonising Westminster at every turn, and it is using Government time and taxpayers’ money to do it. The SNP is telling voters that they have to back independence for policies that it knows can be implemented now, and we know that because it is written in the SNP’s own hand in its own manifesto. Nationalism is the politics of division and that is what is being tried today. The Scottish Government is taking difficult and responsible UK Government decisions that have cut the deficit, created jobs, held interest rates low, and taken low-paid workers out of paying tax altogether, and dressing them up as another sack of Rome. Meanwhile, the Scottish Government has been embarrassed into delivering coalition policies on school meals that the SNP abandoned years ago, and it is placing front and centre a pledge to revolutionise childcare that it could have implemented in any one of the almost seven years it has been in power—but it chose not to because separation is more important than Scotland’s working parents. The Government’s independence offer is a pig in a poke and the Scottish public will not be fooled. I move amendment S4M-08707.1, to leave out from “deplores” to end and insert: “welcomes the Scottish Government’s late conversion to the cause of enhancing childcare; remains concerned that the Scottish Government refuses to use the existing powers of the parliament to address policy objectives; considers that the most effective way of reducing poverty is by getting more people into work, and commends the rise in employment and the fall in unemployment resulting from the policies of the UK Government.”

Does the member recognise, in the same way that the Joseph Rowntree Foundation recognises, that currently we are experiencing the lowest level of children living in poverty since the mid-1980s? In fact, 1.1 million fewer children are in poverty, several years after the coalition Government came to power.

Will the member give way?

How does the member square the circle whereby a Scandinavian-style revolution in childcare was somehow possible under devolution, according to the 2007 manifesto, but in a referendum year suddenly can be delivered only by independence?

The position is that the best way out of poverty is to increase employment, which is what the coalition Government has done. Can the member square what he says with the fact that, after enacting coalition policies for several years, we now have the lowest level of child poverty in this country since the mid-1980s?

2. I add my best wishes to all for a very happy and peaceful Christmas and new year period. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01777)

It is good to see that the objection to narrow political points that the First Minister’s Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning made a few moments ago did not last into the First Minister’s remarks. This week it was announced that anyone who is convicted of housebreaking over the festive period will face a maximum sentence of five years in prison, instead of the one year that is currently the maximum. Does the First Minister agree that the policy should be extended beyond 6 January, so that people who are convicted of housebreaking in future will always face a higher sentence?

I welcome Police Scotland’s initiative and I am glad that the First Minister recognises its value. However, it somewhat misses the point: a crime in June is every bit as wrong as a crime in December, and the penalty for breaking into someone’s home should be just as serious every day of the year. Few people will disagree with the initiative, but most people also think that what is needed is a firm commitment to a permanent change. Last year, nearly 1,400 people were convicted of housebreaking, but only half got any form of custodial sentence at all. Those who violate the homes of others should know that they face the full force of the law, no matter in which month they commit their crime. Will the First Minister take action, so that housebreakers can face higher sentences all year round?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01756)

Two weeks ago, the Prime Minister of Spain stated that an independent Scotland—[Interruption.]

—would join the same queue as everybody else to get into the European Union, echoing the words of the European Commission President and the foreign ministers of Spain, Ireland, Latvia and the Czech Republic. The First Minister told the Parliament that every one of those people was wrong and then selectively quoted a letter that he found on the internet to back up his case. However, the Commission’s official position had already been given to the Parliament when the First Minister stood up, in a letter dated 5 November and held by the Scottish Parliament information centre. Will the First Minister tell the Parliament why he chose to google a pro-independence website rather than read from the official letter that was given to Parliament, and will he read from that letter now?

I think that the First Minister has inadvertently misquoted the Irish foreign minister there, so let me quote her directly. She said: “If Scotland were to become independent, Scotland would have to apply for membership and that can be a lengthy process”. The First Minister used a diversionary tactic, because he did not want to quote from the letter in SPICe, but I will. It states: “The EU is founded on the Treaties which apply only to the Member States who have agreed and ratified them ... a new independent state would, by the fact of its independence, become a third country with respect to the EU and the Treaties would no longer apply on its territory.” It goes on, and it is unambiguous that an independent Scotland would have to negotiate entry into the European Union from the outside. The opt-outs that we currently have from the euro and the Schengen agreement would be voided and our budget rebate would no longer apply. So we have a First Minister who misled the people of Scotland once, telling them that he had specific legal advice on Europe when none existed. He misled them a second time by trying to pretend that a letter that he had googled was the final word on EU entry, and it turns out that he has misled them a third time, because an official position on EU entry had been given to the Parliament but, rather than detail its contents, he used the internet letter instead. He is the Pinocchio of Scottish politics. Every time he speaks on Europe—

—his nose grows another inch.

My apologies to you, Presiding Officer, if I have caused offence in the chamber. I have outlined three occasions on which, on a single issue, the First Minister has misled the people of this country. If the people cannot trust him on this issue, why should they trust him on any issue?

We view events, people and change through our own eyes, and our time and experiences are reflected in what we see. Nelson Mandela’s journey from prisoner to president, which was watched around the world, spanned the decades, and the years of that journey are clear in this chamber. The First Minister and, to a greater extent, the leader of the Labour Party have talked about their memories of the apartheid struggle and how it impacted on their political consciousness and the politics and world view of those around them, but my memories are, by necessity, only of what came after. When The Specials charted with “Free Nelson Mandela”, I was five. When the world watched the man walk free from prison, I was still at primary school. My political consciousness was not really formed until I was in my teens, and by then he was already president. By the time that I reached voting age, he was more than halfway through his term of office and had already indicated that he would step down. So I do not remember the struggle. For me and people of my age, it was something to be viewed almost in the rear-view mirror of modern history—as anachronistic and wrong as American segregation or communist rule across Europe. My view of Mandela was of a man who was greatly wronged trying to heal his broken country and lead it from darkness into light. He said: “No one is born hating another person because of the color of his skin, or his background, or his religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love comes more naturally to the human heart than its opposite.” On leaving prison, with more reason to hate than anyone, Mandela showed people how to love and how to forgive. Mandela taught the world that reconciliation was more powerful than retribution. Despite terrible provocation he never answered racism with racism; instead, he chose to build a rainbow nation. He lived his philosophy every day and sometimes at great personal cost. It was only a number of years after the fall of apartheid that I started more fully to appreciate that the transition that occurred from oppression to equality under the rule of law was not an inevitability and not simply the right and proper or even the obvious way that things could have happened by natural political evolution; rather it was as a consequence of one man’s courage, conviction and conscience. As a young reporter, I was invited to hear FW de Klerk speak at the University of St Andrews. It was only then, when I heard at first hand but from the opposite side the difficulties entrenched in their shared land, that I understood just how big a gap had been bridged: the pressure on Mandela from newly emancipated black South Africans to hit back at their oppressors for every wrong that they had endured; the moral courage required to stand up and show that there was another way—that truth could lead to reconciliation. Mandela’s words “to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others” describe the simplest of concepts but the hardest of tasks, especially given that he had to work with leaders of an establishment that had taken a third of his life and subjected a whole people. Back in those dark days of strife, turmoil and challenge, many struggled to understand the potency of what was unfolding, not least those in my party. I am pleased that the opening of the Thatcher archive shows that Margaret Thatcher lobbied PW Botha for Mandela’s release repeatedly and with vigour. She told him that such a move “would have more impact than almost any single action you could undertake.” That knowledge and the subsequent acknowledgement of the unique greatness that was Nelson Mandela does not change the fact that many members of my party did not recognise apartheid for the grave violation of human dignity that it was and did not back the struggle to end it. That is a stain on our party, and those members have found themselves on the wrong side of history. As someone who is a generation behind, it is almost incomprehensible to me how their judgment could have been so wrong. Following his release, Nelson Mandela showed the world what could be achieved by offering a hand of friendship, shared endeavour, trust, forgiveness and love. His example gave hope not just to his country or his continent but to all people. Describing himself, he said: “I am fundamentally an optimist. Whether that comes from nature or nurture, I cannot say. Part of being optimistic is keeping one's head pointed toward the sun, one's feet moving forward. There were many dark moments when my faith in humanity was sorely tested, but I would not and could not give myself up to despair.” That action—that refusal to give in to rancour and the persistence to keep putting one foot in front of the other and to guide his nation in its journey from division to unity—increased everybody’s faith in humanity. All nations were represented at his memorial today because Mandela spoke not just for South Africa but to the world. His message of love, faith, forgiveness and human dignity made him a man not just for our time, but all time. I support the motion.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01734)

We ask nurses to work long hours in physically and emotionally demanding jobs, and they do so with a huge amount of professionalism and care, but we also need to care for them. In 2006, the Royal College of Nursing Scotland reported that one in five nurses had suffered bullying at work in the previous year. At the time, the RCN said that such treatment was unacceptable and added: “We can’t expect nurses to put up with this at work”. The RCN report that is out today shows that the number of nurses who have been bullied in the past 12 months has risen from one in five to one in three. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to help to tackle the problem?

I welcome the First Minister’s words and the sentiments behind them, but the facts remain that nurses say that the problems are getting worse and not better, and that one in three is bullied. That is the equivalent of nearly 28,000 nurses having faced abuse in the past 12 months in Scotland. We appear to have a system and a culture in which bullying of nursing staff is a widespread and systemic practice in our hospitals and health centres. It is clear that we are not rooting out the bullies, that we have not changed the management culture through which bullying has been allowed to happen, and that we are not properly supporting staff who have an already difficult job that is being made much harder by the abuse that they experience from their managers or colleagues. Our nurses have consistently been failed and we must act now to make that better. Bullying in any form is unacceptable. I want to do something about it and I know that the First Minister does, too. Will he meet me, the other party leaders and nursing representatives to draw up an action plan to help to right this wrong?

Nobody knows how they will react when the unimaginable happens. There is no handbook on how to respond to a tragedy that makes no sense—when, for example, a passenger airliner falls out of the sky above a town, an oil platform is engulfed in a fireball, a man walks into a primary school and opens fire or the rotors of a police helicopter stop spinning and it crashes into the roof of a city centre pub on a busy Friday night. Nobody knows how they will react when they are faced with such unimaginable scenes. In Scotland, we pull together. On Friday, we saw people who had escaped the wreckage of the building turning around and going back in to help others. We saw passengers stop their cars and residents come out of their homes to join a human chain to help people to safety. We saw ambulance crews, fire officers and members of the police work through the night, the next day and the day after, sometimes at great risk, to save the living and recover the dead, knowing that their colleagues were in that wreckage. We then saw them form a simple, silent guard of honour as the last souls were recovered. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families and loved ones of all who died and those who are injured, but our thanks go to those who ensured that that number did not rise. We saw some amazing acts of courage, generosity, thought and care: the son standing vigil by the police cordon throughout the night, knowing that his father’s seat was exactly where the helicopter fell and never contemplating that a son’s place would be anywhere other than where he was, waiting on the worst news that he would ever receive; the hotel opening its doors without question to the injured and exhausted; the pizza shop operating through the night to ensure that those helping at the scene received hot food; and the taxi firm waiving fares so that relatives could make hospital visits for free. I record my thanks to the First Minister for speaking for Scotland on Saturday morning and again today, and to Glasgow City Council, which spoke for all of the city. Gordon Matheson and his team did not just co-ordinate the work but set the tone and reflected the mood of a Glasgow in shock, by cancelling St Andrew’s day events because respect was more important than cost, by feeding police, fire and ambulance workers at the scene, by setting up a family reception centre as news filtered through and by immediately offering financial help for anyone who was suffering hardship as a result of what unfolded. The city’s slogan is “People make Glasgow”, and on Friday night and thereafter, people’s first, last and only thought was to help. No matter the risk and with no thought for themselves, people said, “What can we do?” All Glasgow will mourn Friday’s events and all Glasgow gives thanks. This week, Glasgow stood together.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01713)

Before I start, I would like to get the Spanish foreign minister out of the way. José Manuel García-Margallo told the Spanish Senate: “In the hypothetical case of independence, Scotland would have to join the queue and ask to be admitted, needing the unanimous approval of all member states to obtain the status of a candidate country”. If we are going to quote the Spanish foreign minister, let us do it properly. On 13 December last year, the Deputy First Minister made a statement to the Parliament on Europe. In that, she told MSPs that she had written to the European Commission President, José Manuel Barroso, to seek early discussions with him on the process by which an independent Scotland would become a member of the EU. She told the Parliament that she would give an update once those discussions had taken place. Can the First Minister tell us why, in the intervening 11 and a half months, we have not had that update?

There is surprise and indignation from the First Minister, and yet he should not be surprised. [Interruption.]

Anyone who has ever had any dealings with the European Union would know that the head of Commission would speak only to sovereign states on accession issues. The question is—[Interruption.]

The question is: why did the Deputy First Minister not know that when she said it? That shows just what a shower of rank amateurs the Scottish National Party Government is when it comes to international diplomacy. [Interruption.]

SNP ministers say that they are right and everyone else is wrong on Europe. They say that the European Commission President is wrong when he says that Scotland would have to join the same queue as everybody else. They say that the Spanish Prime Minister is wrong when he says that we would have to join the same queue as everybody else. They say that the foreign ministers of Spain, Latvia, Ireland and the Czech Republic are wrong when they say that we would have to join the same queue as everybody else. The First Minister does not understand that it does not matter if he gets 15, 25, 26 or even 27 member states on board because he needs every single one of the 28 Governments to agree to his demands. Is the First Minister winning friends and influencing people by telling them that they are wrong?

I am interested that the First Minister mentioned the IPPR think tank. It also stated last night: “The Scottish Government’s long awaited white paper is piece of fantasy economics ... Other than a (contentious) assertion that the tax base north of the border is stronger than in the rest of the UK, it is unclear how any of this can be paid for.” Does the First Minister endorse that quote, too?

Much has been made of the size of yesterday’s white paper. It is 650 pages and has been said to be a weighty tome and the unionists’ secret weapon. Joan McAlpine even said that it made America’s Declaration of Independence look like a post-it note. It really is a case of never mind the quality, just feel the width. It is not just a vast unionist conspiracy that says so. The think tank, the IPPR, called the white paper “fantasy economics” and the Institute of Chartered Accountants slammed it for shining no light on pension problems. No doubt, Shona Robison was straight on the phone to the cartoonist at The Independent this morning. In fact, for all the trees that perished in the making of the document, there is very little in there that is actually new. Yes, it refers to childcare—I spoke about that yesterday—but the other new piece of information is the Scottish Government’s cunning plan for a route into Europe, which was followed up with a 100-page document today. Never mind that the European Commission president, José Manuel Barroso, stated categorically last September that “if a country becomes independent it is a new state” and that “if there is a new state, of course, that state has to apply for membership and negotiate the conditions with other member states.”

I can absolutely and categorically state that we will give the people of Scotland a choice, which is something that the First Minister is not happy to do because he does not trust the people of this country. [Interruption.]

He likes referenda on everything apart from the European Union. José Manuel Barroso’s categoric statement last September, with the head of the club saying that there are no shortcuts, has been backed by the foreign ministers of Spain, Ireland, Latvia and the Czech Republic. Despite that, the Scottish Government, in its plucky little wisdom, thinks that it has found a way round that. Application through article 49 is not for the Scottish Government—oh, no, not that long queuing system and the tortuous negotiation that can begin only after the Government’s self-appointed independence day. The Government boldly states on page 221 of the white paper that article 48 is now the mechanism for it. That would be article 48 that has never been used as the basis for accession; article 48 that would require every single member state to agree to open that treaty and other treaties up in order to make accession happen; and article 48 under which the Scottish Government has no way of triggering a treaty change because only member states, the European Parliament or the Commission have the power to do that, so the Scottish Government would have to ask someone else to do it for it. The Scottish Government does have the good grace to acknowledge that “it will be for the EU member states, meeting under the auspices of the Council, to take forward the most appropriate procedure under which an independent Scotland will become a signatory to the EU Treaties”. Therefore, although it wants to change the rules of the club before it becomes a member in order to jump the queue for membership, it recognises that it does not get to decide the route that it wants to take and that it is up to the other club members to decide that for it. Let us look at what the club has been saying overnight. The official response from the Commission spokesman was: “I can specify that the treaty provides some clear articles when it comes to the need for a new, third country to apply to the EU if they want to join.” He then added: “Any process of a particular region of a member state leaving this member state ... will have treaty implications.” He said that Brussels’s “well-known position” on that has not changed, and we are right back to Barroso’s statement of last September. But it was not just the Commission spokesman who responded—no, no. The BBC’s Europe editor, Gavin Hewitt, has been a pretty busy man. He has been speaking to all sorts of officials in Brussels. Let me read out his report this morning: “European officials have made clear that any new country would have to reapply for EU membership. In the case of Scotland, it would first have to complete financial negotiations with the UK, only then would Scotland be able to approach Brussels and formally apply for membership.” European officials are stating that Scotland would not even get to approach the EU for membership until after it has finished all its negotiations with the UK over the currency, the regulator, the lender of last resort, the Bank of England and a hundred other issues. This is where we get to my favourite part of the Scottish Government’s European plan—the fact that all of this will be done in just 18 months. Negotiations with the UK will be completed in time to start a formal membership application, which would require each of the institutions of the EU and every one of the 28 other member states, each one holding a veto, to agree to change the founding treaty, to open up and amend a number of other treaties, to agree all the opt-outs that Britain has secured that the SNP wants to keep, to add to the commissioners and to add to the voting. All of that will be done in a matter of mere months, when from application to accession it takes states, on average, eight years to join. This comes from a Scottish Government that has spent 18 months trying and failing to get EU agreement on alcohol minimum pricing.

I am sorry. I am in my final minute, First Minister.

If the Scottish Government cannot get through one policy from one portfolio in 18 months, what chance does it have of negotiating membership in its entirety on the same timescale? The Scottish Government is desperate to prove that it does not have to come out of Europe before it gets to go back in. Ministers are now contorting themselves in every possible way to find any straw to grasp on the issue, but the weight of the evidence just does not stack up. The Commission president says that an independent Scotland would have to reapply. Officials say that that application cannot happen until financial negotiations with the UK Government about a separate state are complete. The foreign ministers of Spain, Ireland, Latvia and the Czech Republic say that Scotland cannot jump the queue. In history, 22 countries have joined Europe’s club and the average joining time has been eight years and four months. It could be pretty lonely for a newly independent Scotland starting life on Europe’s northern fringe. I support the amendment to the motion.

What would the member say to Tony Mackay of Mackay Consultants—an oil and gas consultancy firm—who said it is unrealistic to have an oil fund for “two main reasons: the declining oil revenues; and the SNP’s commitments to a high level of public spending. There would therefore be little or no money left to invest in an oil fund.”

The people of Scotland have been waiting a long time to get answers on what independence might look like. I think that people right across the country will have looked at the launch of the white paper today and thought, “Is this it? Is this why we should break apart a United Kingdom that Scotland has spent 300 years helping to build? Is this why we should sacrifice one half of our shared nationhood and our dual identity? Is this why we should walk away?” The truth is that there was little that is new—little that we had not heard here before—except the pledge on childcare. For six years, the Deputy First Minister has sat in a Scottish Government with full powers over childcare, and for six years the Scottish Conservatives, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats have been urging her Government to give Scottish families more help with childcare. Now, suddenly, after six years, we get this promise. It is illuminating that, when the Deputy First Minister was asked this morning why, in six years, she had not helped families in that way when she had the powers to do so, she answered that she had not helped when she could have done so because the tax receipts of women going back to work would have gone to the UK Treasury. If the Deputy First Minister wants to prove that the pledge is not retail politics and is not jotted down on the back of a fag packet, can she tell us how much the policy would cost? How much, per year, will 1,140 hours of childcare for all children from the age of one to school age cost, and why is the costing not in the document?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01685)

Nothing that has been said in the past quarter of an hour takes away from the fact that the Institute for Fiscal Studies report said clearly that an independent Scotland would start life with such a gap in its balance sheet that either taxes would have to rise or spending would have to be slashed. Those are similar findings to those of the Office for Budget Responsibility, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, the National Institute of Social and Economic Research, the Confederation of British Industry, the David Hume Institute and any number of academics and economists whom one cares to mention. Why does the First Minister think that the IFS came to such conclusions? Was it part of some vast right-wing conspiracy, or had it just done the sums?

To pick out half a sentence from page 11 and repeating it again and again might be a life raft of a debating point, but it does not change the headline message of the IFS report, which is that in order even to begin to balance the books, there must in an independent Scotland be either a huge spending cut or a tax rise equivalent to VAT of 27 per cent or a 9 per cent hike in income tax. The inconvenient truth for the First Minister is that the IFS is not alone in its analysis. Independent think tanks, academics, economists, financial experts, business groups and trade bodies are all lining up and saying the same things: the books do not balance, the currency is not secure and oil is a finite resource. All of them—[Interruption.]

All of them are on one side of the argument, while on the other, all alone, is the First Minister, sticking his fingers in his ears, making fag-packet promises and with an economic plan that has more holes in it than Rab C Nesbitt’s string vest. All the independent experts are saying one thing and Alex Salmond is saying another, so let me ask him this: Why should voters close their eyes, cross their fingers and take a punt on the First Minister’s far-fetched claims?

The shocking suddenness of Helen’s illness and loss has deprived Fife of one of its most dedicated servants in the chamber and of one of its most principled parliamentarians. Although we in this place are rightly talking about Helen’s contribution to politics and public life, I recognise that it is undoubtedly as a wife, a mother, a grandmother and a friend that her loss will be most keenly felt. I extend the thoughts and prayers of myself and my party to Helen’s family in supporting the motion of condolence. In all the tributes to Helen Eadie over the past few days, two themes have emerged. The first of those is Helen’s fundamental care for people. Although I did not know her as well as other members did, it was evident to me that she was driven by a deep concern for others, be they her constituents, her colleagues or her family. That care for people and desire to help others shaped much of her career and many of her views. She was a vocal opponent of the local government reorganisation that introduced multimember wards largely because her experience as a councillor in Fife taught her that smaller wards allowed her to represent the interests of her constituents more effectively. Whether she was campaigning to improve the care of pensioners in Fife or working on behalf of the Polish and Bulgarian communities, Helen’s priority was always her constituents rather than her career or status as a politician. I was telling Johann Lamont that, when I first arrived here as an MSP, I was a little intimidated by Helen, which seems strange in retrospect. I knew that she had resigned from several committees in protest that a Conservative could take any sort of leadership role in equal opportunities. I had watched as Helen would raise herself in the chamber, trembling in paroxysms of anti-Tory ire on—well, actually, on almost any given subject that one cares to mention. Helen caught me in the corridor a few weeks after I became leader and I have to say that I thought that I was for it. However, I was not, because in private Helen was both warm and kind hearted. She had stopped me to ask whether I would pass on a letter to a United Kingdom Cabinet colleague, because she needed help to help others in her constituency and wanted to know whether I would oblige. That was not the only time that Helen asked me to help intervene on one issue or another on behalf of her constituents. I always did help, because her requests were so modest and her wish to help was so heartfelt. They almost became personal missions to her and she was always on the side of the weak and the poor—the people who just needed a big sister to wrap an arm around them and tell them, “Let’s see if we can’t make this better.” Neither the letters exchanged nor the back-door channels ever made it into the press, even when the situation was not resolved to Helen’s liking. She was much keener to do whatever it took to help than to grandstand or gain credit just for trying. Not everyone in the chamber can say the same thing. It has been said in newspaper tributes, at yesterday’s funeral service and here again today that, even when Helen was confined to her hospice bed, she insisted on carrying on her duties as a local MSP, replying to correspondence and sending instructions to her colleagues—I hope that members have all done what she asked. That sort of dedication is remarkable, but I did not think that it surprised anyone who knew Helen, as they would not be able to imagine anything else. Her life and career were characterised by absolute honesty, decency and integrity. We have lost too many of our class of 99 this year. With every Scottish election, new people have the privilege of taking their seats in the chamber. Helen was an example to all who came after of what a people’s representative should be and of how to put your constituents first. She showed that, although one can put one’s argument with force and passion in the chamber, one can work with others as colleagues—no matter what party—to make a difference. The story of Helen’s indignation and subsequent resignations at my colleague Margaret Mitchell taking on the convenership of the Equal Opportunities Committee is legend and, as the First Minister mentioned, it came with a withering comment about Attila the Hun. Less well known is that under Margaret’s guidance, that same committee produced an in-depth report on women in prison and their rights and treatment. Helen sought out Margaret especially to tell her what a fine and important piece of work that was. That was Helen’s other side: completely supportive and generous with her praise when she saw someone else standing up for the overlooked, the oppressed and the vulnerable. Helen had unshakeable political convictions and passion for expressing her beliefs with full force. One would be hard pushed to find a more decent, honest or principled parliamentarian than Helen Eadie. For me, her most abiding quality was to care: to care for her constituents, to care for the difference that she could make and to show care and respect for her opponents as well as her friends. As our thoughts and prayers go out to Bob, Jemma, Fiona and the wider family at this time, we remember with affection one of Holyrood’s most honourable members.

The debate is not easy and it was never going to be. When areas of love meet the law and when belief, commitment and faith collide with legislation, the waters will always be difficult to navigate. I therefore commend all the contributors to the debate in the past months and years who have sought to make thoughtful comments, to elevate the ideas and to temper the language. People have displayed a respect for beliefs that differ from their own and have recognised that those beliefs are just as sincerely held. I hope that that temperance will continue this evening, to demonstrate that, although this may be a fledgling Parliament, it has maturity. It is precisely because of the nature of the debate that I believe that the bill is a matter of conscience. That is why, like members of other parties, Scottish Conservative members have been given a free vote. Today, I speak on behalf of only myself. I have no doubt that this could be the most personal speech that I will ever make in the chamber. I hope to explain why I support the broadest principle of the bill—the principle of extending marriage. I believe in that principle because I believe in marriage. I believe that marriage is a good thing. I saw the evidence of that every day growing up in a house that was full of love. My family had the stresses and strains that are common to all, but there was never any doubt, question or fear in my mind that our togetherness was in any way insecure. The bedrock of that stability and security was my parents’ marriage. That stability helped me and my sister to flourish and have confidence that we could be whoever we wanted to be. After more than 40 years of marriage, my parents still love each other. I look at what they have and I want that too, and I want it to be recognised in the same way. That recognition matters. Presiding Officer, from childhood, you have known without even thinking that if you found someone you loved and who loved you in return, you would have the right to marry them. The same unthinking right to marry extends to the cabinet secretary, the Labour Party leader and the Liberal Democrat leader. I want that right to extend to not just me but the thousands of people across Scotland who are told that the law says no and that they cannot marry the love of their life. They are not allowed and, unless we change the law, they will never be allowed. It does matter. It matters that a whole section of our society is told that they can have the facsimile of civil partnership but they cannot have the real thing. It is not for them. Their love is something different and something less. Their commitment is denied. I do not want the next generation of young gay people to grow up as I did, believing that marriage is something that they can never have. With this bill, we have the opportunity to change that, and to change the attitudes and stigma that being lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender can still evoke, and that can cause so much harm.

I would hope that their father would have helped to vote them that opportunity. Talking about the next generation is important because it is those people we must think about. Last year, the University of Cambridge conducted a huge body of research called “The School Report”. The researchers spoke to hundreds of LGBT pupils from across the UK who were open about their sexuality. The majority said that they were the victims of homophobic bullying and that it happened to them in their schools. More than half of the respondents deliberately self-harmed. Nearly a quarter had attempted to take their own life on at least one occasion. These are our children and they are made to feel so much guilt, shame and despair. We have an opportunity today to make it better for them. At the moment, we tell these young people, “You are good enough to serve in our armed forces. You are good enough to care in our hospitals. You are good enough to teach in our schools. But you are not good enough to marry the person you love and who loves you in return.” We tell them that they are something different, something less, something other, and that the dream and gold standard of marriage does not apply to them. They do not get to have it. That apartheid message, that “same but different” or alien quality, and that otherness is reflected in every hurtful comment, slander, exclusion and abuse, whether it takes place in the school playground, on the factory floor, or in the local pub. That is why the bill matters to those people who will directly benefit from it, such as those couples who are eager to commit their relationship in marriage and who should be allowed to do so. More than that, it matters to the future nature of our country. We have an opportunity today to tell our nation’s children that, no matter where they live and no matter who they love, there is nothing that they cannot do. We will wipe away the last legal barrier that says that they are something less than their peers. We can help them to walk taller into the playground tomorrow and to face their accuser down knowing that the Parliament of their country has stood up for them and said that they are every bit as good as every one of their classmates. They will know that their Parliament has said that they deserve the same rights as everyone else. I believe in marriage. I believe that it is a good thing and something to be celebrated, and I want everyone in Scotland to know that marriage is important to them. I support the principles of this bill.

2. I add my condolences and those of my party to those of members across the chamber on the passing of Helen Eadie. She will be missed by the Parliament, and our thoughts and prayers are with her family and her colleagues at this time. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01666)

Let us return to Professor Chris Whatley. He is a respected academic from the University of Dundee who, a fortnight ago, spoke at a meeting of like-minded Scots. At that meeting, he expressed his support for Scotland staying within the United Kingdom. As thousands of other people across Scotland have done, he gave up some of his free time to debate and discuss the future of our country in a public meeting. We should be welcoming that contribution and the contribution of others to our national debate. Instead, because he disagreed with the SNP’s position, a Government minister contacted his employer to question his integrity. Was Shona Robison right or wrong to contact the principal’s office?

I notice that the First Minister was incredibly specific in denying a phone call, but that he did not deny that there was contact between Shona Robison and the office of the principal of the University of Dundee. That says it all: if you say something that the SNP does not like, you can expect an intimidating contact. That is an example, if any were needed, of the SNP’s reaction to something that it does not like to hear. The First Minister refuses to condemn such tactics and refuses to back free speech. [Interruption.]

Let us contrast Professor Whatley’s treatment with that of another respected academic. In August, Dr Elliot Bulmer wrote a prominent newspaper article on behalf of the pro-independence campaign; not only that, Yes Scotland paid him for it. If you are an academic who writes in support of independence, the separatists will put a cheque in your hand, but if you are an academic who speaks in support of Scotland staying in the UK, an SNP minister will collar your boss. Chris Whatley’s treatment by the SNP Government so outraged the academic community that a group of Scottish professors wrote an open letter, in which they said: “It is unacceptable for a minister to question the integrity of an academic on the basis of his or her political views.” Emeritus Professors Susan Shaw, Hugh Pennington and Ronald Roberts say that the minister’s actions were wrong. Can I have the First Minister’s guarantee that no member of his Government will act in such a manner again?

2. To ask the Deputy First Minister when she will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01650)

I add my deep regret about yesterday’s jobs announcement. The speculation surrounding those job losses has been deeply unhelpful and has added to the huge amounts of worry for workers in my area of Glasgow and their families. On reflection, does the Deputy First Minister regret speculating publicly in the press last week that the entire Govan yard could close, thereby adding immeasurably to the worry of the workers there?

Nicola Sturgeon and Johann Lamont have both said that yesterday was a “bittersweet” moment for shipbuilding in Scotland. I am pleased that, despite the job losses that were announced yesterday, the Clyde has been reaffirmed as the centre for building United Kingdom warships for the Royal Navy. In the past 24 hours, I have had a number of conversations with BAE Systems and am pleased that it does not want the Clyde yards to remain static. It will make a multimillion pound investment in those sites to upgrade them massively and bring them into what it calls the upper quartile of worldwide shipbuilding, by creating a design and manufacturing centre of excellence on the Clyde. Simply put, it will elevate the yards to shipbuilding’s premier league. With all the earlier talk of diversification, the truth is that next-generation complex warships are increasingly built by specialist yards, and not by generalists such as the yards that are making commercial vessels to which the Deputy First Minister referred. Without massive upgrades, the Clyde will not have full capability to build the type 26, and the company cannot compete in the marketplace to supply the most advanced vessels to foreign navies. The yards’ long-term future depends on both. I know that the company is applying for grants from Scottish Enterprise, and it says that it needs support from the Scottish Government as the yards transform. What work is the Scottish Government doing now to ensure that that assistance will be there when it is needed?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01631)

Today is the last day of consultation on police counter closures. When I asked the First Minister earlier this month about the decision to shut a third of police stations to the public, he justified it on the grounds of the number of people who were using them—in other words, on the footfall analysis. When did that footfall analysis take place and were all police stations included?

The figures that the First Minister has given are slightly at odds with the figures in the Police Scotland internal business case for cutting these services. The internal business case shows that some of the information dates back as far as 2009. That is an important point, because that was before more than 60 stations were shut completely or had their hours reduced, which will inevitably have affected the number of people going to the police stations that were left—the very stations that the First Minister now wants to shut to the public. Even worse, for some rural stations, a footfall analysis was not done at all—Police Scotland just guessed. It is no wonder that the internal business case says that the accuracy of the returns submitted and the ability to draw significant and accurate data is caveated due to the varying quality of the returns. In other words, police stations are set to close to the public because of out-of-date information that might never have been right in the first place. The First Minister’s case for closing the police counters was based solely on the numbers. Does he agree that the flaws in the numbers now mean that his case has collapsed and he should save our stations?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01612)

I am not sure that we got terribly far on the matter that has just been raised, so let us try again from the beginning. The Scottish Government is quoted in the press this morning as saying that the secret Government oil papers from last year “have been overtaken by the expert report of the Fiscal Commission Working Group”. Can the First Minister confirm that, in this case, “overtaken” means that the Government has just lifted the good bits and thrown away the bad bits that do not suit his separatist agenda?

That is all very interesting. The First Minister may be interested to know that this morning I ran the Government’s secret reports from last year and the recent report of the independent fiscal commission through university cheating software. What did I find? Whole sections have been cut and pasted, including entire paragraphs on Scotland’s projected net fiscal debt, on the country’s debt interest payments and on notional borrowing costs. All the good stuff made the grade; all the bad stuff hit the bin. This is the Alastair Campbell school of dodgy dossier writing. It seems that, when the Government reached any section in the original reports—and there were plenty—that said that an oil fund would mean higher taxes, more borrowing or lower public spending, it simply hit “delete”. This is another case of Alex Salmond’s say-anything, do-anything and promise-anything approach to independence. Is it not the case that the First Minister has no wish to be straight with the people of Scotland but would rather try to hoodwink them into a yes vote with spun lines, half-truths and incomplete analyses?

2. I warmly welcome today’s Teleperformance announcement. On a personal note, I particularly welcome the 621 full-time posts that will be coming to Glasgow as part of that announcement. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01592)

A year ago, the Scottish Conservatives raised the issue of police station closures, revealing that a fifth of police stations across Scotland had shut since the Scottish National Party came to power. This week, we hear that a further third are to close their doors to the public. Does the First Minister support those front-desk closures?

I could not really work out whether the substantial argument there was that the First Minister was supporting cuts that would mean having only one police station in the whole of Aberdeen where someone can walk in off the street and speak to someone. When the plans include 3,000 civilian police job losses, how many uniformed officers will have to backfill? Let us consider the practical effects on communities who face local police closures. Most people who visit a police station do so to report a crime, request a police officer, make a complaint or turn themselves in for arrest or for other matters that are now deemed minor or ancillary. I do not know about the First Minister, but I do not think that reporting a crime is a minor matter and I am pretty sure that the victims of crime do not think so, either. However, victims are being told that that needs to happen by email or phone. A freedom of information request revealed that up to 6,000 non-emergency calls to police a month go unanswered. Fifty-six police stations have already been closed on this First Minister’s watch, another 65 front desks are set to go, there is reduced access to the police for communities and victims of crime across Scotland, and there is no guarantee that someone will even answer a person’s call when they pick up the phone to report a crime. Is that seriously the First Minister’s definition of community policing?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01573)

On Tuesday, Nicola Sturgeon stood in the chamber and, when talking about pensions, said: “those who try to perpetuate the myth that Scotland’s population is somehow uniquely ageing or ageing faster than that of the rest of the UK are simply wrong.”—[Official Report, 24 September 2013; c 22775.] However, National Records of Scotland says: “The age structure of Scotland’s population means that it is projected to age more rapidly compared to the UK.” The First Minister’s deputy says that Scotland is ageing more slowly, while his Government’s own agency says the exact opposite. Which is correct?

The First Minister is absolutely correct. The Scottish Government, in its paper on Monday, used some National Records of Scotland projections. It used the projections that show that, between 2010 and 2035, the number of pensioners in Scotland will increase by 26 per cent while the number in the rest of the UK will increase by 28 per cent. What it did not include was the fact that the number of people of working age in the rest of the UK will increase by 16 per cent and the working-age population of Scotland will increase by just 7 per cent over the same period. That matters, because Monday’s pensions paper said that, under independence, Scots could retire earlier and on more money because Scotland’s population was ageing at a different rate from that in the rest of the UK. National Records of Scotland shows that 7 per cent to 26 per cent is 3.71 pensioners for every worker—more than twice the rate of the rest of the UK. The First Minister talked about dependants. That was another pauchling of the figures on Monday, because the figures that the Government used when talking about pensions—[Interruption.]

It would be worth while for the First Minister’s back benchers to listen to this. The figures that the Government used compared the ratio of workers with the ratio of pensioners and children but, as everyone knows, when we are dealing with pensions, it is the ratio of workers to pensioners that counts. All Monday’s promises, such as they are, are based on the Scottish National Party convincing people that Scotland’s demographic time bomb is not the same as those in other countries. That is just not true. The Government knew that all along, as its own agency told it. The First Minister pauchled the figures. Is not it the case that the SNP’s pension policy just does not add up?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01554)

I will take us back to the Institute for Fiscal Studies report, which the First Minister says we should quote properly and in the full context. Yes, the IFS did say on page 8 of the report the words that the First Minister read out, but the very next line stated: “But doing this might be ill advised.” Let us quote the IFS properly and in the full context. That does not get us away—[Interruption.]

It does not get us away from the central projection, which is that an independent Scotland would start life with a £5.9 billion black hole in its finances over the first few years. To continue the theme, I ask the First Minister: is the IFS wrong?

In answering the question, the First Minister once again chooses to pick one scenario and ignore—[Interruption.]

And ignore the IFS’s central projection, which is a £5.9 billion black hole in the finances. It is not just the IFS report with which the First Minister wants to show us a shiny thing in the corner and lead us away. This week, we have heard from the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, following on from the independent Office for Budget Responsibility, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, named experts such as Professor Brian Quinn and Professor John Kay, the British Insurance Brokers Association and the David Hume Institute. All those organisations are raising questions about the First Minister’s economic case for independence. All are experts in their field, and none has an axe to grind, but they have been dismissed, disparaged or ignored by the First Minister. They should not feel special because, as we have just heard, he does that to his closest adviser, Alex Bell. The First Minister may stand here today and say, “I’m a wonderful person”, but a really unpleasant picture is building up of a bunker mentality and a man who refuses to be challenged, to take advice or to engage at all. How can it be that all those experts just do not get it, while the First Minister alone is always right?

In the run-up to today, the year-out point from the referendum, words such as “historic” “generational” and “once in a lifetime” have been regularly sprinkled in newspapers, on television and in interviews—rightly so, because this is an era of big politics in Scotland. We are all blessed to be participants in the discussion surrounding our nation’s future, and those who are eligible to vote next September will cast their ballot not just for themselves but for future generations. We should be proud to be making a mature and democratic choice about the future form that we want our country to take, where we want to stand in the world and, crucially, whom we want to stand alongside. I have said before, and I repeat it, that I doubt neither the sincerity nor the legitimacy of people on the nationalist side of the argument who want Scotland to break away from the rest of the UK and go it alone. I do not share that aim, but I do not question the motives of those who do. That is why I get angry, on behalf of my fellow countrymen who want to continue to be part of a union that we have built, shaped and contributed to for centuries, when we are told that that belief, that continued contribution and that wish to build something up rather than to break away makes us somehow less Scottish and less patriotic, and that it means that we are doing our country down. It does not. I believe that Scotland’s future will be best served by a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong UK. I believe that the currency union that the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister espouse is a poor facsimile of the economic, financial and political union that we already enjoy. I believe that we are stronger together as part of the United Kingdom armed forces, that Scots around the world who are proud to serve with a union flag on the arm of their uniform are part of the most professional fighting force on the planet, and that our integrated land, sea and air platforms allow us to respond to conflicts and crises in all parts of the globe. I believe that the defence of our allies, our response in the world and the safety and security of our people here at home are best served in that way.

I believe that our footprint around the world is such that we are in the top three defence forces in the world, given our commitment of gross domestic product to funding our force. [Interruption.]

I believe that our future alliances, our future assistance and our future security will be best served by the British Army, Royal Navy and Royal Air Force—

—and not by the division of personnel, platforms, assets and hardware that separation would entail.

If Margo MacDonald is making the point that our footprint is smaller than it once was, in different times of war, to break up our nation and break up that defence footprint is not the answer. The First Minister talked about the ingenuity of our people. I believe in it, too. I believe in ensuring the greatest opportunity and prosperity for people in the future. We have helped to build a UK economy that is capable not just of withstanding shocks that have holed other European nations, but of long-term growth. We have prospered through our partnership with the other home nations and we continue to do so. Scottish businesses benefit from being part of a single UK market. We export twice as much to England as to any other part of the world—£45.5 billion annually. Over the past decade, the value to Scotland of trade with the rest of the UK has increased by more than 60 per cent. The First Minister likes to convey a sense that, under independence, everything would change but nothing would change. If we were to leave the United Kingdom, it would inevitably mean different rules on the different sides of the border—there would be different financial regulations, different employment laws, different insurance requirements, different tax authorities and different accreditations and qualifications, and small companies would be obliged to contend with that. Those are all barriers to trade, obstructions to economic growth and impediments to the job creation that we all want. In financial services, nearly 400,000 products, a fifth of a million Scottish jobs and nearly £10 billion of financial service exports are built on doing business within the single UK market. Our manufacturers are part of a 60 million person market, our exporters use our embassy and consular network as a platform for trade, and our individual workers have saved for a future and retirement in which they see stability and security as part of the UK. I expect to be shouted down by the other side when I ask questions about what independence would mean. I expect to be flannelled when I ask questions that the First Minister does not want to answer. I expect a change of subject when I ask for evidence to support the latest assertion. That is politics. What I do not expect is the same treatment to be meted out to experts and trade organisations who are not backing one side or the other but are genuinely looking for the answers that their members need in order to make an informed decision about what is an historic choice, a generational opportunity and a world-shaping vote. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland have all been told, “Don’t worry—it will all be in the white paper.” People in Scotland need more information on the proposition that is being put to them. The Scottish Government has set a high bar for the forthcoming white paper, as all the questions from groups and individuals across the country have been disregarded and set aside, with people being told, “It’ll all be there.” Pensions, welfare, currency, international memberships and treaties, taxation, immigration, defence—we are told that information on all those things will be in the white paper. I truly hope that it is, because we have a year to go. We want a future in which our countrymen and women have the best chance and there is the greatest opportunity for future prosperity, for jobs, for exports, for defence, for a secure and stable economy and for autonomy here in areas such as health, education and policing.

I believe in devolution. I believe in a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong UK and that is why I am proud to back the amendment to the motion.

From the Deputy First Minister’s side of the argument, we have heard about the devolution arguments of 1997, the poll tax, the winter of discontent, a tour of Harold Wilson’s Government, black Wednesday and now votes for women. Given that historical analysis, does she recognise the words of Alex Bell, who up until very recently was head of her own policy unit, who has said that the SNP’s campaign is relying on “tedious” ideas and “tired policies” and that Alex Salmond’s approach is thoroughly “wrong”?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01530)

In 2010, when the First Minister announced his flagship non-profit-distributing model for big building projects, he promised to invest £686 million this financial year—if he is flicking through his notes for the figure, he will find it on page 173 of yesterday’s draft budget. Last year, the Government had to admit that, actually, it would deliver less than half of that—£338 million—and that figure has been revised again. Can the First Minister tell the chamber what the current estimate for NPD spending on building projects is for 2013-14?

That was an extraordinary blizzard of figures, but it did not include the one that I asked for. Let us look at that, shall we? The figure that the First Minister would not give us is that, of the £686 million that the Government promised to invest in big building projects, it now says that it will deliver just £185 million. That is after a first year in which it promised £150 million but delivered nothing and a second year in which it promised up to £350 million but delivered just £20 million. The Deputy First Minister, who is sitting next to the First Minister and smiling, says that that is not incompetence but just a “reprofiling”. Three years ago, the First Minister promised more than £1 billion of investment for big building projects through the NPD scheme, but he is coming up short by more than £900 million: his projects, his responsibility and his incompetence. The people of Scotland need to know what has happened to his £1 billion build.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01509)

Last week, Audit Scotland told us that, in 2011-12, Scotland’s colleges were forced to cut 1,200 members of staff and that 48,000 student places had gone, along with 5 million teaching hours. However, it did not tell us how many college courses have been cut. Can the First Minister?

I am sure that that is all very comforting to the 48,000 people who have missed out, but it failed to answer the simple question that I asked: how many courses have been cut from colleges across Scotland? The First Minister clearly does not know, so I will tell him. It is 614 in the past three years. Although the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has previously dismissed those courses as “hobby courses”, they include plumbing, veterinary nursing and information technology. The record is that there are fewer teaching staff, fewer hours taught, fewer students in the classroom and fewer courses to choose from, and all because Alex Salmond has raided college budgets to the tune of £34 million. Just yesterday, Michael Russell made the ridiculous assertion: “Every young person in Scotland knows that progress is being made.”—[Official Report, 05 September; c 21983.] If this is progress, how bad must things get before he accepts that there is a problem? This cannot go on. With the budget due next week, can the First Minister confirm that there will be no more cuts to our colleges?

The best of parliamentarians and the best of men—the death of David McLetchie leaves a hole that we will struggle to fill. I knew David for only a few short years; others in the chamber—those from the class of 99—knew him far better and far longer than I did. Among my colleagues on the Conservative benches, there were friendships with him that lasted half a lifetime. As we remember David’s political achievement and remark on the size of his contribution to the life of the chamber and the democracy of our country, we must remember that politics was not his first love; it was not even a close second. David’s priority first, last and always was his family. Our condolences go out to his wife, Sheila, his son, James, his mother, Rena, and their wider family, many of whom we welcome to the chamber gallery today. David was a man who was shaped and forged by his family, background and city. He was an Edinburgh boy who was brought up near Meadowbank. He started out at Leith academy primary school before he won a bursary for George Heriot’s. There he attended the literary and debating society, although it was a portent for things to come that he claimed that his membership was only an excuse to sneak out to the nearby Captains Bar for a pint after. David then did law at the University of Edinburgh—he was the first of his family to receive a higher education. In 1975, he was selected as the Conservative candidate in Edinburgh Central. A general election was anticipated in the following year, but that election would not come for another four years, of course. That gave David the opportunity to work with his Labour opponent—the MP Robin Cook—on the no campaign of 1979. David never tired of highlighting the irony of that in later years. David completed his legal training at Shepherd and Wedderburn and joined Tods Murray in 1980, where he became a partner and established himself as a highly regarded expert in the field of tax planning, trusts and estates. David brought to the Parliament when it was established in 1999 that legal training, intellectual rigour, attention to detail and discipline. My colleague Mary Scanlon speaks for all of us when she says that she always felt like a 10-year-old taking her jotters to the headmaster and waiting to see whether a red pen would be scored across the page. Indeed, I fear that there is a great irony and—dare I say—an impropriety in Parliament’s tribute today. I can almost feel the spirit of David, who was always quick to castigate those who worship the false god of consensus, clamouring for an amendment to the motion, if only to correct a grammatical error. Since David’s death, much has been made of his contribution to the party and Parliament as Conservative leader; the strength that he showed in 1997 after our electoral wipe-out in stooping to build up our party with worn-out tools; the resilience to keep speaking his truth clearly, knowing that there was a space and a need for a right-of-centre voice in public debate; the reward of outperforming pundits’ predictions in 1999 and establishing a sizeable Conservative group in the Parliament; and the personal pride that he rightly took four years later in winning his own Edinburgh Pentlands constituency under first past the post. Despite the other leaders having parliamentary experience that far exceeded his, David was a debater of the first order who would often come out on top. A personal highlight for me as a young journalist who followed the fledgling Parliament was his contribution on the appointment of Des McNulty as a junior minister in 2002. During his speech, David managed to remind members that there were but 123 reshuffling days left until dissolution; console the mere seven Labour members who had not yet been given a job in government; comment on the illegitimacy of John Reid, as remarked on in a taped conversation between Henry McLeish and Helen Liddell; score several substantive points on the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill; and crack a fine joke about Jim and Dr Richard’s Wallace-Simpson partnership leading to an abdication. He did all that in less than two minutes; it was a tour de force. David’s contribution did not stop when he resigned the leadership. Indeed, his period as chief whip and business manager during the previous parliamentary session tested his political gifts. His robust but honest approach gathered him many plaudits. David played with a straight bat; he always did what he said he would do. It was in no small part David’s skill, judgment, ability to work with others and determination that this Parliament and this legislative process should proceed that ensured that the fragility of a minority Government did not result in political paralysis. During that period, his long-standing personal assistant, Ann, would often hear him speaking on the telephone to other business managers, eloquently and logically outlining the Conservative Party position and, consequently, how he would vote. In the very next breath he would continue, “And may I say that your voting position on this is totally at odds with your policy,” and a lecture on inconsistency would follow. David was not above trying to whip the other parties either. Once he was sure that his group was accounted for, he would ask the other business managers whether all their MSPs were present and correct. Given David’s propensity for checking every detail, he often questioned the assurances that he was given. He would ask, “What about so-and-so? I thought that they were away for the day.” On more than one occasion, he dispatched his parliamentary researcher, Martin, behind enemy lines to chat with friends on other corridors just to make sure. In many respects, David was the first-ever cross-party chief whip. David’s contribution to Parliament was not just in the chamber or the committee rooms, as significant as those contributions were. He was clubbable, personable, generous with his time, anecdotes and stories, and generous with a drink at the bar and a friendly conversation with someone whom he may well have just eviscerated in the chamber. He added to the life of the Parliament, not just its business. David was no machine politician; he also had a life and interests outside of this place, including his family, golf and his beloved Heart of Midlothian. A regular Tynecastle attender, he would gently tease opponents such as the First Minister and John Swinney for being so-called plastic Jambos by asking when was the last time they had made it to a game. At David’s death, the Hearts message boards were filled with tributes. My favourite said: “he came across as a great Jambo and a real gentleman.” The message was right on both counts. I was thinking of the best words in which to describe David: intelligent, forensic, principled, generous, humorous, loyal, pedantic, irascible, curmudgeonly and combative. However, he had a charm and warmth that drew people to him and took people with him. I settle on brave as the word best to describe him. David was brave to pick up the reins of the defeated party; he was brave to stand his ground, speak his truth and defy consensus; he was brave to bear the death of his wife and to give strength to his then teenage son; he was brave to love again; and he was brave in the face of his illness. I know that David would not want today to pass without due recognition given to the Presiding Officer and the parliamentary staff whose support allowed him to attend this place until so recently, and long past the time that many would have been able to do so. That attendance and service took a bravery and strength, too. I thank you for allowing that to happen. I thank also the many members of this Parliament, past and present, who have contacted me and my Conservative colleagues to give their sympathies and share their memories of David. He had friends on all sides of the chamber, and it is a mark of his decency and generosity that some of the warmest tributes have come from his fiercest political opponents. In David’s death, the Conservatives have lost a leader and MSPs have lost a colleague. We have all lost a friend. David McLetchie was the best of parliamentarians and the best of men, and this Parliament and country is the poorer for his passing. It is with great sadness but with great pride that I move, That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of David McLetchie CBE MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to David’s family and friends; recognises the high regard in which he was held by so many colleagues; appreciates his significant contribution to civic life through his legal career, and acknowledges his distinguished record of service, both in this Parliament and to his constituents in the Lothians. [Applause.]

Perhaps we should not be surprised that in the same breath as the First Minster celebrates the success in tackling unemployment in Scotland, he claims that the UK Government's approach, which is fundamental to delivering economic growth, is all wrong for Scotland. The UK delivers for Scotland, yet it chokes the First Minster to admit that we are moving in the right direction, thanks to the action of the coalition in Whitehall. Despite that, in the same breath he said that he would keep the economic underpinnings of the pound sterling and the Bank of England. It is with deep irony that a legislative programme has been presented that will mean that the parliamentary year will be marked not by the introduction of new laws to materially improve the lives of Scots, but by the Scottish Government’s obsession with the break-up of the United Kingdom and its white paper on independence, so this parliamentary session will be dominated by something that could not possibly be considered until more than a year from now. Clearly, I hope that it will never be considered. We await the white paper’s appearance with interest. Planning for the break-up of the most successful political, economic and social union that the world has ever seen will take some time, but from the evidence of the Government’s programme, there has been time for little else, and the governance of Scotland is all but on hold. For unionists like me, that is the great tragedy of the referendum campaign, because at a time when we should be getting on with the job that the vast majority of the people of Scotland want us to do—working together to make Scotland a better place—valuable Government time is being spent on planning for something that even large numbers of SNP voters reject. If we glance back at the SNP’s manifesto for the 2011 election, it shows us how many promises the party still has to honour. We should remember that we are talking about an Administration that has an overall majority that allows it to do anything that it wants with the powers at its disposal. What happened to the grandiose promises to help to create new retail banks and to support social banking? Nothing. What about the promise to create the UK’s most competitive business taxation system? It has resulted in a new retail tax that will instead burden Scottish businesses with a £95 million disadvantage. There was also a pledge to create a simple town centre regeneration fund. I am sorry, but that is still under generation. What about the promise to increase Scottish exports by 50 per cent in six years? The daddy of them all is the non-profit distributing scheme, which, it was promised, would in its first two years deliver up to £500 million of investment in building projects such as schools and hospitals, but which has so far produced only about £20 million of investment. From what I can see from the programme that has been presented today, there is no intention to make good on those pledges any time soon. Instead, we have two new bills about the governance of public bodies and four bills on technical changes to the administration of law. The proposed community empowerment and renewal bill makes great play of strengthening community voices, but will that mean that the Scottish Government will stop riding roughshod over communities when it comes to wind farm applications? Although the bill talks about streamlining community right to buy in the accompanying housing bill, that right is being taken away from individuals. In fact, in that housing bill we will see the abolition of the right to buy, which was the most empowering legislation passed in this country for a generation and which created a property-owning democracy. The First Minster talks about what is democratically right for this country, yet he seeks to deny its people the one thing that gave them real economic and social freedom. Thanks to the Conservative Party, thousands of people took control of their own lives, unshackled as they were from the whims of local authorities’ determination to control every aspect of their lives. Indeed, it is also thanks in large part to the Conservative Party that the proposed revenues Scotland and tax powers bill is necessary to establish a system for dealing with the new tax-raising powers that will come to the Scottish Parliament in 2015. That is in response to the Scotland Act 2012 and the biggest transfer of fiscal powers for 300 years, which has been enacted by a Conservative-led UK Government. It is thanks, too, to the Scottish Conservatives that we have those 1,000 police officers of which the First Minister spoke. It is also thanks to the Scottish Conservatives that the council tax freeze happened. We also called for action to improve the care for pre-school children and we are glad to see some recognition of the problems in that crucial phase of life in the continuing passage of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. It is therefore to be regretted that amidst the rhetoric about a commitment to education there is nothing in the programme that directly addresses the continuing underachievement of the thousands of young people who are leaving the education system unable to read, write or count properly. It is a stain on this country, with its once proud reputation for educational excellence, that approximately a fifth of our young people leave school functionally illiterate. Apart from improving life chances and employability by putting in more effort to tackle illiteracy, it would make us better able to tackle the challenges that are faced by the police and justice system in dealing with offenders. Today, we have learned from the First Minister that the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill will now include the abolition of automatic early release for serious offenders. He rightly says that that practice no longer commands public respect. It is something about which the Scottish Conservatives have been ceaseless in our criticism. Unfortunately, despite promises not just in the First Minister’s 2011 manifesto but in his 2007 manifesto, the change will not extend to all offenders. Indeed, long-term sentences of over four years, which the First Minister talked about, accounted for just 3 per cent of sentences handed down last year. So, when 97 per cent of custodial sentences will be untouched by the change, it should be no surprise to the First Minister that we will continue to argue that the reduction of prison terms passed by our courts should in principle be a reward and not a right. As one welcome measure is introduced—albeit taking baby steps—a fundamental liberty could be at risk from another bill. It is the plan under the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill to abolish the safeguard of corroboration in criminal trials without a full review of the law of evidence—something that we believe is essential if the change is not to lead to miscarriages of justice in the future. The precious principle of innocence until guilt is proved must be protected, but there is a real risk that it will be sacrificed to secure more convictions, in particular for sex crimes. Of course, we all want all offenders to be caught and punished, but the price must not be the removal of liberty from the blameless. I urge the First Minister, if he will not listen to members of this Parliament, to listen to the Scottish legal profession. The Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates have argued that the proposal will lead to miscarriages of justice without significant change in criminal procedure. Removal of corroboration from Scots law will potentially leave Scotland with one of the lowest levels of protection against wrongful conviction in the western world. So, we urge the Scottish Government not to introduce the change without undertaking a wider review of the law of evidence. The First Minister says in his programme’s foreword: “It is now time to extend the advantages of self-government”. I agree with that but, sadly, the programme is notable not for what it achieves but for what it does not achieve. It does little to extend the advantages that he has, because it is not in his interests to make devolution work as we believe it can. It is in his narrow self-interest to hold back this country, to limit its ambitions within the framework of the United Kingdom and to present a deliberately negative and uninspiring picture of Scotland. We do not recognise his view of a nation that is trodden on by its bigger neighbour, but we do see a thriving nation that is playing a crucial and enthusiastic role in the continued development of the fully integrated family of nations of these islands. The First Minister says that he is ambitious for Scotland but, sadly, this programme shows that that ambition is more for him than for his country.

Will the member take an intervention?

This summer, I read that the First Minister was backing a benefit cap. The point had quotation marks around it and it was in the Sunday Post. Will the member tell us when the Government will bring in a benefit cap, how much it will be and for which Scots it will be implemented?

2. I add my tributes and those of my party to those that the First Minister paid following the death of Peter Fraser. As a member of Parliament, in government and in his contribution to the law, he was a committed public servant. We feel his loss and our thoughts are with Fiona and his family at this time. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01492)

Two weeks ago, I asked the First Minister about the scandal of vulnerable and desperately ill people having to pay for care that they should have received for free. This week, the Scottish Government announced a review into whether people are being denied funding for continuing healthcare. I welcome that, especially as new official figures show that the number of people receiving national health service funding for continuing care has gone down by 37 per cent in the past four years. However, we still do not know how many people have been affected or how much money they have had to spend. Will the First Minister tell us what work the Scottish Government is undertaking to establish the true extent of the issue?

I asked the First Minister how many people have been affected and how much money they have had to spend. In his answer, he talked of the welcome review, which will look at administration in the future, but it will do nothing to help those who have been affected in the past, including at least one family that was forced to sell the mother’s house to pay for her care when it is likely that it should have been covered by the NHS. Two weeks ago, I asked the First Minister to institute a full audit for each health board to find the people who have been affected so that we can right this wrong. He failed to answer. The Scottish Government’s position is that anyone who feels that they may have been wrongly charged for their continuing care should come forward. Surely the First Minister must appreciate that many of those who have been affected will be among the people in society who are least able to do that. They are people with complex care needs and many will be residents in nursing homes. Some may be deceased. It is simply not good enough for the Government to put the onus on them or their surviving relatives, if they have any. This is a systemic failure and the Government needs to fix it. The First Minister has already moved on the issue by announcing the review. Will he now commit to taking the further proactive steps that are needed to identify the potentially hundreds of ill and infirm people who have been forced to pay for care that should have been covered by our NHS?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01472)

Yesterday, bereaved parents courageously came to the Parliament to look for support for a public inquiry into what happened to the remains of their babies and why. What started as a scandal in a single crematorium in Mortonhall in Edinburgh has spread to crematoria in Glasgow and Aberdeen—and they are the ones that we knew about. We have now learned that a number of families who used a facility in Falkirk have been affected, as have families using a private—not local authority—crematorium. The Government’s response has been overtaken by events. Does the First Minister recognise that neither the Angiolini investigation nor Lord Bonomy’s review will give the answers that the parents who came to the Parliament yesterday need?

I welcome the First Minister’s empathy, sympathy and understanding. However, he knows that Lord Bonomy’s commission is not looking at individual cases and will not give answers to what happened historically to parents in different parts of the country who are in such a situation. The Angiolini investigation might do so in Edinburgh, but that does not address what is happening elsewhere. The idea that the Angiolini investigation in Edinburgh could in some way be looked at or replicated in other local authority areas was skewered this week by George Black, Glasgow City Council’s chief executive. He wrote to the head of the Glasgow ashes group to say: “We believe that in order to find out the truth of what happened in individual cases, it would be better for there to be a nationwide inquiry, rather than a host of individual local inquiries”. The First Minister has repeatedly sidestepped calls for a public inquiry. Two weeks ago, he told me that the priority was for Lord Bonomy to put the new procedures in place, and three weeks ago, he said that it was right that local authorities should look at the issue individually. However, the scandal has now spread from one crematorium in one part of Scotland to multiple sites—including private and public crematoria—in at least four local authority areas. The parents, who know how long an inquiry would take, are still calling for an inquiry to find out what happened to their babies’ remains. The head of Scotland’s largest local authority is now saying that the current approach is not enough and that he wants more. I have repeatedly said that this is not a party-political issue, and it should not be. However, there is no getting away from the fact that the only party that is not supporting the parents’ calls for an inquiry is the Scottish National Party. [Interruption.]

I do not think that the parents out there would particularly like to hear catcalls in the chamber. The parents do not understand the SNP’s stance and neither do I. The SNP demanded a full public inquiry into the Dunoon ferry. Why, First Minister, is the case of the bereaved parents less deserving?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01453)

This morning, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, promised that people who had been forced to pay thousands of pounds in care costs for relatives with complex care needs that should have been covered by the national health service would be “appropriately reimbursed.” In three years, we have seen the number of people across Scotland having those care costs supported fall by 27 per cent. Why have relatives of some of the most vulnerable and desperately ill people in this country been denied the support to which they were entitled?

I am sure that the First Minister is not conflating continuing healthcare entitlement with free personal care on purpose, knowing as he does that they are separate. We are not talking about free personal care. We are talking about the continuing healthcare entitlement. I am pleased that the First Minister has acknowledged that the health minister held his hands up to the problem today. That is a start, and I thank Alex Neil for that. However, at one point in his BBC interview, he said that he thought that only “a small number” of people were affected. At another, he said that he thought that we were talking about “a few thousand” people. The truth is surely that nobody knows how many people have been affected. The health minister and the First Minister ask for those affected to come to them. The Government needs to be a bit more proactive than that. The First Minister has a responsibility to find out how many people in Scotland caring for critically ill relatives have been handing over thousands of pounds when they should not have been. We need a full audit of every person in every health board who may be affected, currently or historically, to ensure that proper reparations are paid. Will the First Minister order such an audit?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01434)

Last week, I asked the First Minister whether he would establish a public inquiry into the unfolding baby ashes scandal. In response, he replied that if I wanted to “make the case for why a national public inquiry would benefit the bereaved parents” he would “of course look at that.”—[Official Report, 30 May 2013; c 20505.] This week, I wrote to him laying out that case. Parents are calling for a public inquiry and they are upset that they are not directly involved in Lord Bonomy’s review. Further, it has emerged this week that crematorium workers who were involved in the disposal of babies’ remains will not be called to give evidence. Lord Bonomy’s review will not give those who have suffered loss the answers that they need and deserve. Does the First Minister agree that, in those circumstances, the case for a public inquiry is now stronger than ever?

I thank the First Minister for that answer, but he does not appreciate that neither the Bonomy commission nor Dame Elish’s investigation is looking at individual cases or from an historical perspective. The people who are involved and who are asking for answers want to find out what happened to the remains of their children. They understand the timeframe that is involved in a public inquiry and they are asking for one anyway, because they want answers on what happened to their children. This is not a party political issue, and it is not the Scottish Conservatives’ wont to call for public inquiries lightly, but I know that the First Minister has listened to such calls previously. Under him, his Government has held four public inquiries, two of which are on-going—one into hospital-acquired infections and one into contaminated blood products. Therefore, I want to press the First Minister. There are issues that are not covered either by Lord Bonomy’s investigation or by Elish Angiolini’s investigation, which is looking primarily at Edinburgh. On reflection, the First Minister must surely agree that this matter, which has caused so much distress to hundreds of families right across Scotland and not just in Edinburgh and the Lothians, should have the kind of investigation on a similar scale that we had under the public inquiries that he set up in the past.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01420)

Last year, people were shocked by the Mortonhall baby ashes scandal. We now know that the issues that arose in Edinburgh have spread to Glasgow and Aberdeen. Calls from the increasing number of affected parents for a public inquiry are growing ever louder. Will the First Minister order a full public inquiry?

I appreciate the steps that have been taken, but they are increasingly being overtaken by events. The Edinburgh inquiry is indeed proceeding. There is also Lord Bonomy’s commission, although it has no direct representation from parents, despite their being promised as much. On Friday, Lord Bonomy said that parents would be able to make written submissions until 19 July. However, it has emerged this week that the independent audit of what went on in Aberdeen will not be presented until 24 September. That means that affected parents in one area of the country will have no voice in the process. I agree with the First Minister that new protections have to be put in place, but parents are asking for answers about what happened to their children, and the commission is not designed to provide that. In light of the new information, the only way to get what everybody in the Parliament wants, which is justice for the affected families across Scotland, is a full public inquiry. Will the First Minister please reconsider?

2. I, too, associate myself with the First Minister’s comments regarding the violent death of a soldier outside the Woolwich barracks yesterday. Our thoughts are with the soldier’s family. All our efforts are in playing our part in bringing our communities together following that terrible act. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01393)

This week, the First Minister published the Scottish National Party’s economic case for independence. Rather than give the people a clear picture of a separate Scotland’s economic future, it posed more questions than answers. As if his wee “booklet”, as he called it, had not caused enough confusion, a rather frustrated First Minister blurted out afterwards that the SNP was prepared for an independent Scotland not only to use sterling without proper agreement but to embark on this brave new world by defaulting on its debts. Will he explain how an independent Scotland would pay its way if, right from the start, it would not have a legally supported currency or be able to borrow from anyone other than a back-street loan shark?

I am glad that the First Minister raises nonagenarian Denis Healey as the way forward because, to pay for the First Minister’s plans, the First Minister would have to tax everyone until the pips squeak. [Interruption.]

The First Minister’s economic plan for Scotland would turn this country into a central American-style basket case. It is no wonder that, when he made his way to Alexander Dennis, he kept his finance secretary back at home on the naughty step. Instead of the reality check that we got from honest John’s document—a truthful briefing paper that tells us what would really happen—we got the First Minister giving us increasingly fantastic claims.

Oh, sorry—the finance secretary wants to speak now, does he? He did not have anything to say on Tuesday.

The First Minister would not be able to borrow at anything other than exorbitant rates under his plans. He would be spending money that he did not have like water, but he expects us to believe that, all the while, he would be squirreling away money for a rainy day. There are only two conclusions. Either the First Minister would be printing money faster than Zimbabwe or he would be taxing the people of Scotland up to their oxters. Will he show us exactly where in his wee booklet it tells us how a country that would have instantly defaulted on its debts and would have no control over its monetary policy would finance an oil fund, a 3 per cent cut in corporation tax and an ever-expanding welfare and benefits system?

I congratulate Anne McTaggart on securing the debate. As participants in it are acutely aware, Glasgow has an honourable tradition of electing gobby women. I think that Mary Barbour is at the root of that tradition, but her contribution to the lives of the people of Glasgow has had insufficient recognition until now. I am happy to welcome Glasgow City Council’s decision to approve a statue of Mary Barbour, which I hope will find a place in George Square with some of Glasgow’s other notable monuments. As we heard, and as those of us who are from the city know, only three named women are commemorated by statues in Glasgow: Queen Victoria; Dolores Ibárruri—La Pasionaria—who was a prominent Communist leader in the Spanish civil war; and Lady Isabella Elder, who created Elder park in memory of her husband and is the only local woman to make the grade. Until now, Glasgow has rather neglected its famous women, but a statue of Mary Barbour is a starting point for remedying that neglect. It might seem strange to hear a Conservative leader argue for such recognition for a Labour figure, but I think that Mary Barbour’s achievements were substantial and that it benefits public life in Scotland if we can acknowledge party-political differences while making a neutral assessment of impact and standing. It does no one any favours if we retreat to the sort of schoolyard politics that would try to block a legitimate proposal to celebrate someone who fought for their beliefs and changed the face of the country, for no reason other than that the proposal comes from a political opponent. That is why I am happy to say that Mary Barbour was no ordinary politician. She was a campaigning force of nature, and forcing a change in the law to stop the exploitation of ordinary people by private landlords during the first world war, thereby protecting vulnerable families from war profiteers, is a significant achievement that deserves to be acknowledged. As we heard, Mary Barbour did not stop there. She went on to become Glasgow’s first female Labour councillor. She was associated with organisations such as Glasgow Women’s Housing Association, which was established to fight the rent rises that had been cynically brought in while Glasgow’s menfolk were at the front. Mrs Barbour was so involved in the resistance to evictions that her followers became known as Mrs Barbour’s army. It is staggering to think that she was able to attract 20,000 people on to the streets of Glasgow in November 2015, to demonstrate in that cause. The rent restrictions act, which was passed shortly after that, brought order to a chaotic housing system and protected thousands from unfair eviction. At such a time, it was clearly in everyone’s interest to prevent civil unrest, so Mary Barbour’s actions not only helped ordinary people but contributed to the war effort. Anne McTaggart talked about Mary Barbour’s other political successes, such as helping to found the women’s peace crusade, being elected to the town council as the first female Labour councillor and becoming the corporation’s first female baillie and one of the city’s first female magistrates. Mary Barbour campaigned on many issues: municipal banks; washhouses, laundries and baths; free milk for all schoolchildren; child welfare centres and play areas; home helps; and pensions for mothers. Most progressive was her commitment to and chairmanship of the women’s welfare and advisory clinic—Glasgow’s first family planning centre—which showed that she was brave in the face of controversy and was not afraid to be bold and challenging, if she thought that that was the right thing to do. Mary Barbour loved the city of Glasgow but knew that many of its poorer citizens had never seen beyond its boundaries, so in her later years she helped to set up organised seaside outings for the children of disadvantaged families. I might have very different politics, but I recognise in Mary Barbour a courageous, compassionate and campaigning woman, who was set on improving her city and the lives of its people. Glasgow celebrates plenty of its famous sons. It is time that we celebrated the accomplishment of our daughters, too.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01375)

Last year, we had the embarrassing pantomime of the First Minister pretending to have legal advice on an independent Scotland’s relationship with the European Union and fighting his way through the courts to guard its contents, only for us all to find that no such advice existed—it was made up to cover for the fact that everything that the Government said about the EU was based on little more than wishful thinking. Then, in October, the Deputy First Minister promised the Parliament that she would tell us how much that aborted action finally cost taxpayers but, as of this morning, that information has still not been lodged. I will therefore ask again: how much public money was spent on a pointless action to prevent the publication of legal advice that never existed?

In terms of bare-faced bravado, the First Minister is going some himself, when the Scottish National Party’s own voters are more interested in holding a referendum on Europe than they are in voting for independence. [Interruption.]

Although we were promised the information seven months ago, it is still being kept secret. We do not have it. Last night, we heard from another minister, who said that at last Scottish Government legal advice on the EU actually exists. On the basis that his minister was not pretending, the First Minister needs to tell the people of Scotland what that advice contains. Last year, the Scottish Information Commissioner ruled that we have a right to know on such a critical issue. Vague promises of edited highlights in a far-off white paper just will not cut it. Will the First Minister again go through the costly farce of fighting in the courts to stop the people of Scotland knowing the truth, or will he finally reveal what the Information Commissioner says that he should reveal?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01369)

This week, a diagnosed psychopath and triple axe murderer who killed a fellow patient in Carstairs, a nurse and a police officer was set free. Thomas McCulloch was told that he would spend the rest of his life in jail but, thanks to a human rights appeal, he is once again walking our streets. I know that nothing can be done retrospectively in this or any other historic case, but what has the First Minister done to ensure in future that, as in England, when such violent and vicious people are given a whole-life sentence, it will actually mean life?

I note that this time the First Minister is saying that it is the Parole Board that is the reason. The problem is that, when I put the same question to the First Minister in November 2011, he used European Union human rights law as an excuse for not having whole-life tariffs in Scotland. Last January—16 months ago—the European Court of Human Rights ruled on this and upheld the principle of whole-life sentences for the most dangerous offenders. Since then, we have seen William Kean get just 22 years for the brutal murder of an 80-year-old woman in Perthshire, and Saima Gul and Fazli Rahim given only 23 years after attempting to decapitate their murder victim in front of a 12-year-old girl. Had the Scottish National Party acted in its first term in government, we could have been certain that Colin Coates and Philip Wade, who tortured Lynda Spence to death, would never be freed. The SNP has had six years in which to take action. Whole-life sentences are clear and unambiguous, yet they were absent from last year’s Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill, which was described by Professor James Chalmers as “a tortuous system which is barely intelligible to lawyers, let alone to the general public”. It is simple: life should mean life. Will the First Minister give an assurance today that he will finally take action to give the public the protection that they deserve? Will he ensure that, in the most extreme cases, when the most violent criminals are taken off the streets they will never return?

2. I, too, would like to recognise the service and the sacrifice of Corporal William Savage and Fusilier Samuel Flint from the Royal Highland Fusiliers, second battalion, the Royal Regiment of Scotland, and of Private Robert Hetherington from the 51st Highland, seventh battalion, who was a Territorial Army member. I associate myself and my party with the expressions of gratitude and condolence that have been offered to the families, and the good wishes that have been conveyed to those who were injured in the attack. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01330)

To summarise the currency debate so far, the First Minister has said that he is right and that senior nationalists, separatist colleagues, yes Scotland board members, three former Bank of England experts and his own former economic adviser are all wrong. Is the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland wrong, too? In the past week, it has published a report that says that it would be illegal under European Union law for pension schemes between a separate Scotland and the rest of the UK not to be fully funded. The First Minister’s response is simply to say, “We’ll change the law—we’ll just rip it up.” How many of the 27 member states that he needs to agree has his Government had discussions with on the issue, to protect the pensions of the people of Scotland?

I have the ICAS report here. It raises a number of questions—12 of them, in fact—none of which seemed to be answered by the First Minister’s finance spokesman on Sunday, when he took to the airwaves to try to protect the Government. The question that I liked most was whether there would be a Scottish protection fund. The UK pension protection fund currently pays and manages the pensions of no less than 16,000 Scots whose schemes have gone under. Another question for the First Minister comes from Ronald Bowie, who is a past president of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries. He knows a thing or two about pensions. He says: “It can take 50 years to prove a pensions’ system works, and by then it is too late to do anything if it doesn’t ... The odds strongly favour staying within the UK system. Why gamble against it?” The First Minister admitted on television that he is a betting man. On the currency and pensions, is he not gambling with the financial future of every man, woman and child in Scotland?

I said last week in the chamber on hearing of Brian Adam’s death that those outside Holyrood too often see only the clash and confrontation here; they do not see the camaraderie. They do not see the respect that is fostered and the friendships that exist between MSPs of different parties, or that a person can spend a lifetime fighting for something that someone else will spend a lifetime fighting against, but still recognise their conviction, truly held belief, honesty and principle. Brian had friends on every side of the chamber and was as decent, diligent and principled a member of the Parliament as we have seen. He believed in service, and he loved representing the people of Aberdeen. Before the debate, I talked to my colleague Nanette Milne, who served with Brian on Aberdeen City Council before they made their respective ways to Holyrood. She said that, during much of his time there, he ploughed a pretty lonely furrow as the SNP’s only representative, but she recalls the unfailing diligence with which he represented his constituents and his party. He took a keen interest in the financial management of the council, and every year, without fail, he would produce a full set of budget proposals, knowing that they would never see the light of day. He did that anyway because it was the right thing to do. Brian’s move from Aberdeen City Council to Holyrood in 1999 was an obvious one. He helped to grow the SNP council group from just one member in 1988 to 15. It would be fair to say that the SNP’s rise in Aberdeen and the wider north-east was in no small measure down to Brian Adam’s efforts and his example. Nanette Milne and other MSPs knew Brian for decades, and often caught up with him in conversations on the train back to Aberdeen. I never had that privilege. I came to the Parliament as a new member in 2011. Brian always had a soft word for me, a bit of encouragement to offer, a chat in the lift and a comment in the corridor. That time taken and that generosity of spirit were not reserved just for new members, whatever their party. Brian believed in democracy, and in others benefiting from being part of it and seeing it up close. That is why he instigated one of the Scottish Parliament’s regular internship programmes with Brigham Young University in the United States. Although MSPs across the chamber have hosted college interns, I have a sneaking suspicion that hundreds of young American graduates have a bit of a soft spot for the Scottish National Party because of the influence of Brian Adam. Possibly Brian’s most significant achievement in this place was in his role as chief whip during the SNP minority Government of 2007 to 2011. Few people thought that such an arrangement could last, and it was largely down to Brian’s exceptional abilities that it did. My colleague and his opposite number, our chief whip at the time, David McLetchie, appreciated Brian’s honesty and square dealing. Their trust in the other’s integrity and their ability to do business helped them to navigate those uncharted waters successfully. I do not think that there is anyone in the chamber who was not struck by the courage that Brian showed when facing his illness. Knowing the full extent of it, but not speaking to more than a few close confidants, he carried himself with optimism and resolve to continue to do good service. Serve he did, right to the end. Brian Adam’s death has robbed the Parliament of one of its key figures. It has robbed the city of Aberdeen of one of its proudest servants. It has robbed his family and friends of a thoroughly decent man. While the greatest pain at this time will undoubtedly be for Brian’s family and close friends, they should be proud and they should take strength from the knowledge that he was an outstanding servant to his city, his party and his values. It is to them that I extend my thoughts and prayers, and those of my party, at this most difficult time.

2. I associate myself and my party with the tributes paid to Brian Adam. Too often, people see only the conflict in this Parliament. They do not see the camaraderie. Brian Adam had friends on all sides of the chamber. He took great pride in serving the people of Aberdeen, first as a councillor and then as a parliamentarian, and he did so with diligence and decency. The thoughts of everybody on this side of the chamber are with his family, his friends and his colleagues at this time. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01313)

The First Minister seemed very keen to use quotations just a moment ago. I gently remind him of his own words in November 1999, when he said: “the pound sterling has been a millstone around Scotland’s neck costing Scotland jobs and prosperity.” Ten years later, he said: “we’re in sterling and sterling is sinking like a stone.” He has also said: “We cannot allow ourselves to be held back by clinging onto sterling.” At what point in the First Minister’s political journey did the pound sterling stop being a millstone and start being a life raft?

It is not like the First Minister to be shy in just telling us that it was when a more fiscally responsible Conservative Government came in, in 2010. Let us leave aside the bluff, bluster and whatever that answer was supposed to be. The First Minister has already had the United Kingdom chancellor and the former Bank of England experts, Professor Charles Nolan and John Nugée, telling him that it would be unbelievably difficult to secure his preferred choice of a sterling zone. Even the First Minister’s former economic adviser, Professor John Kay, said that he should “expect to fail” in his negotiations. Indeed, politically, his fellow separatists Margo MacDonald, Jim Sillars and Patrick Harvie have all said that independence should mean Scotland having its own currency. We know that the First Minister is a gambler, we know that he is reckless, but is he honestly telling Scotland that he would enter negotiations with no bargaining position and no back-up plan? [Interruption.]

Okay, I will ask the Deputy First Minister and the First Minister to tell us what plan B is. Is it to use sterling anyway, as Ecuador uses the US dollar, or is it to have a separate currency, as his economic adviser suggests—the bawbee?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01298)

A few days ago, Sean McLaughlin was sentenced to 10 years for culpable homicide. A career criminal with more than 50 convictions, McLaughlin should have been in jail, rather than being free to stab Robert Brown repeatedly in Mr Brown’s girlfriend’s house. McLaughlin had more than a year of his most recent sentence still to serve, but he had been released early under the Government’s automatic early release scheme. In both his 2007 and 2011 manifestos, the First Minister promised to end automatic early release, yet no proposed legislation has come before the chamber, and there is no hint that any is due. He could have put such a measure in his Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which was published two months ago, but there is still no sign of an end to automatic early release. If the First Minister had acted much earlier, Robert Brown could still be alive. Why is the First Minister refusing to fulfil the promises that he made to protect Scottish communities?

I fully accept that it was the Conservative Government that introduced automatic early release, but it was that same Conservative Government that legislated to end it. The Scottish Government has had six years but has done nothing. That is not good enough. The First Minister promised the people of Scotland—not once, but twice—that, if the Scottish National Party were put into government, it would end automatic early release. He has a clear majority in the chamber and he has cross-party support, so why not act? So far, the Government has found time in the parliamentary schedule for a debate on a war that happened 10 years ago, for which the Parliament has no responsibility, and for countless debates without any vote. This matters, because also this month Reece Fleming was tried for raping a teenage girl at knifepoint in front of her wheelchair-bound mother, forcing the mother to watch. If the current policy is not changed, he will be out in just over two years. That is not the kind of Scotland that anyone wants. The First Minister has promised us twice that he will get this done, so will he bring forward the necessary legislation now?

I begin by paying tribute, on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, to the late Baroness Thatcher, who died last Monday morning and whose passing was mourned yesterday at her funeral in St Paul’s cathedral. She was a remarkable, ground-breaking woman and a true Conservative revolutionary. I also offer, on my party’s behalf, our profound condolences to Margaret Thatcher’s family at this time. I express my gratitude to the Parliamentary Bureau for allowing this debate to be moved from yesterday. As my colleague, John Lamont, explained, it was not the subject but the timing to which we objected. Even in conflict, one is given leave to bury one’s dead, and so it should be in politics, too. Conservatives wanted to mark the passing of a former leader and Prime Minister yesterday. It was right for us to do so, and I thank everyone in the chamber for allowing it to happen. I never knew Margaret Thatcher. She left office years before I was even eligible to vote. However, she—more than any other politician or public figure—shaped the Scotland and the Europe that I grew up in and in which we live today. The corruption of the quote on which today’s debate is based is often used to try to portray Margaret Thatcher as an anti-society individualist who did not care about communities. Patrick Harvie quoted what came before, but not what came after, and, as the Bishop of London pointed out so eloquently in his funeral address, even a cursory glance at her words makes clear that the opposite is true. Speaking in the right-wing publication of choice for capitalist running dogs everywhere—the Woman’s Own—Margaret Thatcher completed her thought with these words: “There is a living tapestry of men and women and people, and the beauty of that tapestry and the quality of our lives will depend upon how much each of us is prepared to take responsibility for ourselves and each of us prepared to turn round and help by our own efforts those who are unfortunate.”

I would say that Margaret Thatcher’s interpretation was that society is not the same as the state. She did not believe that it was about Government departments or faceless bureaucracies. She believed in people, and she believed that the tapestry that she spoke of was woven house by house, street by street and town by town. I believe that, too. I believe that all our lives are improved by the contributions of men and women who decide to take responsibility for their community and who contribute to the wellbeing of their fellow citizens. Indeed, large parts of that interview—which I believe that Patrick Harvie said was 27 pages long—were devoted to Margaret Thatcher’s anxiety that too much government had weakened the social institutions that best foster self-respect and respect for others: families, churches, schools and voluntary associations. Margaret Thatcher expanded on that during her sermon on the Mound, when she addressed the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. She said: “We are all responsible for our own actions. We can’t blame society if we disobey the law. We simply can’t delegate the exercise of mercy and generosity to others.” However much her detractors attempt to distort her words, it is clear that her belief in human decency was at the heart of her view of society.

I read out that portion of the interview, and I believe that an explanation is given there. I do not believe that Margaret Thatcher’s determination during her premiership was driven only by her values. She was motivated by the state that the country was in when she came to office in 1979. For those who argue that her reforms were harmful or unnecessary, it is worth looking briefly at the state of Britain when she came to power. The Government controlled prices, dividends, wages and even how much money people could take abroad on their holidays. Our economy was hopelessly uncompetitive—that was certainly the view of the Soviet Union, which indicated in 1979 a reluctance to buy from Britain because of the poor quality of goods and the unreliability of deliveries. The General Post Office could take two years to issue a phone line. State-owned utilities were losing hundreds of millions of pounds each year. British Steel took twice as many man hours to make one tonne of steel as its European competitors.

No. I want to make progress. With the dead left unburied, rubbish piling up in the streets and union militants standing guard outside hospitals deciding which patients could be admitted, it was clear that Labour’s failure was costing Britain dear. That failure was clearly recognised by the SNP, which supported Margaret Thatcher’s motion of no confidence in the Government, which led to the election and propelled her into power. Let me deal in hard facts instead of myths. Scotland’s economy grew by an average of 2.5 per cent a year between 1979 and 1990, going from a position in which the economy lagged behind the rest of the UK to one in which Scottish GDP per capita was higher. Even the First Minister has grudgingly recognised those achievements, saying of Baroness Thatcher’s policies in an interview that he “didn’t mind the economic side”. Why would he, with living standards increasing and employment going up during her premiership? However uncomfortable, the facts show that when Baroness Thatcher left office, there was a new prosperity in Scotland as a result of the difficult decisions that she took. Margaret Thatcher was also a global figure, saying loudly and clearly that Mikhail Gorbachev was a man with whom she could do business. She was the first western leader to meet Solidarity’s Lech Walesa. The Berlin wall fell the night before my 10th birthday, changing the established world order. She played her part in that through her efforts to spread democracy.

That is why President Obama described her as “one of the great champions of freedom and liberty”. Margaret Thatcher’s opponents’ deliberate distortion of her achievements is, in many ways, a tribute to her. The only line of attack is to bend the truth out of all recognition. Did she want to impose the community charge on Scotland as an experiment? No. As Margo MacDonald said, she wanted gradual, UK-wide introduction but Scottish ministers pleaded for early change because of the rates review. Did she shut Ravenscraig? No. It worked for another two years, until she left power. Did the miners’ strike wipe out the mining industry? No. In 1983, there were 174 working pits; the strike was over the closure of 20 uneconomic mines. Margaret Thatcher’s achievements speak for themselves. She allowed thousands of people to take control of their lives through home ownership. She freed up inefficient, loss-making, state-owned monopolies to become profitable businesses. She turned Britain from a strike-bound and demoralised nation into a country of ambition that rewarded hard work. She laid the foundations of London and Edinburgh as global financial centres. She played a pivotal role in the fall of communism, and she gave Britain back its pride by standing firm against a fascist dictatorship. Margaret Thatcher was a Prime Minister who believed in Britain and one who believed in people. She knew that the beautiful tapestry of our nation is woven family by family, house by house, street by street and town by town, and thousands of Scots believe that, too.

It is interesting to hear the member talk about Hayek and his economic policies, and about how the expansion of the state creates the possibility for serfdom among people who live within that state. Writing recently in a national newspaper, Jim Sillars, who will not be unknown to the member, said: “Hayek was right and the left wrong.” Does the member agree?

Does the member recognise that Scotland exported more manufactured goods than Japan by 1990, reaching the highest levels ever, and that manufacturing increased by 26 per cent in real terms between 1979 and 1990?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

Will the minister take an intervention?

It is worth recognising that Margaret Thatcher left office 23 years ago and since then there has been no significant push by anybody in any party to renationalise anything. Is that something that anybody, including John Finnie, would ask for?

2. I welcome the First Minister’s announcement of significant donation to the Disasters Emergency Committee appeal. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01283)

Last week, in his statement to the chamber giving the date for the independence referendum, the First Minister said: “It is incumbent upon all of us, as parliamentarians, to lead by example, and to ensure that the level of this hugely important debate matches the expectations of the people who elected us.”—[Official Report, 21 March 2013; c 18118.] Does he believe that the comments made this week by his former transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, which celebrated job losses at The Scotsman because of the newspaper’s referendum coverage, meet those expectations?

The First Minister is playing down Mr Stevenson’s comments, but that is a slightly different approach from that of his Member of the European Parliament, Alyn Smith, who leapt to Mr Stevenson’s defence by saying that having serious journalists complain about the tweet was a symptom of the problem. This week, the Minister for Local Government and Planning, Derek Mackay—who is sadly absent from the chamber just now—retweeted his desire to hit David Cameron in the face with a shovel in the most insulting of terms. We have also had James Dornan MSP saying that a party for saving the union is like “supping with the Devil”. Even worse, the First Minister’s aide, Joan McAlpine MSP, has taken to the pages of a national newspaper to compare the United Kingdom to an abusive marriage, and, shamefully, Councillor David Berry has been forced to resign for saying that the UK is akin to the slave trade. Of course, all of that stems from the top. Did not the First Minister open the flood gates by calling a BBC executive a Nazi official after failing to bully his way on to the television as a rugby pundit? [Interruption.]

The First Minister is right when he says that the people of Scotland expect a high standard of debate and that his parliamentarians should be setting the tone, but on that evidence they are not. If that is allowed to continue unchecked, the next 18 months will descend into little more than an anti-British hate campaign. When will he and his party clean up their act?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01261)

I invite the First Minister to join me in congratulating the chancellor on scrapping the fuel duty rise, again cutting corporation tax, to 20 per cent—a rate that is not unadjacent to what the First Minister is looking for—and for lifting 224,000 Scots out of income tax altogether. Yesterday there was a row over help in the budget for house-hunters, in the form of loans and equity, to get people on to the property ladder. The Scottish Government has trumpeted on many occasions the £200 million that it has put into housing since the spending review. Can I ask the First Minister whether any of that money is in the form of loans and equity?

However much the First Minister complains now, however much John Swinney complained yesterday, adding revenue and capital together, £176 million came to Scotland yesterday as a result of that budget. [Interruption.]

The First Minister was very keen to get away from the question that I asked him about equity spending and loans for housing. Of the £200 million that this Government has trumpeted since the spending review period, £42 million has been in loans and equity. In September, we heard from Alex Neil that increasing shared equity was “good news for households and families” which would “help people on moderate to low incomes across Scotland get on the property ladder.” Yesterday, the finance secretary said that it was “funny money”, “deceitful” and “baloney”. Six months ago, the same UK cash for shared equity was good news, but in referendum-date week it is described as “deceitful”. There is a quarter of a billion pounds on the table. Will the First Minister keep playing political football with it, or will he get on, use it and help people get on to the housing ladder in Scotland?

I welcome the clarity that today’s statement brings. I believe that next September the people of Scotland will vote to stay within our United Kingdom—recognising that the autonomy that the Scottish Parliament has in areas including health, social care, education and justice, allied with the strength of being part of a larger UK family; the safety and security from our intelligence services; the international standing from our diplomatic corps; and the advantages of being one of the largest economies on the planet, means that Scotland can make a positive choice for devolution—the very best of both worlds—rather than opt for separation. A yes vote will mean the end of devolution. [Laughter.]

The First Minister today rightly notes that the people of Scotland have expectations regarding “the level of debate”. They also desire and demand information that they can trust, on which to base this most important of decisions. Will the First Minister now pledge to Parliament that his own conduct will rise to that level? No more exaggeration, no more misinformation and no more baseless assertion: does the First Minister realise that he has to be straight with the people of Scotland?

Does the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth speak for the Scottish Government? He suggests in his Swinneyleaks document: “I have made clear to the Defence Workstream that a much lower budget must be assumed.” He is planning to cut defence spending in an independent Scotland.

The question is why anyone would rise to advocate the retention or replacement of a nuclear weapons system or platform. The SNP would have you believe that only the immoral, the trigger-happy, the war-crazed, the Dr Strangelove-esque, intent on destruction, would do so, but that is a false depiction, for I support the retention of Trident and my party supports the retention of Trident because we are a party of responsibility. The first responsibility of any Government is the defence and the security of its people. Further, I believe that it is the responsibility of individual countries to work for security and stability around the globe. Continuous at-sea deterrence has been the ultimate safeguard of the nation since 1968. The UK’s membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance and our commitment and progress as a signatory to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty mark us out as a responsible global citizen.

I think that the UK is the only recognised nuclear power under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty that has a single platform for weapons and a single set of warheads, and which has managed to reduce its number of warheads in the past 13 years. The fact that it has set out clear principles not to threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries shows that it is a country of responsibility. Now, we must look at non-nuclear countries that are becoming nuclear threats. There are a number of countries that were not nuclear powers when the nuclear non-proliferation treaty was started but which have gone on to become nuclear powers—they are countries of irresponsibility.

No, thank you; I was dealing with the member’s colleague. In the assertions and emotion that have come from the SNP on the issue of nuclear weapons down the years there has been a distinct lack of facts, so I would like to introduce some. Why do we have nuclear weapons in this country? In what circumstances could they be deployed? What work is going on to reduce nuclear capability in the UK and across the wider world? SNP members are correct that in terms of pure destructive power, nuclear weapons pose a uniquely terrible threat. It is precisely because of that threat that they have a capability to deter acts of aggression that is on a different scale to any other form of deterrence. A number of enduring principles underpin the UK's approach to nuclear deterrence. The first is the focus on preventing nuclear attack. The UK’s nuclear weapons are designed not for military use during conflict, but instead to deter and prevent nuclear blackmail and acts of aggression against our vital interests that cannot be countered by other means. The notice to fire the Trident D5 missiles has been increased to several days since the cold war ended, and the missiles are not targeted at any country. Secondly, the UK will retain only the minimum amount of destructive power required to achieve its deterrence objectives. Since 1997, the UK Government has reduced the upper limit on operationally available nuclear warheads by nearly half. That reduction is continuing, with a commitment to reduce the number still further into the mid-2020s.

Not at this time. The third key principle is that the UK’s nuclear deterrent supports collective security through NATO for the Euro-Atlantic area. Nuclear deterrence plays an important part in NATO’s overall defensive strategy, and the UK’s nuclear forces make a substantial contribution to that. Our nuclear defences are designed to keep our country and the countries that we are allied to safer in an unstable world. I cannot predict the future threats to our nation over the next 50 years, and neither can SNP members. Members on all sides of this chamber would wish to see a nuclear weapon-free world and I believe that all parties are committed to multilateral disarmament. The SNP has not explained how unilateral disarmament—or, indeed, just kicking Trident down the road to England—would help to achieve that aim. There is no evidence that others would follow the UK down a unilateralist route. There would need to be compelling evidence that a nuclear threat to the UK’s vital interests would not re-emerge in future before we could responsibly contemplate such a move. We cannot mortgage our long-term national security against such assumptions. The UK takes its international responsibilities seriously. As well as reducing the upper limit of operationally available nuclear warheads, Britain is the only nuclear weapon state recognised under the NPT to have a single platform, single delivery system and single warheads. Britain has significantly reduced not just the scale but also the readiness of its nuclear system. HM Government’s transparency regarding its arsenal and its declaratory policy regarding its use are designed to foster trust among states and to help encourage other states to reduce nuclear weapons as we have done.

I will give way in a second. The SNP’s approach to this most serious of subjects, however, is muddled, confused, cynical and posturing. After decades of opposition, the SNP says it wants an independent Scotland to shelter under the security umbrella of a nuclear NATO alliance, while disrupting the very capability of that umbrella. For me, Sandra White explained the contradiction best when she said: “It’s not enough to say that you believe in independence and then say that you want to belong to Nato. As far as I’m concerned, it’s hypocritical to say we shouldn’t have nuclear weapons and we want to belong to Nato—how dare we”.

We want to be rid of nuclear weapons too, and that is why we are using the leverage that we have by reducing our own stockpile to work with other countries around the world to do that. The SNP has given us no evidence that unilateral disarmament or kicking Trident down the road will achieve that. As yesterday’s debate was a cynical attempt to use a 10-year-old conflict for naked politicking on a referendum for independence, so is today’s. The SNP appears to want it both ways—anti-nuclear today but in a pro-nuclear alliance tomorrow. Why is the SNP’s defence spokesman now championing NATO? Is it because of a commitment to the UK’s allies or because he believes in international co-operation to keep Europe safe? No, it is to win the referendum. At the SNP conference in October, Angus Robertson said: “Do not disregard the evidence; when asked, 75% of respondents said they would wish an Independent Scotland to remain ... you can boo, but do not disregard the evidence. ... Walking away from our neighbours and allies will not help us win a referendum in 2014.” The rest of us support NATO because we believe in standing shoulder to shoulder with our allies to secure the safety and security of the modern world; the SNP supports NATO to huckle votes to break up Britain.

No thank you, not at this time. The other argument that we hear is the money argument, which is that Trident is expensive and the money could be better spent elsewhere. We can quibble about the sums, but the yes Scotland campaign put a notice on its website last week saying that Scotland’s share of Trident is £163 million a year—a figure repeated by the minister. Trident supports more than 6,500 jobs in Faslane, which makes it the biggest single-site employer in the whole of Scotland. In the coming years, that is due to rise to more than 8,000 jobs, as the rest of the submarine fleet relocates to HMNB Clyde. For the nationalists, that £163 million a year, which supports high-quality jobs for people across the west of Scotland, could be spent better elsewhere—many times over. At conference, the First Minister suggested that the money could be put to other defence spending. In the same week, he suggested to the BBC that the money could be spent on youth unemployment and colleges. Nicola Sturgeon has suggested that it could be used for tackling child poverty. That is a change from October, when she suggested that it could be spent on welfare. The day before, she had a shopping list of nurses, teachers, schools and hospitals.

No, I want to make progress. Angus Robertson has promoted using that same money for conflict resolution and, then, for front-line services. In June, it was to be used for infrastructure projects; in July, it was for other defence spending. By 6 March this year, he had allocated the money to tackling inequality. His Westminster colleague, Stewart Hosie, has suggested that the same £163 million should go to shovel-ready projects. In this Parliament, the money has been earmarked by Christine Grahame and Joan McAlpine for job creation, by Alex Neil for health and education, by Christina McKelvie for nurses and teachers, by Bill Kidd for welfare, by George Adam for school building and by Kenny Gibson for further defence spending. However, all of that is at odds with the man in charge of the money. In John Swinney’s secret document, the finance secretary says that defence spending will be cut. He says: “I have made clear to the Defence Workstream that a much lower budget must be assumed.”

No thank you, First Minister. However, that £163 million will not go far, because Swinneyleaks also states—

No thank you, First Minister.

The £163 million will not go far, as Swinneyleaks also states that it will cost nearly four times that amount to run a Scottish tax system every year. That is a rise of more than £300 million per annum on Scotland’s contribution to HM Revenue and Customs. The debate on today’s motion, like that of yesterday, is not about having a considered discussion on Scotland’s future defence needs; it is a naked, cynical attempt to hijack the parliamentary timetable and rabble-rouse ahead of the referendum. We have seen, from the flip-flopping over NATO, that the nationalist’s position is to harbour under a nuclear umbrella while grand-standing over attempts to dismantle that nuclear capability. We have seen, from their multiple-entry bookkeeping on the cost of Trident, that they see nuclear’s defence contribution as a cash cow that they can milk in every debate. We can see, from their disregard for a considered approach to multilateral disarmament, their ignorance of the measured steps that the UK Government has taken—

And we have heard from the mouth of Angus Robertson that their position on Trident and NATO is nothing more than a vote grabber for the referendum. The first responsibility of Government is the security of the nation. Continuous at-sea deterrence is a cornerstone of that security. I move amendment S4M-05988.2, to leave out from “devastating” to end and insert: “fundamental responsibility of any government to provide for the security of its citizens now and in the future and to cooperate in securing international peace and stability; recognises the uncertainty of global military threats and, therefore, the requirement to maintain an effective defence capability in the UK, including a nuclear deterrent; understands that significant foreign nuclear arsenals remain and that some are being enlarged and modernised; supports the UK Government’s commitment to progress on multilateral nuclear disarmament; notes the importance of building on the non-proliferation treaty; believes that the unilateral removal of Trident would be irresponsible and negligent, and supports the UK Government’s efforts to maintain stability and security for its citizens and internationally through the maintenance and renewal of Trident.”

Will the member give way?

My point was that the UK was a responsible signatory to the NPT and that countries such as North Korea and Iran that, since the NPT’s establishment, were seeking to bring on nuclear weapons were indeed irresponsible.

The comment about “walking away from our neighbours” was a direct quote from Angus Robertson at the SNP conference, which I believe the member attended. My point in listing the huge number of alternatives was to point out the number of times her former colleagues in the SNP have spent the £163 million for Trident. By my reckoning, it is about 20 times per year.

2. I associate myself and the Scottish Conservative Party with the First Minister’s welcome to Pope Francis. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01240)

Last week, we saw in the Swinneyleaks document that the finance secretary accepts the Office for Budget Responsibility’s projection that North Sea oil revenue would halve in five years. The First Minister’s response—although he denies that he moved it up or rushed it out in any way—was a barely six-page long fantasy report that asserted a new oil boom in Scotland. The smoke and mirrors of that report were compounded by taking an average of four cherry-picked examples and conveniently leaving the OBR’s respected projection to one side. The First Minister mentioned his own fiscal commission with its two Nobel laureates. That commission warns that “The Scottish Government should plan budgets on a cautious estimate for oil revenues”. Can the First Minister tell us why, against his own experts’ advice and his finance secretary’s acknowledgement, he has ignored the “unchallenged, independent, more cautious estimate”?

The First Minister’s figure of £48 billion from 2017-18 takes account of only the four projections that the Scottish Government used and leaves out the OBR projection. Let us look at the projections. We asked the Scottish Parliament to ask the Scottish Government whether we could see the sums behind the document, and this is what the Scottish Government had to say: “The scale and complexity of the models we use, combined with the fact that some of them rely on firm-level data and subscriptions to commercial data sources means that we are not in a position to make them publicly available.” In other words, the Government is saying, “We made up these projections and we’re not telling you how. It’s too big and too complicated to let the Parliament or the people of Scotland know. Just take us on trust.” After the European legal advice fiasco, we know exactly how far to trust the Scottish Government. By ignoring the OBR and fiddling the figures, is it not true that the First Minister is asking Scotland to take a massive punt with a dodgy bookie who is fixing the race?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01220)

Let us stick with the First Minister’s seeming inability to be straight with the people of Scotland on what he knows in private to be true. The First Minister says that an independent Scotland will deliver universal benefits, that it will have well-funded public services and pensions, and that all of that will be paid for by oil—the resource that he has just extolled. [Interruption.]

However, Mr Swinney’s timely document states that oil receipts “will fall in cash terms by 50% between 2011-12 and 2016-17”. It says that in paragraph 15. It also says that those forecasts “have not been seriously challenged by the industry or by independent commentators”. In other words, they are right—the oil money will halve. John Swinney’s document says that in an independent Scotland the deficit will double by 2015-16. It says that there will be a “downward revision in current spending”. Therefore, the document that the First Minister is extolling shows that a newly independent Scotland would have half the oil money and double the deficit, and that it would be ordinary Scots who would pay for it all. Why has none of that ever been said in public before?

So the defence is that the report is out of date and that there have been revisions to it. Let us look at the revisions, because the Office for Budget Responsibility has given a revised estimate of how much money we will get from oil. It gave us a revision in December, after many of the findings that the First Minister has told us about. We are talking about the OBR that has not been challenged by industry, experts or commentators. In its December 2012 “Economic and fiscal outlook”, the OBR said that the tax revenues figure for 2015-16 was not the figure of £4.8 billion that is in John Swinney’s document, but £4.6 billion, which is hundreds of millions of pounds less. The figure is worse than John Swinney’s figure. If, as the First Minister states, he has been updating Parliament regularly on how many barrels of oil are in the North Sea, why did he not tell Fergus Ewing, who answered a question on the issue yesterday by using the same figures that the Government has been using for many, many months? That does not stack up. The First Minister says that the oil tax revenues are enough and are growing. If the OBR’s update in December is wrong and John Swinney’s secret document is out of date and is not the latest one, what is? In the interests of transparency, will the First Minister give us the updated document from John Swinney on the fiscal position for a future Scotland? When will the First Minister publish an update to tell the people of Scotland what he has tried to hide in private?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01198)

The difference between the First Minister’s attitude and manner in relation to waiting lists from last week to this week is astonishing. The reality is that, no matter what tone he takes in the debate, thousands of people across Scotland are waiting far too long for treatment. Last week, the First Minister’s lame excuses were that the computer system was not up to scratch and that too many people were on holiday to report for treatment. Yesterday, the Auditor General told the Parliament that that was nonsense. If the First Minister wants to quote the Auditor General, then let us quote from the Auditor General. She said: “the information was available ... it wasn’t acted upon ... it should have rung warning bells”

Let us look further at what the Auditor General said, which is that if national health service boards and the Government had been looking at the other information that was available, such as the increasing use of social unavailability codes, that should have raised some warning signs, which would have merited further investigation. The Government’s complacency about treatment targets relates not just to treatment over the 18 weeks but starts when people first enter accident and emergency. Only this week, a Scottish Government spokesman insisted that there were no accident and emergency admissions targets at all. However, the Government’s own ISD Scotland documents state clearly that NHS boards are tasked with reducing the attendance rate in emergency departments. That is despite the Royal College of Physicians saying in the Scottish Government’s press release that accident and emergency admissions would soar by 13.5 per cent by 2020. The First Minister cannot blame the computers or people’s holidays. Now his own spokesman cannot deny what is in his own documents. There are targets and the Government is missing them. Does he or anyone else in the Government know what is going on inside the health service?

2. This time—thank you, Presiding Officer. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01184)

On Tuesday, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, gave a statement to the chamber on the still unfolding horsemeat scandal. Can the First Minister tell us why Mr Lochhead failed to mention that the operating budget of the Food Standards Agency in Scotland has been secretly slashed by 10 per cent in the past year?

A minute ago, it was a computer’s fault and now it is Westminster’s. The First Minister has made quite a big play of the fact that, in Scotland, none of the FSA’s functions was moved to a Government department and none of its operations was moved elsewhere. Let us look at the timeline, because that makes things worse, not better. The Government learned that there was horsemeat in the food chain on 14 January. On 7 February, it published its spring budget revision, which showed a £1.1 million smash and grab on the FSA three weeks into a food scandal. That was not because any functions had been taken away from the FSA; it is a direct assault on the work that the agency does in Scotland. Did nobody notice or think that it might be a risky idea to take money out of the FSA’s budget in the middle of a growing crisis? Surely—at this time more than at any other—it needs the full resources and tools to maintain public confidence in our food. Can the First Minister explain the logic behind ripping £1 million from the FSA’s budget?

Och!

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01167)

By asking about college funding, non-profit-distributing model failures and the cancer drugs fund, I am not sure whether Johann Lamont has just gone through the Scottish Conservatives’ greatest hits. However, I want to take the First Minister through some of his pet projects. First, the rural parliament for Scotland was announced in September 2011, but 17 months on it has not been established; legislation on the Scottish sentencing council was passed in June 2010, but two years and eight months on it has not been established; and, although the college reform programme was announced in September 2011, there are no timescales at all for some of the mergers. That is from a First Minister who says that he can build an entire independent nation in just 18 months. The constitutional expert, Professor Adam Tomkins, says that that timetable is “not just unrealistic, but hopelessly unrealistic.” Given the First Minister’s own failings, why is he right, but the acknowledged expert in the field is wrong?

Despite the bulging-eyed bluster, the only thing that happened yesterday was that Mr Swinney cut college funding by more than £24 million while his back benchers clapped and cheered. Let us focus on only one body—quite apart from a welfare state, a Scottish treasury and a Scottish supreme court—that the First Minister needs to establish in that 18-month timeframe: the armed forces, because the defence of the realm is the first responsibility of any Government. There are—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. There are 65,000 Ministry of Defence civil servants supporting the United Kingdom military right now, but the Scottish Conservatives have learned that the number of people that the Scottish Government has planning for a Scottish defence force is just seven. That is seven people who not only face an impossible task but who were better deployed delivering the public services for which this Parliament is responsible. In fact, defence is only one of 16 policy areas in which officials are being diverted from their devolved duties to work on the First Minister’s separatist obsession. [Interruption.]

It is no wonder that the First Minister cannot create a rural parliament or a Scottish sentencing council, or get the college merger programme through in time. Will he admit that he is failing to run a devolved nation, never mind planning a new one?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01150)

Now that the Electoral Commission’s report has been widely accepted by all sides of the chamber, we know the spending limits and the question for the referendum. However, as mentioned, a piece of the jigsaw is missing. Therefore, can the First Minister tell the people of Scotland the exact date on which the referendum will take place?

I am amazed by the First Minister’s coy reticence, particularly since he is no stranger to making grandstanding announcements in this chamber at First Minister’s question time. Why is the First Minister trying to keep his poker hand hidden from the room? If the referendum is the property of the people of Scotland, why can he not be straight with them? Why were members of his Government briefing national newspapers a year ago? We have known for more than a year the date of the 2014 Ryder cup at Gleneagles and we have known for more than five years the date of the Glasgow Commonwealth games. Important though those things are, they do not impact on the course of this nation’s history in the same way as a referendum. [Interruption.]

The people deserve to know the date now. Why will the First Minister not tell them?

I congratulate Drew Smith on securing the debate. I am pleased to be able to explore some of the important issues that it raises. It is important to begin, as other members have done, by recognising the important place of live music in our culture. The motion focuses on professional musicians in Glasgow and across Scotland. The issue is important precisely because we have such a proud tradition of live music in our country. From major international acts to traditional musicians, singers and performers, Scotland has a vibrant and diverse music scene. The public perception is often that professional musicians play to crowds of thousands and are among the highest earners in our society. Although that might be true for a small number of performers who are in the public eye, the reality for most professional musicians is very different. Indeed, recent research that was conducted by the Musicians Union highlighted the issue as one of the main challenges that face those who seek to make a living from music. According to the research, more than half of professional musicians earn less than £20,000 a year, with many taking home considerably less than that. It is worth identifying the difference between those who perform for enjoyment and those who perform to try to make a living. We should note that musicians have a variety of motivations for performing. Those who play for enjoyment are often in competition with those who are trying to make a living from music. Others are somewhere in the middle, and use music as a means of earning a bit of extra cash alongside another job. Often, for people who are just starting out and trying to make it as professional musicians, free gigs might give them the exposure that they need early in their careers. However, other musicians who are playing for free, possibly on the same bill at the same venue, might have no such desire. Therefore, it is hard to differentiate between professional performers and those who play as a hobby, as they often play on the same stage. That does not mean that there are not real issues that need to be considered. The work not play campaign has highlighted that, in some areas, there seems to be a culture in which venues or promoters take advantage of aspiring musicians. If someone is making money from the playing of music, be it a promoter, bar owner or venue manager, it is only fair that the profit is shared with the musicians. That issue is challenging enough to address properly at local level, but I am also aware of concerns about professional musicians being asked to do unpaid gigs that were attached to last year’s Olympic games. The organisers of Glasgow 2014 will want to be aware of those concerns as preparations for the Commonwealth games continue. Common sense suggests that, in that situation, musicians should be remunerated for their work. However, there will be events that might not break even and for which profit was never a primary concern. In such circumstances, it would be difficult to expect a promoter, who might be investing their time, effort and money into an event, to pay out of their own pocket if there was never an agreed commercial contract. The campaign website that the motion refers to includes the experiences of a number of musicians, some of whom describe being pressurised into performing at charity events for little or no pay. Clearly, bands might wish to offer their services for free to a charity that they support, or for other reasons. That could range from bands supporting national campaigns such as Live Aid to a ceilidh band waiving a fee for performing at a friend’s wedding. However, using guilt to compel musicians to play for free is a worrying road to go down—playing for free should always be at the behest of the musicians. We also need to be aware of charitable gigs that are not so charitable after all. There are a number of reports of events that have been billed as charity events with high ticket prices but with very little money actually going to charities. Those often involve organisers and promoters taking their usual fee whereas the musicians are expected to play for nothing. The key thing is that musicians should not be exploited by unscrupulous promoters. If musicians are happy to perform with no fee, that is their right, but nobody should be pressured into working for free. It is good that the work not play campaign is raising public awareness of the issues. Members of the public might often believe that musicians are being well paid when the opposite is true. Years, often decades, of hard work go into becoming a professional musician, and musicians should expect to be paid fairly for their work.

2. To ask the First Minister when he next plans to meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01132)

Despite the First Minister’s protestations, there is clear blue water between us and Labour on many things, not just Europe. The difference is that we are sound on Europe and the Labour Party is not; we would give Scotland a say and the Labour Party would not—and nor would the First Minister, it seems. Why is that? When the research shows that twice as many Scots want a Euro referendum than want Scotland to leave the United Kingdom, why in his Scotland would he not give them their say?

I saw his speech both this week and last. The difference is that the Prime Minister is ready to negotiate a better deal for the UK and that European leaders such as Angela Merkel are lining up to sit down with him for talks, whereas this First Minister cannot get through the door in Brussels for a simple meeting. I am grateful to the First Minister, because this week something has become crystal clear. If people vote to stay in the UK, they will have a chance of a say on Europe, whereas if people vote for independence, the First Minister is telling them that they should pipe down and leave it to him. From yesterday’s Scottish social attitudes survey, we all know which way Scotland is going. We also know that the First Minister is old enough to have had his say on Europe—decades ago—[Interruption.]

No one in Scotland under 55, however, has ever had their say on Europe and, in this First Minister’s world, they never will. The First Minister needs to explain to them why he would deny them their say. Can he explain? Why does he not trust them?

2. I, too, associate myself with the comments made by the First Minister regarding the very serious situation in Algeria. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01109)

In the week before Christmas, I asked the First Minister why he had promised the people of Scotland that he would spend up to £500 million on non-profit-distributing model big building projects between 2011 and 2013 but would actually spend just £20 million. He blamed legal delays on the Aberdeen bypass. Is that still his reasoning?

I am no Sarah Montague, but I too was there for that exchange. If he looks back at the transcript, the First Minister may wish to make his weekly trip to the Official Report this afternoon. The First Minister is broadly sticking to his story that the Aberdeen western peripheral route was an issue to do with NPD spend. Yesterday, we heard something different from the man in charge of the organisation that the First Minister personally set up to build new schools and hospitals. The head of the Scottish Futures Trust, Barry White, said that the unspent millions were very little to do with the Aberdeen bypass, which was “more for 2013-14 and onwards”. After European Union advice that did not exist and college funding that was going down instead of up, we now have yet another example of the First Minister telling the people of Scotland something that is simply untrue. The real tragedy here is that our construction industry and our communities were promised nearly £0.5 billion of NPD big building projects, which this First Minister has failed to deliver. Even his placemen on the Finance Committee, John Mason and Kenny Gibson, have said that the whole NPD scheme is “overoptimistic”. Will the First Minister now hold up his hands and admit that he is not spending the NPD money, that his excuses do not stack up and that barely a brick has been laid?

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. The future of the day centres in Glasgow is of great importance to the people who use and work in the centres and he has spoken passionately about the work that is done and the services that are offered in them. He has set out his concern about the potential impact on services of a reduction in their number. Like Mr Doris, I have been contacted by constituents who are concerned about Glasgow City Council’s proposals. At the outset, it is worth reflecting on the centres’ importance for the individuals who use them and their families. As well as delivering educational and leisure opportunities, the day centres provide users with a place where they can develop social interaction and build friendships with other users and staff. For many vulnerable adults, a safe and secure environment in which to build such relationships is invaluable and significant trust is built up with staff over not just weeks and months, but years. For parents, families and carers of adults with learning difficulties, the centres provide a comfortable and secure environment, where they know that users will be supported while they are at work. The structure that the centres provide in the lives of the vulnerable adults who benefit from them should not be underestimated. Often, the programme of activities, the supportive environment and the provision of regular, nutritious meals makes a real difference in the lives of users, as Mr Doris said. One of the carers who wrote to me about their concern said that the centres that have been earmarked for closure are “central to the health and wellbeing of hundreds of learning disabled adults in the city”. It is important to pay tribute to the hard work of staff at the centres. Mr Smith made a good point in that regard, although he was running out of time in his speech at that point. In many cases, it is the relationships that have been built up between staff and users that demonstrate the day centres’ benefit and impact on users’ lives. Given the value of the centres, it is difficult to see how the proposal to reduce their number from seven to four could have anything other than a negative impact on the service that is available to users. There are specific concerns about the services. Some carers are worried about the impact of changes to the way in which the council allocates resources to vulnerable adults. Members discussed self-directed support at length in the Parliament and the approach received broad support, but many vulnerable individuals would not cope with the responsibility of managing their own budgets. There is also concern about plans to cut transport for learning-disabled people, who are being pushed towards public transport and other alternatives. Sometimes that might be appropriate, but in many cases it is likely that the transport that is currently provided is the only suitable means by which an individual can get to a day centre. I share some of those concerns. It is important that changes are managed as sensitively as is humanly possible. As members know, Glasgow City Council’s social work services sought views on the changes. Many people contributed to the consultation, including some of the 520 adults with learning disabilities who currently attend the day centres. I hope that people’s views will be taken on board as the council takes forward service reform. Given the pressure on local authority budgets, it is clear that councils, including Glasgow City Council, must make difficult decisions about the services that they provide. They must balance their responsibility to provide effective services with their duty to deliver value for money for council tax payers. I hope that, in the situation that we are considering, the right balance can be found, which minimises the impact on the vulnerable adults who have benefited from the centres.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01089)

Two years ago, this Scottish National Party Government brought in community payback orders. The justice secretary said that criminals would be “paying back through the sweat of their brow the harm they have done in our communities.” Can the First Minister tell me how much of the work that was handed down during the most recent financial year has been completed? Does he think that his CPO scheme is working?

So that is a no; the First Minister cannot tell me about his own scheme. However, I can tell him, and I can use his figures. In 2011-12, more than 10,000 community payback orders were handed out, of which 7,763 involved actual work. Of those, only 2,536 were completed—less than a third. Even worse, of the more than 2,500 work requirements that were officially terminated last year, a third were signed off uncompleted, so the work will never get done. Last week, a sheriff raised concerns about the fact that criminals are turning up and being marked down for two hours’ work without lifting a finger. Sheriff Graham Buchanan thinks that the public would be horrified if they knew how “these so-called robust community sentences were being administered.” There is a massive backlog, whole sentences are signed off only partially completed, and offenders are credited with work that they never do. Communities are being conned and not paid back. Is that why, on Monday, the Scottish Government advertised for an outside body to evaluate whether CPOs are working at all?

2. I wish you, Presiding Officer, and indeed the whole chamber all the compliments of the season. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01070)

The First Minister did not appear to like the pantomime routine—it is just as well that people in the public gallery were not charged. Let us play this one straight. Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth pledged to spend £205 million of the money he received from the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement to start what he called a “building boom” in Scotland. However, last year he pledged to spend up to £350 million this financial year through the non-profit-distributing building fund for schools and hospitals. How much of that will actually have been spent by the end of this financial year?

As the First Minister should know, NPD is “such a success” that, according to the Scottish Parliament information centre, of the £350 million pledged, the princely sum of £20 million will be spent: £330 million less than the finance secretary pledged and has available. That is on top of the year before, when he pledged up to £150 million but spent nothing: zero pounds and zero pence. Up to £480 million was promised to build schools and hospitals, yet was never delivered. If yesterday’s £205 million can be heralded as a “building boom” that will secure 2,000 jobs, surely, by the Government’s own figures, £480 million would have been a building bonanza that could have secured nearly 5,000 jobs. Millions of pounds have been promised to help the construction industry but next to nothing is being built, which is why it is so important that yesterday’s announcement is not just more seasonal spin. Scotland cannot afford to wait for these shovel-ready projects to be cynically delayed until just before the 2014 referendum. Will the First Minister tell us what the finance secretary refused to confirm yesterday: in which months in 2013 will the £205 million-worth of projects start and when will the unspent £480 million that was previously promised actually be released?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01051)

I, too, listened with interest to the performance of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth at the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee, particularly when he said that the Scottish Government had held informal dialogue with the European Commission about an independent Scotland’s entry into the European Union. The Scottish Conservatives revealed earlier this year that both the EU’s enlargement commissioner, Štefan Füle, and President Barroso had confirmed in writing that, by March, there had been no discussions on this subject with the SNP Government. Can the First Minister tell the people of Scotland what talks John Swinney was referring to? When—since March—did they take place? Who conducted them and at what level? What ground was covered? If we were to contact Europe, would we get the same answers that he is about to give?

Can I gently remind the First Minister that he is here to give straight answers to straight questions and that the people of Scotland deserve honest answers? The First Minister cannot, will not or seems unwilling to tell us something as straightforward as precisely what discussions have been going on, if indeed there have been any. This all just adds to quite an unedifying week in which first the First Minister and then the finance secretary were spanked and sent to bed by President Barroso and the Bank of England for not doing their homework properly. [Interruption.]

Now, in a panic, the head girl, Nicola Sturgeon, has been dispatched to Brussels to sort this mess out. I ask the First Minister whether Brussels shares his sense of urgency. Can he tell us who has agreed to meet the Deputy First Minister, when these meetings are due to take place and what questions she is due to ask?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-01032)

One party in the chamber has consistently argued for a Scottish cancer drugs fund. The First Minister is right: that argument, which the Scottish Conservatives have put forward, has consistently been opposed by the Scottish National Party and the Labour Party. Today, he says that that is because it is an imperfect solution. A cancer drugs fund may not be perfect, but it is a solution to enable Scottish cancer patients to get better treatment and access to the same drugs as people elsewhere, and to address the difficulties in recruiting cancer specialists north of the border. I have raised that point with the First Minister, as has my predecessor. The postcode issues that the First Minister cites today have been being addressed down south since the fund’s inception. Does the First Minister even know which drugs are routinely denied to Scottish patients, but are now available in England?

I have information here—which I am happy to lodge in the Scottish Parliament information centre—to show that, between October 2010 and 27 November of this year, more than 23,000 cancer patients in England have had their lives extended by the cancer drugs fund. That is 23,000 families who have been able to spend more time with their loved one and who thought that that road was worth going down. Because of the fund, patients in England have had access to everolimus to tackle kidney cancer, which is a drug that is not routinely available in Scotland; Avastin for kidney cancer; lapatinib and eribulin, which are available for those with breast cancer and are not routinely available in Scotland; and bendamustine for those who are suffering from non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and chronic leukaemia—that drug is not routinely available in Scotland. This Government has failed the Scottish patients who died of those conditions and who, with access to those drugs, could have had more time. It does not have to fail thousands more. Rich people do not need free prescriptions: cancer patients need better treatment. Will the First Minister, in his review, at least reconsider his opposition to a cancer drugs fund?

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to the First Minister and all members for my late arrival. When the full scale of the phone-hacking scandal and illegal behaviour in the national press became apparent, major change in press regulation was inevitable. It was inevitable because the people who matter most in all this—the public—had lost faith in a system that was meant to ensure that journalists’ behaviour was kept within the bounds of reason and decency. We now have an opportunity not only to restore faith in the regulation of the press but to put the public interest back at the heart of everything that the press does. We all agree that there cannot be a return to the free-for-all that existed before 2006. It is, however, also in the public interest that the Government and politicians are kept well away from control of the press and the freedom of journalists to report, investigate and express opinions. After an investigation lasting over a year, it was inevitable that Lord Leveson would recommend a major upheaval of our regulatory system. Indeed, major change is already on the way. Under Lord Hunt, a significant toughening of press regulation is under way, including a new investigations arm, the ability to negotiate compensation and the power to levy fines for the worst offences. Today, the Prime Minister has sent a clear message to editors that those reforms must be introduced with urgency. Last week, there was a certain sense of urgency in this chamber, too—such urgency, in fact, that the First Minister abused First Minister’s question time to make an unannounced statement on the Leveson report before he knew what it contained. Most sensible people would have waited to see what the report said before pronouncing, but the First Minister had already made up his mind that it would be introduced in Scotland. What he announced was a judge-led implementation body that would “consider how best to implement the Leveson proposals in the context of Scots law and the devolved responsibilities of the Parliament.”—[Official Report, 29 November 2012; c 14119.] Seemingly, the First Minister had already decided to introduce something that he had not read. He said that the Opposition leaders were being invited to talks because he wanted consensus on a way forward, and then he pronounced on what much of that consensus must be. The truth is that the First Minister is in a corner of his own making. He says that he wants “a particularly Scottish suggestion and solution that meets our responsibilities”.—[Official Report, 29 November 2012; c 14122.] However, the speech that he made a few moments ago shows that he misunderstands the position for newspaper publishers in Scotland. First, newspapers here are well used to dealing with differences in Scots law while operating under one UK system of regulation, no matter how discredited that system may now be. Indeed, if there were problems with the Press Complaints Commission, they were not limited to one part of the United Kingdom, even if the most flagrant breaches of its code of conduct were committed by Fleet Street titles. The PCC has always had strong representation from Scotland, and until recently four of its 17 commissioners were Scots. Scottish legal advice was readily at hand to inform its decisions. There is nothing in the Leveson recommendations for the new regulatory body that requires a different system of regulation here. Secondly, tinkering with Scots defamation law as an incentive for newspapers to join a new system is not necessary. The protection against heavy damages for defamation that Lord Leveson thinks his kitemark system could produce would have little impact in Scotland, where defamation damages have long been limited. Unlike in English law—the First Minister is right to point this out—there is no such thing as exemplary or punitive damages under defamation in Scots law. Until Tommy Sheridan was awarded £200,000, which we know has never been paid, the biggest ever defamation damages award in Scotland was £60,000. Further, as the First Minister will know, there is already provision in Scots law for legal aid in civil defamation cases under legislation that was passed here in 2007 and 2010. We have already made it easier for people of limited means to sue.

First, it is important to look at the fact that Lord Justice Leveson does not say that there need to be separate bodies across the different devolved jurisdictions. Secondly, we see from the proposals being put forward that the newspaper industry does not want to deal with two systems, and I cannot imagine that the most important people in this regard—the public—want the confusion of two competing systems, either. People want to know that they can go to a single body and be dealt with both quickly and fairly.

I am winding up. If the First Minister is genuine in his support for a self-regulated system—he told the BBC on Sunday that he wants to protect a vigorous and self-regulated press—he cannot force newspapers to take part in his McLeveson plan. Let there be no doubt that even what has already been proposed by the PCC chairman, Lord Hunt, will cost far more than the old system. To set up a second, McLeveson body would add thousands of pounds of costs, with publishers already stumping up more than they did before for what is being brought in down south. There is no escaping the new UK system for the biggest publishers of Scottish newspapers. A number of them are already preparing to sign up to it. What we must do now is call on the First Minister to see the sense—sense that is being spoken across the chamber—in accepting a UK-wide scheme for UK self-regulation. It must command the trust of the public, and it is the best way forward. Over the past few weeks, much has been said by my opposite number in the Labour Party, by the papers and by commentators about Mr Salmond’s actions and what Lord Justice Leveson had to say about them. It is not too late for the First Minister to do the right thing and step aside from the process as it goes forward. In attempting to curry favour with Rupert Murdoch, his judgment was flawed, and his judgment is also flawed when it comes to grasping the reality of the legal and regulatory landscape in which Scots newspapers operate. There needs to be a debate about the future of the press in Scotland but, for so many reasons, this First Minister is not the man to lead it.

It is reported today by the Irish journalist, Kevin Myers, that the Irish justice minister is unhappy with the work of the Irish press council and that the Irish Parliament will formally scrutinise its performance in 2014. Does that sound to the member like the sort of freedom of the press that the First Minister said he wants to enshrine?

2. I welcome the First Minister’s offer to me to meet him and other party leaders when we have all had the opportunity to read and digest Lord Leveson’s report. I look forward to taking that forward at the earliest opportunity. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-01022)

This week’s official national health service figures have confirmed what members already knew: there are 2,000 fewer nurses in Scotland now than there were when this man came to power. Can the First Minister tell us how much the Scottish Government has been spending on agency and bank nurses to cover for all the posts that he has cut?

I thought that I heard the First Minister say that there had been a reduction in the figures. In fact, we spent £94.5 million on agency and bank nursing this year. That is up £4 million—or about eight Ryder cup visits—from last year, and is more than 160,000 extra agency and bank nursing hours this year alone, compared with last year. That cost is far in excess of the staff equivalent. I see the former health secretary whispering to the First Minister, whom he moved to fight his referendum for him. Perhaps he might want to speak to his current Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. That is happening at a time when nursing vacancies in Scotland are at a three-year high. There are currently 1,400 posts for nurses lying empty in hospitals and health centres across this country. Why are nursing vacancies at a three-year high? Why is this Government seemingly unable to recruit nurses? Why is it spending over the odds on bank and agency staff, thereby diverting valuable resources away from improving front-line priority care? Those are more NHS failings from a Government that seems rapidly to be losing its grip.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00990)

In the First Minister’s answers to the Labour Party leader, we have all just seen him diminish his office. In one of his answers, he said that we must “move on to the substantive issue of college funding”, and I believe that he said that we should recognise his Government’s efforts to “protect and defend” the college budget. Let us look at that. Last week, the First Minister repeatedly told us that the further education budget for 2012-13 is £546 million yet, in the draft budget for 2013-14, the Government says that the revenue budget for further education will be reduced to £511 million. Can he confirm that that represents a £34 million single-year cash cut? I can tell him now that that is more than 5 per cent.

Although the First Minister is in charge of budgets in this country and has cut the colleges’ budget over the spending review period by 24 per cent, which is significantly more than the overall reduction in the budget, there is still no acknowledgement that any responsibility lies with him. Last Thursday—at the fifth attempt, by my count—the First Minister told the Parliament that the further education budget in 2011-12 was £555 million and that the budget for 2012-13 is £446 million. I apologise; it is £546 million. [Interruption.]

The First Minister stated that, in 2011-12, the budget was £555 million and that the budget for 2012-13 is £546 million, yet today the Parliament’s independent information service—the Scottish Parliament information centre, to which the First Minister referred earlier—insists that the true figure for 2011-12 was actually £576 million and that the budget for 2012-13 is £526 million. Can he explain that discrepancy, either now, or at 5 o’clock?

I would be absolutely delighted to put into SPICe exactly which colleges the courses have been cut from, under Mike Russell. In that half-answer that the First Minister gave me, he tried to account for £15 million of the discrepancy that I raised, which is the difference between the figure in the chart that was given to the committee and the figure that is available in SPICe, but he did not mention the Skills Development Scotland money of £5 million, did he?

2. I would like to associate myself and the entire Scottish Conservative Party with the First Minister’s remarks about Captain Walter Reid Barrie, and to pass on our condolences to his family after the tragic events of remembrance day. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00970)

Yesterday, we heard the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning ignore the impact of Scottish National Party policies on Scotland’s colleges as simply getting rid of what he arrogantly dismissed as “hobby courses”. I will give a few examples of courses that are now no longer available under the education secretary’s stewardship: higher national certificate in diagnostic imaging—gone; higher national diploma in human resource management—gone; HND in technical support—gone; HND in network computing—gone; qualifications in healthcare and nursing—gone. Mike Russell has labelled those subjects “hobbies”, which they are anything but. Will the First Minister instruct his education secretary to apologise for his insulting attitude towards the thousands of ordinary people who are doing nothing but their best to improve their lives?

Let us ask the First Minister to look at the situation north of the border, because the 70,000 fewer places here are not an illusion. That is the harsh reality and it is part of the choices that his Scottish Government is making. The First Minister just said that he is delivering for Scottish colleges under what he calls severe financial pressure. Conservative members accept that the Scottish budget has had a 6 per cent real-terms cut—although it is still up in cash terms—but he must accept that a 24 per cent cut to college budgets comes directly from him and not from Westminster. That is his responsibility. [Interruption.]

There are now 70,000 fewer opportunities for ordinary people to learn skills that would help them to get on. As the unemployment gap between the rest of the UK and Scotland grows, those people need more opportunities, not fewer. The truth is that the First Minister is raiding college budgets to fund the Scottish National Party’s electoral bribe of free university places.

That is little more than educational arrogance and snobbery: university good, solid college places bad. [Interruption.]

When will this First Minister finally admit that his priorities are damaging the chances of thousands of ordinary Scots?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00949)

Let us stick with the Auditor General. This week, Audit Scotland published a highly critical report that shows that reoffending costs Scotland £3 billion a year. The First Minister has had five years to get reoffending policies right, so why—according to the Auditor General—is there such a “mismatch between what is delivered and what is known to work to reduce reoffending”?

The Auditor General seems to think that “what matters” is to have a reducing reoffending programme that works. Audit Scotland says that the Government is spending money on programmes that are not known to work; that there needs to be “stronger” national leadership; that there is a lack of cohesion; and that reoffending rates are “relatively static”. It has also looked at the Government’s plans to make things better—plans that have been up and running for more than six months—and it says that there is still “an urgent need” for improvement in “all of these areas.” Communities across Scotland are seeing the same people committing the same crimes time after time after time. Whatever the First Minister is doing is not working. When will he do what Audit Scotland is urging him to do and get serious not just about crime, but about reoffending?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00949)

Let us stick with the Auditor General. This week, Audit Scotland published a highly critical report that shows that reoffending costs Scotland £3 billion a year. The First Minister has had five years to get reoffending policies right, so why—according to the Auditor General—is there such a “mismatch between what is delivered and what is known to work to reduce reoffending”?

The Auditor General seems to think that “what matters” is to have a reducing reoffending programme that works. Audit Scotland says that the Government is spending money on programmes that are not known to work; that there needs to be “stronger” national leadership; that there is a lack of cohesion; and that reoffending rates are “relatively static”. It has also looked at the Government’s plans to make things better—plans that have been up and running for more than six months—and it says that there is still “an urgent need” for improvement in “all of these areas.” Communities across Scotland are seeing the same people committing the same crimes time after time after time. Whatever the First Minister is doing is not working. When will he do what Audit Scotland is urging him to do and get serious not just about crime, but about reoffending?

I congratulate John Mason on bringing the debate to the chamber. I am delighted to be given the opportunity to speak about an exciting event that can bring the nation together in a positive way, behind a common purpose, in 2014. It is an event that will give Scots across the nation an opportunity to express what is great about this country, and the opportunity to promote our national identity while celebrating competition with and respect for our friends in the home nations. When John Mason listed venues and what was happening at them, I was mentally ticking them off. I have played table tennis and badminton in Scotstoun, done a bit of crown green bowling at Kelvingrove and used the ranges at Barry Buddon for shooting in my previous life in uniform. Although I am, like most Scots, a very far cry from Commonwealth standards, it will still be a thrill to be able to see those venues being used on the television and say, “I’ve been there, I’ve done that.” I think that people throughout Scotland will share that thrill. The motion notes the latest progress on the games from the Commonwealth Games Federation co-ordination commission and I am pleased that it reports that a number of venues are either completed or are nearing completion and that the CGF has confidence in the ability of Glasgow to deliver a successful games. I share that confidence—the new facilities speak for themselves. We have, I believe, 622 days to go and we appear to be ahead of schedule. I am sure that Scotland’s largest, friendliest city—my home city and one that I am proud to represent—will step up to the challenge of filling the 15,000 volunteering spaces that are needed to help run the games. I concur with Ms Ferguson that perhaps a cross-party group of MSP workers could be attached to that volunteering project. Glasgow 2014 will be a global event. It will involve 71 nations and territories representing one third of the world’s population and it will attract an estimated television audience of more than 1.5 billion people from across the globe. Just yesterday, it was announced that Emirates Airlines is to be one of the major sponsors of the games, which is again a reflection of Glasgow 2014’s international reach. The games will be good for Glasgow and they will help to cement its reputation as a truly world-class city. I note that the para-sports programme will be fully integrated in the games, which will help para-sports athletes achieve greater exposure on the international sports scene. We are fortunate in many ways that the Commonwealth games can learn from and build upon the London 2012 Olympics and Paralympics in that regard. At the recent Commonwealth games reception, which has been referred to several times, I was struck by how appreciative the Glasgow 2014 organisers were of the access, the support and the co-working with the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games that has been on-going. We know that 41 per cent of Scots are more interested in the Commonwealth games because of London 2012 and we need to build on that. For me, the games will be much more than a sporting event. They represent a real opportunity to use sport to benefit businesses, organisations and communities across Scotland and to instil a lasting legacy for young people in Scotland. The venues will continue to be used after the games by a variety of athletes, from elite competitors to young people who have been inspired by the games to take up a new sport. EventScotland’s games for Scotland initiative has already seen 40,000 people trying Commonwealth games sports and activities in 2010 and 2011, and I hope that that trend continues. The legacy of the games can and should extend beyond the physical infrastructure of the houses, the events and the venues. Every person who gets off the sofa, every child who is inspired to try a new sport, every Scot who is proud to cheer on our athletes and every inch of progress that we make as a nation to see and practise the benefits of exercise in our own communities is a legacy worth competing for. I congratulate the member on securing the debate.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00929)

It is nice to see the First Minister back in his chair in the chamber. When he ducked out of the debate on Tuesday—a debate about his conduct—he avoided a sadly very necessary reminder that the nation needs to be able to trust when it comes to every aspect of his independence plan. We know now that the First Minister has no legal basis for his claims about Scotland’s place in Europe. As for the economy, I repeat what the head of Scottish Financial Enterprise told a Lords committee last week—another appointment that the First Minister ducked. Owen Kelly said of the Scottish Government: “It’s aimed at persuading, rather than providing” an “authoritative conclusion ... I struggle to see how they have the authority to tell us anything.” That is Europe and the economy—what about defence? The First Minister says that an independent Scotland can be a fully committed member of NATO but kick the nuclear submarine fleet out of Faslane. Can he tell us what facts or advice he has sought or received to support that assertion?

The First Minister’s answer on evidence for SNP policy is to look at an SNP policy document. Brilliant. That goes further than the non-answer that we got on Tuesday from his deputy leader. I wrote to the First Minister—he may remember—about the legal position in relation to NATO. What I got back was a letter from a junior official saying that all will be revealed in 2013 and—wait for it—it will all be fully in accordance with the legal advice received by Scottish ministers. We know what that means. I asked the Ministry of Defence what discussions had taken place with the Scottish Government and what work has gone on to stand this up. The answer? None. There has been no contact between the Scottish Government and the MOD. There are no facts to support Mr Salmond’s claims. It is not just the Conservatives who have noticed. The First Minister needs to look behind him: Jamie Hepburn said that it is “nigh-on impossible” to remove nuclear weapons under pressure from NATO; and Sandra White said that it is “hypocritical” to be anti-nuclear and pro-NATO. Perhaps Councillor Norman MacLeod summed up SNP policy best when he said that, on this and on other issues, it goes into “unsubstantiated assertion”. The nation owes Councillor MacLeod a debt of gratitude for summing up what we already know. Even the First Minister’s own side recognises that this First Minister asserts as facts things that he does not know to be true. We know that we cannot trust the First Minister on defence, we know that we cannot trust him on the economy and we certainly cannot trust him on Europe. How can Scotland trust him on anything ever again?

It seems to me that creating a new nation state such as an independent Scotland is a matter of trust. We have to trust those who are proposing the creation or transition of that state to safeguard three things. First, they must safeguard national security, because the primary responsibility of Government is the defence of the nation state’s people and the military structure that provides that. Secondly, they must safeguard the nation state’s economic security by establishing its central bank, currency and regulatory regime. Thirdly, they must safeguard the nation state’s political security by establishing its place in the world through membership of international organisations such as the EU. People need to trust that the proposals for each of those pillars of nationhood are sound. In relation to those assertions, we have already heard the Deputy First Minister assert on live television that an independent Scotland would have a seat on the monetary policy committee of the Bank of England, only to backtrack later after she found out that that would not be the case. The SNP Government has asserted that an independent Scotland would share a regulator and a lender of last resort with the rest of the UK, only to be gently reminded that all EU countries have their own regulator and that there is no agreement that the Bank of England would support an independent Scotland. So much for being able to trust the economic pillar. On defence, we have heard the blind assertion that an independent Scotland could automatically assume membership of NATO, with its first strike nuclear policy, while simultaneously removing nuclear weapons from its territory. That assertion seems to be based on no evidence or advice. I ask the Deputy First Minister to tell members what discussions have taken place with NATO to assure the people of Scotland that that is indeed the position. I will take an intervention on that point if the Deputy First Minister cares to make one.

Once again, the SNP is playing fast and loose and using assertion rather than fact, so trust in the pillar of defence also falls. That is some record to have, even before we get to last week’s events. The Labour leader has today outlined the timeline that has seen Government ministers assert and assert and assert as fact something that is unknown. The Government does not know whether Scots will be spending pounds or euros, whether farmers will continue to get European support, or whether the Schengen agreement will alter our border controls. On Tuesday, the Deputy First Minister told members that the Government had not asked for advice from its law officers, despite the fact that the First Minister claimed on television that advice had been sought, and despite countless experts, two European Commission chairmen and the Spanish foreign minister saying on the record that the opposite of what the First Minister asserts is true.

I know the current structure under which the UK is a member of the EU, and that the current position is that we will remain a member. I am not asserting as fact anything that I do not know to be true. Today in El País, the European Commission’s vice-president, Commissioner for Justice Viviane Reding, makes the situation in Catalonia very clear. An independent Catalonia would be considered to be a new state, it would have to apply for membership under the provisions of article 49 of the Treaty on European Union, and it would need unanimous approval to be admitted. We can assume that, as for Catalonia, so for Scotland. Despite not knowing the position on Europe, the SNP’s assertions have continued today. We have heard its supposed answer on how to clear up the mess of its own making: it is for the First Minister to refer himself for investigation to see whether he broke the ministerial code. Let us look at the system. Alex Salmond is to refer himself to Sir David Bell, who has been appointed by the First Minister, to be investigated under terms of reference that have been decided by the First Minister. The rest of the panel—Lord Fraser and Elish Angiolini—are apparently surplus to requirements. It is one thing to appoint the judge but to dismiss the jury and choose the charges on an issue that is entirely about trust raises eyebrows. What about the Government wasting taxpayers’ money in court to keep secret advice that it now says it never had in the first place? On Tuesday, the Deputy First Minister said that she would update Parliament on how much was spent after the £3,000 figure that she quoted turned out to be incomplete. When can we expect that update? When can we be told who in the civil service sanctioned the use of that cash, and when, to fight to keep non-existent advice secret? Indeed, when “legal sources close to the First Minister” tell the national press that Scotland’s law officers “consistently told Alex Salmond’s Holyrood government that an independent Scotland’s future inside the European Union was not automatic” and would require “detailed negotiations”, we need to know whether that is true. Of course, the person who could clear this up is the Lord Advocate himself, Frank Mulholland, who has written to me today to say that he has no intention of appearing before this Parliament to answer legitimate questions and clarify the issue.

I do indeed find that strange. I refer to rule 4.5.2 of standing orders, which makes it clear that there is no impediment to the law officer coming to Parliament.

I need to make progress, because I am very close to my time limit. A referendum is not an election where the results can be reversed in five years. The people of Scotland are being asked to make a decision that could affect our nation for ever. They need and deserve the fullest possible information about what independence means to make that choice, and it is simply not good enough for Scotland’s Government to assert as fact that which is not and to go to court to deny to Scotland’s people information that the Scottish Information Commissioner has decided is in the public’s interest to know. The people of Scotland need the truth and where there is only opinion—even legal opinion—they also need to know that for what it is. Scotland deserves a Government that people can trust and I am not sure Alex Salmond’s referral under the ministerial code will restore any of the trust that has just been lost. I am pleased to move amendment S4M-04594.1, to leave out from “believing” to end and insert: “and requires that a full legal justification for the Scottish Government’s assertions in relation to membership of the EU, and its possible consequences in terms of the existing privileges enjoyed by Scotland as part of the United Kingdom, be made available as soon as possible in order to inform a full and substantive debate ahead of the proposed referendum.”

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00907)

And, on that day, I believe that your advisers told you not to look too triumphant. It is amazing what 10 days can do, eh? For days, we have had more ducking and diving than Del Boy from the First Minister as he avoided the conclusion that every fair-minded person has already reached, which is that he has misled the country into believing that his case for Scotland’s place in Europe was based on proper legal advice. Now, if we believe the Deputy First Minister, that was all a fantasy—“This time in 2014, Nicola, we’ll all be millionaires.” However, perhaps this politician of the year is less Del Boy and more Bill Clinton—“I did not have legal relations with that man, Mr Mulholland.” [Interruption.]

The fact is that Mr Salmond and his deputy cannot both be right. Either the First Minister misled the BBC and the nation into believing that he had legal advice and then spent thousands in a devious attempt to cover his tracks or, much more seriously, the Deputy First Minister has misled Parliament by telling us that no such advice existed all along when, in fact, it did, which is a resignation offence. Which one is it? Did he mislead the public or did she mislead Parliament?

It seems that the only sauce that the goose needs to get around the ministerial code is a panicked phone call on Tuesday morning because it seems like a good day to bury bad news. The inescapable truth is that neither the First Minister nor his deputy can be trusted to tell the truth. Maybe it is not Bill Clinton; maybe it is Richard Nixon—“I am not a crook.” Maybe the First Minister is not a crook, but the people of Scotland simply cannot believe a word that he says—[Interruption.]

And, because of him, we cannot believe a word that his deputy says either. The one way to clear this up is for the Lord Advocate to come to the chamber to explain what law officers were asked, what they said and when they said it. Will the First Minister now take the appropriate action to ensure that Frank Mulholland appears before Parliament at the earliest opportunity?

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of her statement. On Friday it was proved beyond all doubt that the Scottish National Party is a party without principle, voting for a policy that it does not believe in, and today the members of that party with principle voted with their feet and walked out. However, NATO is not the only international body that is tying the SNP in knots. We found out today that despite desperate claims of knowing the answers, despite thousands of pounds of taxpayers’ money spent in courtrooms to keep information from the Scottish people, the SNP has never taken advice on a separate Scotland’s place in the European Union. It does not know whether we would be spending pounds or euros. However, it is worse than that—when I and other party leaders tried to exact the truth, we were shouted down. The Deputy First Minister has told this chamber that she knows that Scotland would continue in the EU. In fact, in June, she said: “An independent Scotland will be a member of the European Union ... arguing otherwise ... is ... an utterly absurd position”—[Official Report, 21 June 2012; c 10388.] It is not absurd and the Deputy First Minister does not know. Monetary policy, EU membership—when will she stop trying to hoodwink the public on the big issues? Scotland needs to know, so when the Deputy First Minister eventually gets that advice, will she promise to publish not her interpretation, not SNP spin, but the actual advice, so that Scotland has the information that it needs to make this historic decision?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00888)

Last year, the principal of the University of Glasgow, Anton Muscatelli, warned that the funding gap for the First Minister’s policies would cause long-term damage to Scottish universities. Alex Salmond not only refused to listen to him; he quite publicly slapped him down. We are starting to see the full effects of the Scottish Government’s higher education policy. All but one of Scotland’s top universities are slipping down the world rankings, and one has tumbled out of the top 200 altogether. University principals such as Professor Muscatelli were right all along. Will the First Minister now admit that his policies are creating a deepening crisis in Scottish education?

Classic SNP playbook: attack the messenger, ignore the message, do not acknowledge responsibility and, for goodness’ sake, do not even think about answering the question. Perhaps the First Minister has spent too much time lolling on the greens in America to pay any attention to schools. Let me take the First Minister on a journey through Scotland’s education system: one child in every five leaves primary school unable to read and write properly; our teachers are confused about what they are supposed to do in the classroom because, as Professor Lindsay Paterson pointed out, there is no “clear leadership and focus in the implementation of curriculum for excellence”; 70,000 people are now denied a place at a further education college after tens of millions of pounds-worth of cuts to the budgets; and, shamefully, Scotland’s poorest and most disadvantaged students have seen vital bursaries cut by 34 per cent. From primary 1 to postgraduate, that is a catalogue of failure. Will the First Minister now do what his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning did and stand in the chamber and just admit that he was wrong?

2. To ask the Deputy First Minister when she will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00871)

I thank both of the honourable leaders for finally and belatedly bringing the debate on to grounds that the Conservatives have been talking about since before the last election. [Interruption.]

I chime hugely with Murdo Fraser and I am pleased to remind members that, indeed, there was only one party that did not take part in a Dutch auction in 2011 and had sound ideas for prescription charges, the council tax and student funding. Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth gave us what he said would be a budget for growth. He gave it a big build-up and he took to the newspapers and the airwaves. He said that every penny would be put towards the economy. That was a budget that fell apart within 24 hours and which has been decried by the leading economist Professor David Bell, by the construction industry chief Michael Levack and even by the Parliament’s own independent information service: the Scottish Parliament information centre. Let us give the Deputy First Minister a chance to repair the damage. What is the big game changer in 2013-14 that will give the Scottish economy the boost that John Swinney faithfully promised?

Nicola Sturgeon clearly read her colleague’s press release, but I am not sure that she read the 2013-14 budget, because the £80 million for schools does not kick in until at least a year later and the £40 million that went back into housing was to help to repair some of the damage that was caused by taking £100 million out of housing. The finance secretary has had a busy few days. At the point at which his budget was being picked apart, he was speaking to Scotland’s accountants. He told them that he would correct his leader’s words in January by saying that a separate Scotland would take on a share of the multitrillion pound banking debt. That follows Ms Sturgeon’s gaffe and subsequent U-turn on a place on the Bank of England monetary policy committee and the Scottish National Party’s collective economic illiteracy on a separate financial regulator for Scotland. This week has proved not just that the Government cannot write a budget for today, but that the Government has no idea how to construct a financial system for the future. It is a back-of-a-fag-packet Government, which pushes every hard question to a mythical white paper that we are supposed to expect late in 2013. The SNP is asking the people of Scotland to trust it with everything that they have, but it will not tell people how it would keep their money safe—it will not tell them anything at all. The Deputy First Minister has taken on the bank debt. Can she tell us, in pounds and pence, how much of that debt she is willing to take on? How much?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00856)

I find it extraordinary that a political party’s attempt to get information out of the Government of the day should be worthy of roars of laughter and derision from the Government. This is a Government that has been trying to block information being passed to the public. I also find it extraordinary that the First Minister wanted to compare this year with 2005. I have the figures in front of me. I do not know whether he was talking about 2004-05 or 2005-06, but in those two years the number of appeals that the then Government blocked was 166, compared with the past two years, when the number has gone up to 215. The case has cost us a six-figure sum—and that is before the two days scheduled in the Court of Session, so the cost is continuing to rise. Before the election last year, the First Minister spent more than £100,000 of taxpayers’ money to keep from voters his plans for a local income tax. How much of the taxpayers’ hard-earned money are he and his ministerial team spending to shore up his secret society and deny the people of Scotland information to which they are perfectly entitled?

I asked about cost, but I guess that the First Minister is keeping that secret too. We know about the two cases that have cost more than £100,000 each, but the Government has not told us that there have been 500 more appeals since the First Minister came to power. Is he so paranoid that even the smallest details are being blocked, such as requests about who he had been to the theatre with? [Interruption.]

If the First Minister is as open as he says he is—he appears not to be—then, at the risk of sparking yet another costly legal action against the interests of the people of Scotland, will he tell us, for example, what legal advice he has received about an independent Scotland leaving NATO?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00837)

I have a question about something much closer to home—perhaps the First Minister will not hide behind Government lawyers, ministerial codes or European spokesmen. When the First Minister’s deputy, Nicola Sturgeon, launched her new patient management system for appointments in Scotland’s national health service—I am sorry, but here is another quote—she assured us that “Communicating with patients is one of the areas that I am absolutely determined the NHS will improve on and this new system will help us achieve this.” The system comes at a cost of £44 million. If we look at just one health board, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, we see a system in meltdown—so much so that the board has had to cancel more than 7,500 in-patient appointments since the system’s introduction. Those appointments have been cancelled by the health board, not by patients. Does the First Minister still have confidence in a system that, from inception to implementation, is entirely the product of his Government?

Nicola Bevan got a card so everything is all right—fantastic. The 7,500 figure that I raised in my first question is shocking, but that is not half or even a tenth of the story. If we include out-patient appointments, since the system’s launch in NHS Ayrshire and Arran, a staggering 110,000 appointments have been cancelled by the NHS. For one in eight people who thought that they were going to get help, suddenly the phone goes and the patient is told, “The doctor cannot see you now”. At the launch of this shambles, the Deputy First Minister also said: “This new system will be much more efficient, faster and more secure”. She said that it would also be better for the environment. Well, it is not better for patients. There is nowhere for the SNP to hide and there is no one else to blame—the First Minister should not look south of the border. For once in his life, will he take some responsibility, order an investigation into this chaos and get it sorted as a matter of urgency?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00818)

That is good to hear. It is also good to see that the cheery bonhomie between the First Minister and the leader of the Labour Party that we left off from in June has resumed. We now know that the Scottish Government is happy to sacrifice a latter-day Nye Bevan on health in the pursuit of the break-up of Britain. Over the summer, we watched higher education descend into chaos. [Interruption.]

To be frank, justice has been little more than an afterthought for the Scottish National Party. Yesterday, Mike Russell said that the SNP wants to be judged on its record, so I ask the First Minister how many convicted killers and rapists, for example, have been released early under the SNP.

That was a truly stunning lap in the bluster Scolympics, but I asked about rapists and murderers. The First Minister should have those figures—they should be in his book—because they are Government figures:161 rapists and 277 killers are among the nearly 5,000 of the most violent people in our society who have been released early, back on to Scotland’s streets, since he came to power. We know that the judges do not like early release because Lord Ross has called it “a charade”. The First Minister is today keen on opinion polls, but we know that the public do not like early release because 95 per cent of them oppose it. There is a simple remedy; the First Minister has even announced a victims bill for this parliamentary session, but in it is not a single word about automatic early release. Will the First Minister now act on the manifesto promises that he made in 2007 and in 2011, or is he personally content with these people roaming Scotland’s streets?

It is the first day of term and the First Minister is already getting a row from the teacher. Let us look at how the First Minister spent his summer. He went to the golf, the tennis and the book festival. He enjoyed some fizz at the television festival, hoovered up the canapés at the “Brave” première, brought his own vol-au-vents and put on his own party at the Olympics—sorry, the Scolympics—and spent as much time rushing towards the buffet table as he did avoiding the negotiating table. It would also appear that he spent even less time at his desk doing the job that he was elected to do, which is to run a Scottish Government that has competency over health, education, justice, transport and finance. There is no doubt that the number of bills announced by the First Minister will occupy the time of Parliament over the coming session, nor is there doubt that with an overall majority in the chamber, ministers will get their way on most of—if not all—the measures. However, it is debatable whether, when Parliament rises for its recess next summer, the passage of those bills will have made changes to Scotland that will have benefited the man or woman in the street.

I am sorry. Can you let me progress, please? On the strength of the array of bills that were flagged up today, the answer seems to be clear. The Scottish Government’s approach is, “Never mind the quality, just feel the width”. It is a legislative programme that throws into sharp relief the rhetoric of a Government that claimed upon its election to stand for the Scottish national interest but which, over the course of the past 12 months, has shown itself to be interested only in promoting the Scottish National Party’s interest. The First Minister dresses it up as a legislative programme about the economy, but it is, rather, a programme that is dominated by one thing, and by one thing only: the Scottish Government’s obsession with tearing apart the United Kingdom. It singularly fails to address the most pressing concerns of the Scottish people. I thank the First Minister for advance sight of his speech. I should not have been surprised at the bluster, the assertion and the highly selective use of figures that has become the hallmark of this Government, but once again I was surprised. Let us take a look at some of his soft-shoe shuffles. “There has never been an economic recovery without a recovery in the construction sector.” That, from a Government that has slashed tens of millions of pounds from the housing budget and overseen a slump in the building of new homes to its lowest level in a decade and a half. Next, the First Minister said that the Government “will develop a system of education and training that meets the needs of learners and employers”. That, from a Government that is reducing college funding year on year and which is strong-arming mergers through.

Let us look at the capital spend figures. We have already heard the old lie about shovel-ready projects and Westminster’s demands for infrastructure. Neither Kevin Stewart, the front bench nor the First Minister has acknowledged the extra £1 billion that has come Scotland’s way since the 2010 comprehensive spending review. The First Minister has selected fantasy figures that are predicated on an oil price that is already out of date and not in the Government’s favour, and which take no account of Scotland’s liabilities, such as the £102 billion of pensions liabilities, a proportion of the UK national debt, and costs from the banking crisis that was made in Edinburgh and not in the London that the First Minister loves to blame.

Does the First Minister accept that he has had £1 billion in extra cash from the 2010 spending review? He will never admit to it, because he is all about priorities of spending on capital projects. The First Minister’s selective citing of figures is about one simple thing—bolstering the referendum bill, which will provide no answers to Scotland’s problems. Quite the contrary is true: it is a bill that cannot even decide on the number of questions. I, Johann Lamont and Willie Rennie have tried to help the First Minister. We commissioned a panel of respected independent experts to draft a fair, legal and decisive question for the referendum. We have even written to the First Minister about the panel’s recommendations and have offered to meet him to discuss them and to help him to proceed with the issue. What have we got? We have a flat refusal. His shilly-shallying around talks to thrash out the issue with the UK Government shows his reluctance to take a single fair question to the people of Scotland. What of the 26,000 consultation responses that were promised to us by the end of the summer? Here we are in September and we have not heard a peep. His national conversation has turned out to be little more than a national monologue. The First Minister speaks and everyone else is expected just to listen, and anyone who has a view other than the one that he already holds is not welcome to take part. Let us look at the rest of the First Minister’s offering, because I do not want to be wholly negative; after all, I am not the leader of the Labour Party. I am pleased to see that the Scottish National Party has found room for measures to reform the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Perhaps, in the future, we might even see the Scottish Government accepting the rulings of the freedom of information commissioner rather than mounting costly appeals to try to block the release of information on whether ministers hold legal advice on the status of an independent Scotland within the European Union—all at the taxpayer’s expense. The proposed equal marriage bill has been largely debated through the media and it now will be aired in the chamber. I hope that the issue, which ignites passions and reveals firmly-held views, can be debated freely and in a manner that shows courtesy and respect to members from all sides of the debate, thereby demonstrating the Parliament at its best and ensuring that the level of debate is elevated, and not diminished. It will also be a vote of conscience for MSPs from the Scottish Conservative Party. On the criminal justice bill, Lord Carloway should be commended for his work, but changes to corroboration should be part of a wider review of the law of evidence and should not be considered in isolation. However, I am surprised by the First Minister’s repeated reference to university applications. Only under the SNP could we expect the debacle of Scottish students being turned away from Scottish universities in favour of students from south of the border, because ministers refused to pay attention to the warnings that they were creating a two-tier admission system. Only under the SNP would we be completely unsurprised that, with nobody but themselves to blame, the existence of the problem is simply denied. All the Scottish students who have been turned away from Scottish universities in favour of students from south of the border must simply have imagined it.

I am sorry. I am already over my time. It is clear where the First Minister’s priorities lie, and they are not the priorities of Scotland’s people. Their priorities are economic recovery and jobs. We hear lip service from the First Minister, but the track record tells a different story.

We have a Scotland-only retail tax that is pummelling businesses, and now we see, with a sucker punch, Scotland’s property owners being floored by the SNP’s plans to slash the value of empty property relief and to raise business rates on properties by up to 80 per cent. It is the legislative programme of a Government that has run out of steam and run out of ideas, and which fails to live up to the ambitions of Scotland’s people. It is a programme that seeks to create the illusion of activity through a plethora of policies, but which somehow contrives to be somewhat less than the sum of its parts. It is the programme of a Government—

It is the programme of a Government that has been reduced to a simple, overriding goal: to break Scotland away from the rest of the United Kingdom. It is not a programme of success for Scotland but a product of this First Minister’s fear of failure.

I did not quite understand—[Interruption.]

My card is not in my console—it is my fault. I hold my hand up, Presiding Officer, and I apologise.

I apologise to the member for the oversight. Does the member suggest that the Scottish Government did not cut investment in housing by more than £100 million over four years, from £389.6 million to £272.7 million? If that is what he suggests, he should probably tell the finance secretary about it.

2. I thank the First Minister for his letter in which he apologised to me for saying in the chamber last week that the Scottish Conservatives did not respond to his consultation. I am glad that he was able to put the record straight. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00795)

A month ago, the First Minister spared no expense in shipping in Atlantic ex-pats to add a touch of celebrity and glamour to the launch of his separation campaign. It was a launch the like of which we had never seen. In fact, it was remarkable in one completely undisputed way—it was the first campaign launch in political history to produce a bounce for its opponents. However, since last month, the Greens have taken their ball away; we heard that a rapid relaunch was ordered from nat high command, and that is what we have seen. We now know that Dennis Canavan is going to be the new chair of the yes Scotland campaign. The First Minister has read out everybody else’s name. Can he tell us what Mr Canavan’s views are on the referendum question?

I know that I am relatively new at this, but I am kind of getting used to all the assertion and bluster. I am pretty sure that the First Minister has no idea what Dennis Canavan’s views are on the referendum question, so let me share those views with Parliament. Just in April this year, the new chair of the separatist campaign said that he supports a single question, because otherwise “It’s completely confusing to the electorate with all this devo-plus and devo-max.” The chair of the yes Scotland campaign is in favour of a single question, the better together campaign is in favour of a single question, and every major party in this Parliament is in favour of a single question. Will the First Minister confirm today, ahead of whenever his next relaunch will be, that his Government and his party will back Dennis Canavan and support a single referendum question?

2. When the Deputy First Minister says that the Scottish National Party has been in favour of keeping the Queen “since 1934”, that possibly means 7.34 last night rather than 1934, when the Queen was not on the throne. To ask the Deputy First Minister when she will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00775)

The Deputy First Minister has said that she has sympathy with the doctors who are striking today and understands their frustration and anger at pension changes that they say are unfair. Will she explain to the Parliament precisely what she finds so unfair about an annual pension of £68,000?

I did not hear anything in that response from the Deputy First Minister about why £68,000 is an unfair pension income or about whether she would increase that at the expense of lower-paid public sector workers. All we had was more SNP grandstanding that it would do something different, just do not ask what. On the point about sitting round the negotiating table, the Deputy First Minister knows fine well that the Department of Health had 23 meetings on pensions with the BMA, including five between the Secretary of State for Health and the head of the BMA. Given that the responsibility of the Deputy First Minister and her Government is to stand up for the patients who are affected today and for the taxpayers, who finance three quarters of the multibillion pound pension bill—

I ask the Deputy First Minister how many appointments have been cancelled in Scotland because of the industrial action, how many operations have had to be postponed and how many patients have been denied treatment by their NHS because the taxpayers’ contribution of £50,000 a year to a £68,000 pension is not deemed to be enough.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00750)

I am sure that the First Minister kept his seat warm for him. Let us stick with yesterday’s testimony. When Rupert Murdoch’s new baby, The Sun on Sunday, was launched, Alex Salmond was the first edition’s poster boy. He gave exclusive access and a full interview—nothing was off the table. The same edition had a front-page splash that said “Day of Destiny” and “Revealed” the date of the referendum. Yesterday, the First Minister said that he did not leak the date—indeed, it could not have been leaked because apparently you cannot leak a possibility. However, he did not say whether that date was given to The Sun as a possibility by one of his advisers. Did it come from the First Minister’s office—from a spin doctor, a civil servant or another adviser—and did he approve the date’s release?

It seems that all the charm and candour was used up yesterday and the First Minister is back to his usual self today. That was just like the First Minister—attacking anyone else and not answering the question. We were told: “a Scottish Government source said: ‘This date is being lined up as the day when people will get the chance to vote for independence ... for Scotland.’” Alex Salmond asks people to trust him on the issue, but we should look at the record of the past few weeks. The First Minister asserts that he has cross-party support for the independence campaign—no, he does not. He says that he knows that Scotland would not have to apply to join the euro—no, he does not. He asserts that he can put a Scot on the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee—no, he cannot. He asserts that Scotland can just use the Financial Services Authority as a financial regulator—no, we cannot. He is making it up as he goes along. He is getting found out and people are watching. People are looking for real answers to legitimate questions about the future of Scotland, but the First Minister is selling Scotland short by refusing to give them. Does he really think that, based on past performance, people will believe him any more?

2. I have met the Prime Minister of Lower Saxony this morning and I, too, wish the First Minister well for their discussions later today. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00738)

This week saw a British aid worker being rescued in Afghanistan in a textbook raid by United Kingdom special forces. The daily work of our security forces at home is to look after our people and our assets. The First Minister has repeatedly staked the economic stability of a separate Scotland on North Sea oil and gas. Those assets are currently protected by the full range of the British security services, including the marines, special forces and the intelligence community. The Scottish National Party’s defence spokesman, Angus Robertson, has conceded that it would be imperative to ensure that our oil and gas fields are adequately protected. As Angus Robertson has identified the need, has Alex Salmond come up with the plan? Will a separate Scotland have its own special forces?

As he has mentioned Norway, I am sure that the First Minister will want to join me in welcoming the Prime Minister’s announcement this morning of an energy partnership with Norway, which will see multibillion pound investment in the North Sea. However, the First Minister somewhat misses the point. Former Special Air Service deputy commander, Clive Fairweather, has said that special forces expertise is vital for looking after our oil and gas assets and that it would take Scotland years to build its own regiment at a cost of tens of millions of pounds. The First Minister's fag-packet blueprint for defence, which was unveiled in January, has one naval base, one air base and one army brigade. Special forces were conspicuous only by their absence. Norway has special forces. Would Scotland have the same? We did not hear a peep about special forces, a Scottish MI5, a Scottish MI6 or Government communications headquarters monitoring. We know from a few moments ago that the First Minister is happy to rely on the Bank of England to be the lender of last resort, but is he content to have what would be the special forces of another country as Scotland’s defence of last resort, too?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00718)

I am not sure whether I have asked in advance whether this is the right question, but I am going to be old-fashioned and press on anyway. Three weeks ago, I asked the First Minister about Northern Irish pupils using Irish passports to receive free tuition at Scottish universities. At his high-handed and patronising best, the First Minister told me that there was no evidence of any serious difficulty. As we know, where the First Minister leads the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is only too eager to follow. This week, in a letter to my colleague Liz Smith, he, too, was magisterially dismissive of legitimate concerns. Refusing to make a statement to Parliament, he said that “doing so might risk attaching a level of importance to this that is out of proportion to experience on the ground”. Well, the evidence does exist. Figures have emerged from the University of Dundee showing that almost a quarter of the more than 1,500 applicants from Northern Ireland used an Irish passport, with a potential cost to Dundee alone of more than £14 million. Will the First Minister now admit that there is a real problem and instruct his education secretary to sort it out?

The First Minister is yet again giving us the broad brush but not looking at the detail. How many of those applying were doing so under an Irish passport? That is the question that the First Minister has to answer. Yet again, he is running off to shore up his flailing education secretary, but what is interesting about Mike Russell’s letter is that he kind of contradicts himself. It comes down to this idea of domicile and residency. There is a boast in the letter when Mike Russell says that he is absolutely clear that the domicile is the deciding criterion, but in the next sentence he contradicts himself by saying that those with dual nationality get to choose. Again, we come back to whether the criterion is domicile, nationality or residency. Our universities and students are desperate for clarity, which Mike Russell says in his letter he hopes to come up with next year, but not this year. Will the First Minister break the habit of a lifetime, admit that this is a total Horlicks, step in, sort it out and give our universities clarity now?

Does the First Minister count among his number my deputy, all the political editors of Scotland and everyone else whose Twitter picture was harvested and used so egregiously against their wishes in support of that campaign?

I congratulate the First Minister on the tone he has struck in this debate. If we are measuring followers, he might like to know that more people were in the gallery for education questions than there are for the debate on this historic motion. At some point in the next two and a half years, Scotland will be asked to choose and its decision will determine not only the standard of living that we enjoy but the standard of living of our children, our grandchildren and generations to come. If that decision is to separate from the rest of the UK, there can be no turning back, change of mind or reversal at the ballot box in five years’ time. England, Wales and Northern Ireland will go one way and Scotland another. Given the fundamental nature of the question and the monumental effects of a vote to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK, the very least that we should be able to expect is a clear articulation by the proponents of separation of what they mean by independence and what a separate Scotland will really look like. In fact, probably the most remarkable thing about the debate on Scotland’s future is the unwillingness—or perhaps even the inability—of the SNP to define exactly what it means by independence or to give any indication, as exemplified by the First Minister’s performance at lunch time, that it has undertaken any preparatory work at all to check that what it asserts will happen is even possible. On one hand, the SNP argues that independence—separating from England, Wales and Northern Ireland—would transform Scotland but, on the other, it argues that very little would change: sterling would still be our currency, we would continue to have membership of the European Union and the Queen would remain our head of state. Let us deal with some of the issues that have been raised in the debate, and let us deal in fact. A newly separate Scotland, which would have a large fiscal deficit and would be saddled with significant public debt, would not only face the loss of its AAA credit rating but be left with a choice between increased borrowing costs—

Even if we accept the SNP Government’s definition of Scotland’s geographical share of North Sea oil, Scotland faces an overall fiscal deficit that amounted to £10.7 billion in the most recent financial year. Senior economists predict that the position will worsen next year, because of the situation with oil revenues. If we add to that the fact that the fiscal deficit would worsen—this is where we get on to the UK—when an independent Scotland was obliged to assume its £80 billion share of the UK’s net public debt, the economic reality becomes pretty clear.

I will make progress, thank you. We would be left with a choice between increased borrowing costs and rapidly reducing our debt level through deeper cuts in public spending. There would be higher mortgage rates, higher personal taxes and cuts to public moneys. On top of that, there is the fundamental matter of currency, on which I will gladly give way to the First Minister.

I am sure that the First Minister will agree that, without the size, the strength and the credit rating history of the UK, a newly separate Scotland would not keep its AAA credit rating. However, let us move on to the currency. Following the First Minister’s long flirtation with the euro, even he has been forced to admit that it would be a disaster for Scotland, so the solution is to keep sterling and to continue to have the Bank of England as the lender of last resort. If the Bank of England were to be the lender of last resort, what remained of the UK would need to oversee Scotland’s fiscal management. If an independent Scotland were to submit to such control over its monetary and fiscal policy, what kind of independence would that be? There would be more confusion, more risk and more needless uncertainty. That is not a future that I want for my country, because Scotland deserves better. I love my country. My country is Scotland, and I bow to no one in my commitment to Scotland and the wellbeing of our people but, like most Scots, my pride in my country and my sense of patriotism are not threatened by the British component of my identity—far from it. Like the majority of Scots, I celebrate it and draw strength from it. Among the greatest strengths of the UK is the diversity of its cultures, which is reflected in Scotland. We have Asian Scots, French Scots, Italian Scots and German Scots, but the one thing that you cannot be in the SNP’s vision of the future is a British Scot. This debate is about the future. It is about the future of my family and of everyone else’s family. Let us imagine for a moment that Scotland had not been a partner in the UK for the past 300 years, but that it now had the chance to join it. Through membership of the UK, Scotland would gain trading opportunities and access to international markets, as a result of which it would secure jobs and investment. It would gain the advantages of an integrated economy and the ability to weather the economic storms that have devastated small countries, and it would have the clout on the international stage that membership of the G8 offers, which would allow us to stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies as part of the most successful military alliance in the world. It would gain safety and security through having an integrated defence force, backed by special forces, and security services, such as MI5 and MI6, that are the envy of other nations—[Interruption.]

Who but the most starry-eyed of nationalists would deliberately not choose those advantages?

Those are precisely the advantages that the First Minister and his Government are calling on the Scottish people to surrender. This debate is about the future. We are stronger together than we would be apart. The United Kingdom has massive achievements to its name and a positive future through working together, pooling our resources and sharing our rewards. I want the next generation to inherit a more prosperous, confident Scotland, and that is why I must support the amendment in Johann Lamont’s name.

As the member is making judgments about things happening in Scotland versus things happening in London, I am interested to know why he was on the march in London when there was a march in Glasgow on the same day.

Will the member give way?

I echo the sentiments of the previous speakers and add my support for the motion. In this place, in this chamber—our fledgling Parliament—we have just cause to mark the Queen’s constancy, service and duty in an ever-changing world. When the first Scottish Parliament for several centuries convened less than a mile from here, the Queen presented at its official opening a mace hammered from silver and carrying a band of gold that was panned from Scottish rivers, signifying a Parliament that is wedded to the people of Scotland. It sits before us here in the chamber, bearing its legend: wisdom, justice, compassion and integrity. Those are the qualities that Scots desire and demand from those who make their laws. It is, as well as for we who received it, a fitting legend for the giver: for Scotland’s unelected leader and monarch. For 4 million of Scotland’s people, the Queen has always been there as a constant—gaining succession in 1952 and being crowned the next year, and beginning a life of service before many of us were born. Those of a more mature vintage remember the vibrant 26-year-old, who had already started representing her father on state occasions, taking up office in a time of grief and dedicating herself to the demands that the role dictates. Although there is, rightly, a separation between Parliament and palace, and between politics and monarchy, the Queen is head of state and is an integral part of the process of government. From Winston Churchill to David Cameron, and now taking in Alex Salmond, Peter Robinson and Carwyn Jones, the Queen has been a source of wisdom and reference for the UK’s political leaders, and her reach and resonance extend far beyond these shores. President Obama, in his recent state visit, remarked that when it came to US presidents and UK prime ministers, the Queen had seen off about a dozen of each. He concluded that it made her “a living witness to the power of our alliance and the chief source of its resilience”. As the son of a Kenyan economist father and an anthropologist mother, and as someone who has been described as being of Scottish, German, Irish and Welsh ancestry, President Obama may have more insight than most regarding the global resonance of the current Queen. She has worked tirelessly in an ever-changing world to promote the ideals and alliances of the Commonwealth. We must remember that she is not just our Queen. As head of a Commonwealth of 54 independent states, she plays a leadership role to 2 billion people from all regions of the world, and of all faiths and ethnicities. No monarch has travelled as widely nor met as many citizens of the world as our current Queen has in spreading the Commonwealth ideals of democracy, freedom, peace, the rule of law and opportunity for all, with Prince Philip ever at her side. We speak today of the great history of service that the Queen has given, but we must not allow Her Majesty to be treated purely as a living history: her place in the world has a resonance and relevance that continues and endures. Half of all Commonwealth citizens—a full billion of the world’s population—are under the age of 25, and the Queen speaks directly to them. She speaks to the people of Rwanda, the newest addition to the Commonwealth family, which was admitted only in 2009. Like Mozambique, Rwanda is a country that has no historical links to Britain, but it sees membership as being a mark of political development and the Queen as a beacon of public service the world over. The Queen speaks to the soldier joining the British Army, the sailor signing up for the Royal Canadian Navy and the airman enlisting in the Royal New Zealand Air Force today. They pledge an oath of allegiance to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II, and her heirs and successors before ever being allowed to wear a uniform. Here, too, in the Scottish Parliament, we take our own oath. With every new intake of MSPs, with every official opening presided over by Her Majesty, with every speech and every debate, and with every pledge to be the best representatives of the political life of Scotland that we can be, we stand before the mace, which was gifted to the Parliament by the Queen, and read the words: wisdom, compassion, justice and integrity. They are the guide for how we should aspire to act in the chamber and in the world, and they are the qualities that have been perfectly espoused and embodied for 60 years by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. I am proud to support the motion—not just to congratulate Her Majesty on the occasion of her diamond jubilee, but to express gratitude. She has been our representative in the world for 60 years, and we could not have asked for one finer.

2. If the First Minister is looking at what is on at Cineworld tomorrow, I say for his information that “Dark Shadows” and “The Dictator” are playing. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00692)

Two years ago, the Scottish National Party Government withdrew its commitment to publicly fund the new sick kids hospital in Edinburgh. Yesterday, NHS Lothian confirmed that the project has been delayed yet again—not for the first or second time but for the fifth time. The health secretary approved the plans that promised us a new sick kids that would be completed by early next year. When will the doors open at a new children’s hospital facility in Edinburgh?

Those excuses do not work. The Government promised a hospital and the hospital has not been built. I can tell the First Minister that the projected date of completion has now slipped to 2017, but the sad truth is that the chair of NHS Lothian reported yesterday that NHS Lothian is being forced to prepare a plan B, which would keep the hospital at the old site. I have a personal interest, as I am one of the many thousands of people across Scotland whose lives were saved by the specialist care that they received at the sick kids hospital in Edinburgh. I know how beloved the old Sciennes building is. However, the site’s limitations, the building’s age and its distance from an acute emergency hospital mean that the facility is no longer suitable to provide the world-class care that our children deserve into the future. Plan B is not good enough. Plan A has slipped five times on the First Minister’s watch. The Government cannot sit on its hands and let the project fall apart, because it is too important. Will the First Minister now show the political leadership that patients and their families expect? Will he make the hospital a political priority and bring to bear all the power that the Government has to get the players round the table, to get the bricks laid, to get the doors open and to get children treated by 2017?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00667)

It is a topsy-turvy week when the First Minister is quoted as saying that he will have to wait 1,000 days to have even a long shot at winning a referendum. A fortnight ago, I and other members asked the First Minister a simple question—a question that he said he would not answer because he would tell all only to the Leveson inquiry. Unfortunately for the First Minister, Lord Leveson has entered the fray, saying that he is not in any way seeking to challenge the ability of Parliaments to proceed as appropriate. So I ask the First Minister again: was he hacked?

Perhaps the First Minister should accept this quotation from a Scottish parliamentary spokesman, who said this week: “Ministers are accountable to the Scottish Parliament, and it is the role of MSPs to hold Ministers to account.” I am doing my job, and I am asking the First Minister to do his. He is accountable to the Parliament and to the people of Scotland, but he is currently holding both of them in contempt. Therefore, I continue to ask: First Minister, were you hacked?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00655)

The First Minister says that he wants to engage in a substantive issue so let us do so. When ministers allowed universities to charge students from the rest of the United Kingdom, they said that the whole system would be based on where someone lives. Anyone who lives in England, Wales or Northern Ireland would have to pay up to £9,000. A week ago, all that started to unravel when Northern Irish pupils were told that possession of an Irish passport could result in their fees being met by Scottish taxpayers. Yesterday, we found out that any UK citizen who has an Irish granny can get in for free through that loophole. It now emerges that anyone with a grandparent from any of the other 26 European Union nations could have their fees paid by Scottish taxpayers. The Scottish Government’s defence for such a massive amount of confusion appears to be that no one has noticed yet so it will all be all right. That is not good enough. We need to clear up the confusion. We need to fix the Guinness loophole. Mike Russell said that fees would be paid according to where a person lives. It now appears that what matters is the passport that a person holds. Which is it?

If joint citizenship applications are old news—old news that was put out by the Government only this morning—why were they not identified in the consultation on the 2011 order? Confusion has been compounded by complacency. It is not just the Conservatives who are asking these questions. Robin Parker, the National Union of Students Scotland president, who speaks for students, says that he is desperate for clarity and the president of the University and Colleges Union, Gordon Watson, has warned that a huge rise in such applications is likely next year. Scottish taxpayers already fund EU students at our universities to the tune of £75 million a year, but the continued incompetence of the education secretary could cost untold millions and see thousands of Scots unable to study in their own country. Apparently, the introduction of rest of UK fees was supposed to stop Scottish students getting crowded out of Scottish universities but this shambles makes a mockery of that aim and blows apart the budgets of our universities, which have already set fees for people who now might not have to pay. Given that the education secretary is in denial, will the First Minister step in and sort this out?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00637)

Let us simplify this a little. We know that the former First Minister Jack McConnell and his children were hacked. We know that the current First Minister’s close parliamentary aide was hacked. Parliament and the people of Scotland deserve to be told whether the First Minister was hacked. The First Minister’s spokesman has repeatedly said that his boss will reveal all to the Leveson inquiry, but the First Minister reports to this Parliament, so this is his big opportunity. Dodging the question now, only to reveal all when he takes the stand later, will look like media manipulation of the very worst kind. Is it the case that the First Minister was hacked but did not speak out to protect his new best pal, or did Rupert not need to bother tapping the First Minister’s phone because he was already on speed dial? Parliament is asking and Scotland is watching. Was the First Minister hacked?

Let us talk of inquiries, then. [Interruption.] The First Minister wants to speak at the Leveson inquiry. We have a First Minister who is willing to speak at an English inquiry but not to hold one in Scotland. [Interruption.]

An inquiry in England—[Interruption.]

The First Minister says that the police have primacy because their investigations are continuing, but the Culture, Media and Sport Committee at Westminster managed to hold an inquiry. When it comes to the First Minister’s conduct, we in Scotland need to look deeper than Leveson allows. Therefore, I support calls for an inquiry in the Parliament, especially when the First Minister’s intervention appears to contravene a law of his own making. The Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008 states: “In particular, the First Minister … must not seek to influence particular judicial decisions through any special access to the judiciary”. The United Kingdom Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport was acting in a quasi-judicial role on BSkyB, and the First Minister has admitted that he sought to influence him. Indeed, there were desperate calls between their offices. Surely—[Interruption.]

Surely, when there are questions as to whether a First Minister of Scotland may have acted in contravention of Scots law, a parliamentary inquiry is the minimum to which we are entitled.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00636)

While we are on the topic of New York-based billionaires, the First Minister was asked by the Local Government and Communities Committee in January 2008 whether he had met before the previous December any members of the Trump Organization. He replied that he had met representatives at the Menie estate on 24 September 2007. He did not mention the Donald, candlelit Manhattan dinners or talking for hours on their favoured subjects of golf and wind farms, but such a dinner occurred just three months before the committee meeting. Did the First Minister intentionally mislead Parliament or did he just forget, in the glory of supping with Murdoch one night, that he had supped with Trump the next night?

If the First Minister had nothing to hide from a 12-man dinner, why not tell the committee about it just three months later? With his overweening self-regard, the First Minister never knowingly undersells what he believes to be his political gifts, but I do not think that even he thought that he had the skills to make Donald Trump look credible. We know that the dinner that Alex Salmond failed to disclose to the committee took place—I thank him for finally admitting that. We know that he and Donald talked for hours. We know that they talked about golf and wind farms. Is the First Minister seriously asking the Scottish people to believe that, when a multibillionaire who was attracted to Scotland with great fanfare by the First Minister’s predecessor was threatening to pull the plug as soon as the First Minister took office, he did not—like some latter-day Arthur Daley—tell his new best pal that he would get it sorted? Something here stinks. Will the First Minister set the record straight and state categorically before the chamber that no such discussions on planning or wind farms took place?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00605)

I am sure that we will hear a great deal from the First Minister about the additional powers that will be coming to the Scottish Parliament as of yesterday and how he plans to use them. Does the First Minister support “the essential role nuclear weapons play in” the NATO “Alliance’s strategy of war prevention”? That support is a precondition for new members in chapter 4 of the 1995 “Study on NATO Enlargement”.

Those 25 members are signed up to the strategy. I am proud that the United Kingdom is a founder member of NATO. I am proud that, after the unimaginable horrors on our doorstep, we chose to stand together with other responsible nations to prevent such atrocities from every happening again. I am proud that for more than 60 years the UK, with NATO, has acted to protect its allies in Europe. That has been the case in spite of the Scottish National Party’s opposition to the missions in Bosnia, Macedonia and Kosovo—a mission to stop ethnic cleansing on Europe’s shore, which the First Minister disgracefully called “unpardonable folly”. We hear that the SNP is to debate whether to change its opposition to NATO—and not before time. The First Minister has already flip-flopped on his positions on the pound, the Queen, and the Bank of England—all have been sacrificed on the altar of political expediency. How will he now show leadership and have his party positively embrace the essential role of nuclear weapons in NATO, without flip-flopping on his party’s demands for the rapid removal of a nuclear deterrent from Scotland’s waters?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00589)

Johann Lamont has just rightly raised a string of Scottish National Party Government failures on education, which will result by the end of the current session of Parliament in a generation of schoolchildren who have been failed by the SNP. The Government’s answer—apart from attacking the critic—is that curriculum for excellence will solve all the problems. That claim was directly attacked by teaching unions yesterday as “not credible”. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was even more blasé, dismissing the worrying maths failures as “the same as they have been for the last few generations”. What a depressing lack of ambition. Is the First Minister satisfied that Mike Russell’s answer is good enough?

Chic Brodie tried to get into the conference, for a start. There was no attempt in that answer to address the massive drop-off in standards that is failing our secondary school pupils. That is why the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association said that using curriculum for excellence as a sticking plaster is not a credible position. Last week, the education secretary was forced into a U-turn because teachers know that their schools are simply not ready to deliver the new exams. He had been turning a deaf ear to them for months. It is not just teachers: chairs of university courts are deeply unhappy about the Government’s plans for university governance, and college students are worried about cut courses. One of our most respected educationists, Professor Lindsay Paterson, is warning that teachers are being failed in their training and that many are not competent enough to teach maths. That comes 15 months after the Government’s own report, by Graham Donaldson, said the same thing. Amid that growing chorus of criticism, we have an education secretary who is arrogant enough to think that he knows better than the educational experts, the universities and the college students, and who is magisterially dismissive of schoolteachers. Is it not time for the First Minister to get on top of the education secretary, call him into his office and demand that he stops failing Scotland’s young people?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00554)

Indeed. Can the First Minister say how much money has been diverted within the health budget in Scotland to fund free prescriptions for people like him, who are perfectly willing and able to pay?

I am happy to talk about the 73,000 people taken out of tax altogether, the 2.1 million people who see their tax rate rise, and the biggest rise in pensions, which will benefit pensioners across the country. However, those are not the numbers that I asked the First Minister for. I will give him the numbers that I asked for. The Government’s own figure is that £130 million will have been spent on funding free prescriptions by the end of this month alone. There is £130 million to buy votes at the last election, but, as we heard last week, there is no money for a cancer drug fund. There is £130 million for free prescriptions, but the Royal College of Nursing tells us this week that there is less money for nurses on the front line and—despite the First Minister’s protestations today—that the number of nurses in Scotland is the lowest for six years. There is a £130 million bill for free prescriptions, but yesterday a health board was found to be fiddling the figures because it was missing its targets. Today, the British Medical Association says that even visiting the family doctor means getting treated in substandard conditions in crumbling buildings. Government is all about choices. Will the First Minister now admit that there are far greater needs in Scotland’s health service than a free prescription giveaway, which is his choice?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00531)

Earlier this week, the Scottish Medicines Consortium decided not to approve the drug abiraterone for men in Scotland who are suffering from advanced prostate cancer. Abiraterone is the drug that has been used so successfully to extend the life of Mr Megrahi since the Scottish Government sent him home to die. In a battle against a cancer that costs so many hundreds of Scottish men their lives every year, there have been few advances. This drug is one. Will the First Minister act to give cancer sufferers greater access to important new drugs?

The First Minister misrepresents what I was asking: I was not asking him to overrule the SMC, which is indeed independent and thorough. There is an obvious solution—a Scottish cancer drugs fund. My predecessor, Annabel Goldie, raised the issue with the First Minister 14 months ago; Conservatives then met him and his health secretary; and we brought the issue to the chamber for debate as recently as September last year. In other parts of the United Kingdom, we have seen the huge impact of the cancer drugs fund for sufferers and their families. To date, 12,000 people have had their lives extended through the cancer drugs fund. What possible excuse does the First Minister have for refusing the same opportunity to cancer sufferers in Scotland? Government is about choices. The First Minister chose to find £50 million to give free prescriptions to people such as himself who can afford to pay for them, but he is choosing not to find a more modest sum to extend and improve the lives of Scots with fatal conditions. Will he now make a different choice? Will he now—14 months down the line, and after countless premature deaths—reconsider, intervene and support a Scottish cancer drugs fund?

Despite the cabinet secretary’s sense of déjà vu, the Scottish Conservatives approach this debate rather differently from our approaches to previous debates on minimum pricing policies for the 2010 Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. I feel that it is incumbent upon me to explain why that is the case. We have always appreciated that many problems arise from the irresponsible use of alcohol. My area of Glasgow suffers from some of the most acute alcohol-related health and social problems in the United Kingdom. The fact that there is an issue that needs to be addressed is not seriously in dispute in the chamber, but when the state enters this arena, we should be mindful that many of the policies that we propose will come to very little if society is unwilling to move with them. We need a change in the attitude and relationship that many Scots have with alcohol. Price has a part to play—but only a part—and we hope that once minimum pricing is resolved we can move the debate on much further to changing the culture. That is why we must view minimum pricing not in isolation, but as a building block in a wider range of initiatives. In 2010, Scottish Conservatives were sceptical. After all, new powers over alcohol misuse had recently been introduced, with little time to come into effect. The evidence that was presented to the Health and Sport Committee on the minimum pricing proposals was less than convincing. However, the updated Sheffield study goes some way towards demonstrating that the bill before us has the potential to provide meaningful benefits to Scottish communities. In addition, I recognise and welcome the evidence from Canada, which has been useful in providing some empirical rather than theoretical support for the Scottish Government’s position. While the suggested benefits to Scotland are difficult to prove, conversely it is extremely difficult to suggest that minimum pricing will have no clear benefit for health and social problems. The case suggesting that lives may be saved, or that there may be a reduction in the enormous number of acute hospital admissions linked to alcohol, is worth pursuing. With such high stakes, it is reasonable that we are open minded. In 2012, while we remain sceptical, we are prepared to support the bill, subject to several important caveats. First, we intend to introduce a sunset clause amendment at stage 2, which the Scottish Government has indicated that it will support. A five-year period will allow us all to examine whether minimum pricing can have a material impact in Scotland and will give us the data that Dr Simpson wants to see. However, that will happen only if we are prepared to allow a robust study of the policy’s impact. We have proposed that outcomes be measured against a control group from a similar area elsewhere in the United Kingdom where minimum pricing has not been implemented. We must give the bill every chance to succeed in helping with Scotland’s alcohol problem and assess its benefits rationally, based on the evidence. If minimum pricing does not make the difference, the legislation should not be left on the books; if it does, the Parliament will have the opportunity to refresh it in the next session. Are the proposals legal within EU law? The Scottish Government has stated that it is confident in its position that minimum pricing is entirely legal, but we favour further evidence rather than assertion, given the previous case load of the European Court of Justice and statements that the European Commission has made on the subject. We have therefore proposed that minimum pricing be subject to voluntary notification to the European Commission, which will in turn offer an opinion on its compliance with EU law. We are under no illusions that that opinion will be the last word on the matter. That certainty can be provided only by the European Court of Justice.

We would like quite comprehensive notification to the European Commission. In making a voluntary submission, we will have discharged our duty of full diligence in the legislative process. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s agreement to voluntary notification, but I seek clarification today of the precise form that that notification will take; the detail of the timescale in which she intends to refer the matter; and an indication of the date by which she expects a response. This is not a side issue. I hope that the Government, having agreed to voluntary notification, will get on with it. I have dealt with technical and procedural matters; let us turn to the substance of the proposals. Even if we assume that the policy will have a measurable impact, we are under no illusion that it will be a silver bullet. Underage people will still consume alcohol, there will still be crime and disorder, and drink-fuelled domestic abuse will still be a blight on our nation. There is no panacea for those issues, and we have realistic expectations of what can be achieved, even if minimum pricing is successful in meeting its objectives. That is why, in the discussions and correspondence involving our health spokesman Jackson Carlaw, myself as the party leader, and the cabinet secretary over many weeks and months, Jackson Carlaw and I have sought to highlight the Conservatives’ commitment to further working in areas of education and community support and on further public health measures in order to effect a cultural shift across Scotland in relation to alcohol. I thank the cabinet secretary for her straight dealing with both of us in that time and for her recognition of our good faith while the discussions continued. We sought assurances from her that we can look beyond price and work on other measures to address the alcohol culture in Scotland. As a party, the Scottish Conservatives are committed to working more closely in that area with the Government. Although the Scottish Conservatives remain healthily sceptical, particularly about the assertion that the duty system would be less effective, we sincerely hope that the policy will work. It has been a political priority for Jackson Carlaw and me, as the deputy leader and leader of our party respectively, for Conservatives to play our part in helping to tackle one of the gravest social concerns of our time, which costs this country hundreds of millions of pounds and has immeasurable costs in lives. To give the legislation the authority that only cross-party support can confer, and given the amendments that we intend to lodge and the assurances that the cabinet secretary has indicated that she is willing to provide, I invite other members who may as yet be unconvinced to reconsider their position on the bill.

2. I thank the First Minister for his warm words about Paul McBride. Paul made a huge contribution to Scottish public life and he had many friends in the chamber. The thoughts of the Conservative Party are with his partner and family at this time. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00513)

Today, the Scottish Conservatives announced plans to support the Government’s Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill in return for concessions that will help industry, such as voluntary notification to Europe and a vital sunset clause so that, although we hope that the measure works to reduce problem drinking across Scotland, Scottish industry will not be penalised in perpetuity should the legislation prove to be not effective. Yesterday, the Scottish Conservatives tried to help employers by blocking the retail levy, which is a Scotland-only tax that is designed to be a £95 million cash grab to allow the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to plug holes in his budget, aided and abetted by Labour. This punitive tax, unheralded in the SNP manifesto, and with no assessment of its impact on Scottish retailers, will result in Scottish retailers having the highest business poundage for more than 20 years. Asda has already said that this uncompetitive tax will add significant costs to its business in Scotland, and has warned that future projects might now be scrapped. Can the First Minister tell me how many young people are employed by the retail sector in Scotland right now?

The retail levy has no preventative properties in terms of health. It does not target retailers that sell alcohol and tobacco; it merely targets the largest and it is not a proportional cost based on the amount of alcohol or tobacco that is sold. Frankly, to call it a “health levy” is a fig leaf to cover the embarrassment of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, whose numbers did not add up. The First Minister did not answer my question on youth employment, so I will answer it for him. More than a third of all Scots who work in retail are under the age of 25. The sector supports 80,000 young people directly and is a gateway to employment in other industries for thousands more. Sixty-two per cent of all retail jobs are done by women. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland, the Scottish Property Federation, the Scottish Retail Consortium, the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the Wine and Spirit Trade Association and the British Council of Shopping Centres all condemn the tax as being damaging to Scotland. The First Minister says that he wants to be trusted with all Scotland’s taxes. We now see what he would do with them: he would put them up and damage the very companies that are preventing Scotland’s youth unemployment figures from rising above the already scandalous figure of 102,000 young people on the dole. It is not too late for the First Minister. Will he now scrap that cynical and anti-competitive £95 million tax that will endanger jobs and investment in Scotland?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00490)

As the debate on Scotland’s constitutional future grinds slowly on we, as parliamentarians and as a Government, have a duty not only to examine the shape of Scotland’s future but to address the serious problems that are facing our country right now. The First Minister and I disagree on many things, but there is one serious area of policy in which something is universally accepted in the Parliament—that drugs destroy lives and damage communities. The Scottish Conservatives are proud of their part in creating a new drugs strategy for Scotland in 2008, and I recognise the personal commitment of my predecessor, Annabel Goldie, on the issue. What evidence is there that the programmes that the Government has directed in rehabilitation or recovery are achieving results on the ground?

I welcome that response and the encouraging signs that we are seeing, but I am sure that the First Minister will agree that the picture that he paints is in no way complete. The national health service figures that were released this week show that the number of babies who are born to drug-abusing mothers has almost doubled in the past four years. As a nation, Scotland spends £28 million a year on methadone treatment, and in prison, which is a closed society in which we would expect to see a degree of control, the number of prisoners who are taking methadone every day has reached a record high, with no attempt being made to reduce intake in the vast majority of cases. In the previous session, the Parliament agreed that a focus on rehabilitation and recovery was the appropriate drugs strategy to pursue. That was the job of Parliament, but to implement the strategy is the job of Government. When will we start to see much more wide-ranging results?

With today’s debate, it feels a little as if we have been here before. Like me, a number of the speakers talked on this issue a few weeks ago in Patricia Ferguson’s members’ business debate. I congratulated Ms Ferguson on securing that debate, and I congratulate Labour on bringing the issue forward again today. In the previous debate, I said that the overarching need was for clarity, and that is what today’s motion searches to find. We have heard a number of speeches today on a great many rail issues around the country that are raised by the Transport Scotland consultation document and the accompanying fact sheet. My colleague Alex Johnstone spoke at length about the sleeper services, as did Richard Baker. Although it is right that rail changes are discussed in the round, I am pleased that the lion’s share of today’s debate has been based on the perceived threat to the 11 stations in Glasgow that are within 1 mile of another station and are on the list. As a Glasgow MSP, I have received a number of representations on this issue, as have others. Glasgow residents have real worries over any doubts about trains on the Maryhill and Paisley canal line. As they stand, the consultation document and the accompanying fact sheet make it look as though stations throughout Glasgow are under threat simply because they are within 1 mile of another station. There are 14 stations in that category, and I can assure members that Glasgow residents are alarmed by any prospects of closure. That concern is not manufactured; it is real. More than half a million journeys are made on the Maryhill line every year, and there has been continuous annual traffic growth at all stations. The line serves some of the most deprived areas of Glasgow—areas where other modes of transport are frequently not available. Bob Doris mentioned my local station—Kelvindale—and said that, despite the high car ownership in the area, the station is well used. It is worth remembering that Kelvindale opened only in 2005, and that it has been a great benefit to local residents. How on earth can it be sensible to close the station now, when passenger numbers are rising year on year, and car ownership is going down? We can consider another station on a different line. Nitshill is in a deprived area of Glasgow, and it appears that the station could be under threat, as it is one of the stations on the list. The area is poorly served by buses—recently, the 45 route was shortened—and the level of car ownership is low. That may explain why the number of rail passengers has increased by 50 per cent over the past five years. Given that the station not only serves the people of Nitshill but affords access to the Glasgow museums resource centre, which is visited by more than 11,000 people every year, surely what Nitshill needs is investment to provide step-free access to the southbound platform, and certainly not closure.

I have had representations from people who are genuinely worried and are looking for more clarity. That is what I am asking for. The whole point of a suburban rail line is to have plenty of stations on it. The point is to allow the maximum number of people to use the train services for commuting and leisure. As the representations from my constituents make clear, the consultation has caused consternation and alarm. Now that it is closed, I hope that the minister will give us clarity—not just a Yes, Ministeresque “There are no plans to scrap X, Y or Z” response. When it comes to rail services in Glasgow and GARL, residents know what “no plans” means from the Scottish National Party Government.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00470)

Last Thursday, the Deputy First Minister was caught out on a radio programme when she suggested that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development endorsed a claim that an independent Scotland would be the sixth-richest country by gross domestic product in the group, and the First Minister has himself cited that figure in this chamber. Will he confirm that the statistics are not in fact endorsed by the OECD and are not official?

The Prime Minister agrees with me—first we settle separation, then we discuss devolution. On the issue that I actually raised with the First Minister, last Friday afternoon his adviser was scrabbling hastily around this Parliament’s press tower, handing out a 12-line document supporting the claims about the OECD. The document shows that the estimates of Scotland’s GDP came from the experimental Scottish national accounts project, or SNAP. The figures on which the First Minister relies are on the Scottish Government website, under the heading, “Data Being Developed”, with the cautionary warnings that they “are not deemed fit for general use” and “do not yet meet the rigorous quality standards of National Statistics”, and that they “are not ‘official’” and—this is my personal favourite—should not “be the subject of media releases.” The First Minister needs to stop presenting his assertions as fact and stop manipulating the data to suit his narrow purpose. Did he authorise the release of information based on those figures to the media? If he is prepared to be so slippery on this issue, how can anybody have any faith in anything he ever says?

2. Now that he is finally live on the BBC, I ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00451)

After the First Minister claiming grudge and grievance for being pulled from BBC radio and television sports programmes, it has emerged that it was in fact he who asked the BBC, not once, not twice but three times if he could be a rugby pundit. On reflection, does the First Minister think that it was acceptable to use the bully pulpit of his office to liken a BBC employee to a Nazi? Will he now apologise?

By “having a wee think” presumably he meant after the First Minister’s office had been on the phone. With such outrage at the weekend, I thought that I would check the First Minister’s rugby qualifications. He has the build for it; surely he must have a glittering career behind him. However, in the Linlithgow academy rugby team archive, there is no mention of A Salmond, and there is no mention of him in the University of St Andrews rugby team or the Royal Bank of Scotland rugby club. In today’s papers, the First Minister’s official spokesman says that the First Minister is so outraged that he will raise the snub with the head of the BBC trust, Lord Patten. This is all about the First Minister—his bruised ego and his injured pride. Today’s meeting was supposed to be about the future of broadcasting, people’s jobs, their careers and their livelihoods. Those are surely more important than the First Minister’s stymied ambitions. Will he confirm to the Parliament, to those who are broadcasting this exchange on the BBC and to those who are watching at home that he will not waste a second of his meeting with Lord Patten on this petty sideshow but will focus on what matters—Scottish jobs?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00432)

I presume that the mutual agenda is the referendum. Since the referendum consultation was launched in the chamber, members on the Government benches, from the First Minister right through his Cabinet and down to the lowliest of lowly back benchers, have been using the removal of nuclear-armed and powered submarines from Faslane as a reason for Scotland to become a state separate from the rest of the United Kingdom. The Faslane naval base is the largest single-site employer in Scotland, with 6,500 people working on the Clyde. The latest Ministry of Defence figures show that there are 18,000 uniformed and civilian defence personnel based across 30 of Scotland’s 32 local authority areas. That does not include the 4,500 workers in yards in Rosyth and on the Clyde who are building navy destroyers and aircraft carriers, or the thousands of other defence contractors throughout Scotland who are engaged in work for the UK military. We know that the First Minister wants to decimate the 6,500-strong workforce at Faslane, but how many defence workers—uniformed or otherwise—does he plan to keep?

So, no answer then on the number of jobs that the First Minister plans to keep, just as there is no answer on what the one naval base in an independent Scotland would have in terms of minesweepers, destroyers or frigates, or on what would be done with the Marines and what would be done about a fleet auxiliary. Let us look at the experts’ response to the First Minister’s defence plans. A former commander of the Black Watch, Lt Col Sir Andrew Ogilvy-Wedderburn, said that the First Minister had “absolutely no grasp of how the British Armed Forces work”. Lord Robertson—[Laughter.]

Lord Robertson, the former secretary-general of NATO said that the First Minister’s plans have “no coherence or relevance”. He continued: “And what about logistical troops? Or combat support and combat service support? Engineers, medics, communicators, reconnaissance, surveillance and intelligence forces ... Nothing is said about how this gap is to be filled”. Colonel Clive Fairweather, a former commanding officer of the King’s Own Scottish Borderers and former deputy commander of the SAS, said: “I have respect for some of the stuff the SNP come up with and are proposing, but when it comes to defence I don't think they have a scooby. I do find Mr Salmond very, very, very weak in this area. I have watched him, I have been with him, he doesn’t really understand it. He really doesn’t get it.” There are many unanswered questions on the Scottish Government’s plans for defence, but I will ask just one, which comes from a young Scottish soldier who is based down south and wrote to me this week.

I would have thought that the member would have more respect. [Interruption.]

He wrote: “Dear Ms Davidson, I am currently serving in the British Army and have done so for the past 2 years. I am due to deploy on operations in Afghanistan in early April, I love my job and am proud to serve this country. I am sure you are aware of the phrase ‘back of a fag packet’ and this it seems, is how Mr Salmond has developed his ‘plan’ for the Armed Forces. I would be greatly appreciative if you could raise the following question for me ... Does he envisage a point where those serving will be forced to make a choice between the uniform in which they have faithfully served the crown and in many cases tragically lost friends, and the country of their birth?” Well, does he?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00417)

Yesterday, the First Minister finally brought a little bit of clarity to some parts of the process of the referendum. Today, I hope that we can agree that we need slightly more clarity than we have just had on a number of substantive principles upon which the people of Scotland will vote. The First Minister repeatedly asserts that he wants independence so that the Scottish Government can have all the economic levers at its disposal, yet he has just obfuscated when answering questions on that issue. He now maintains that he wants to keep the pound—that he wants to leave the United Kingdom but remain part of the United Kingdom currency union, which means that an independent Scotland will have its interest rates set by the Bank of England. Does he accept that when the bank sets interest rates it considers the whole of the United Kingdom, but that it would be unlikely to give Scotland a second thought after independence, which would leave Scotland with less control?

The First Minister thinks that he has answered one question, but I am not sure that it was entirely the one that I asked. The First Minister has been telling media organisations—not just in this country but elsewhere—that the pound could be a transition currency, as was the case in Australia, when it became independent. If that is the First Minister’s transition plan, what is his ultimate banknote of choice? Is it the euro, which is much loved by him and the SNP? Or is he perhaps planning his own currency—the Salmond shilling? The First Minister asserts that an independent Scotland would not be forced to join the euro as an accession country, although the weight of legal opinion states otherwise. He asserts that the Bank of England would act as a lender of last resort for Scotland, although it would be, for us, the bank of a foreign nation. On this vital issue, the First Minister is all over the place. He twists and turns according to his audience. For almost 40 years, the First Minister has campaigned on independence, but he leaves dangerous uncertainty on the issues that matter. Is it not the truth that the First Minister has no plans to assume the full levers of financial power, because either of the options that are flitted between involve significant control by either Europe or London, with even less influence than we have now?

I, too, congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing tonight’s debate. I was happy to support the motion. Above all, what the residents and representatives of Glasgow need from the consultation, from tonight’s debate and from the minister’s upcoming summing up is clarity. As it stands, there is grave concern that there is a plan to close a number of important stations in Glasgow. There are nine stations on the Maryhill line and five of them are under question because of the rail 2014 consultation and the accompanying fact sheet. Were they all to close, it might be hardly worth having a railway line at all. Since one of the stations in question is Maryhill station, it could no longer be called the Maryhill line.

I would like to make some progress first. My local station, Kelvindale, was opened in 2005 to the great benefit of local residents. How on earth can it be sensible to close it now, when passenger numbers have risen every year and rates of car ownership in the area are low. More than 0.5 million journeys are made on the Maryhill line every year and there has been continuous annual traffic growth at the stations. The line serves some of the most deprived areas of Glasgow where other modes of transport are frequently not available. Different options are being contemplated simply to ease congestion on Queen Street station’s high-level platforms and to bring in more trains from Edinburgh. If that is the case, woe betide any passenger coming from Edinburgh to Glasgow who wants to go on to visit relatives in Maryhill. The painful irony for Glasgow commuters and shoppers is that their stations are under question because of possible improvements to the Glasgow to Edinburgh service. Surely a government that is committed to public transport should improve all rail services. Improvement of one high-profile line to the detriment of the local lines that feed into it, if that is what is going to happen, would be no improvement at all for many users.

I said that there are questions about plans that may close a number of important stations. I was talking about the references in the consultation document and the fact sheet to stations that are within a mile of each other, and whether they are viable. As it stands, that consultation document makes it look as though stations throughout Glasgow are under threat simply because of such proximity. Fourteen stations are in that category. I assure members that Glasgow residents are alarmed by any prospects of closure. I am talking about gaining clarity from the debate so that the genuine fears of people—not only members, but constituents at home—are assuaged. Mosspark station is one of the stations that are deemed to be too close to another station. A Mosspark resident who lives five minutes from Mosspark station has pointed out that he is disabled and is no longer able to drive. If the station were to close, he would face an extra 20-minute walk to the nearest station at Corkerhill. How is a disabled constituent supposed to walk that extra distance and carry his shopping home? He cannot do that. The Paisley canal line, which Mosspark station is on, is about to undergo electrification, but it appears that Transport Scotland will displace some of Mosspark’s passengers on to road if the proximity threat is realised. Mosspark’s passengers make up 13 per cent of the total passengers on the Paisley canal line. I am afraid that I do not have enough time to talk about issues surrounding Nitshill station and other stations. The whole point of a suburban rail line is to have plenty of stations on the line to allow the maximum number of people to use the train service for commuting and leisure. It is not good enough to tell people that there is another station nearby, because nearby could well be too far for those who are elderly and disabled. We need to be told whether Transport Scotland is considering closing stations in Glasgow. Conversely, like Paul Martin, I would welcome an unequivocal assurance from the minister that no station will close, if that is indeed the case.

Will the member acknowledge that there is already fear that stations are going to close? That is why we require clarity from this debate.

I thank the First Minister for early sight of his statement and for his referendum consultation, which by some counts is the fourth of its kind in his attempt to hold a vote on separation. It is, of course, running alongside the UK Government’s consultation, and I urge as many people as possible to respond to both. The First Minister says that he should be judged on the mandate that he received from the people of Scotland last May, which, by anyone’s reading of his manifesto, is to hold a referendum on independence: a single straightforward question on whether we want to be a separate country or remain part of our United Kingdom. The people of Scotland want and deserve a fair, legal and decisive referendum held as soon as possible. What the First Minister posited today is a fair and decisive legal question, which I welcome, and we now need to ensure that it is asked in a legal referendum. Will the First Minister now co-operate with Her Majesty’s Government to ensure that that is the case, resolving remaining issues of franchise and timing? We want co-operation, not confrontation; an outcome that is decided by the voters of Scotland, not by the law courts; and a clear answer to that one question, which will finally resolve the issue. Scotland wants to move on from the process of the referendum so that we can look at the substantive issues surrounding the sovereignty of our nation: the key questions that the First Minister has so far been unable to answer, on Scotland’s currency, her membership of the European Union, our defence and energy policies and our welfare state. They are areas of pressing concern. However, the process matters too. That is why I ask the First Minister to enter into further discussions in good faith to ensure that Scotland sees both of her Governments and both of her Parliaments working together to resolve the remaining process issues so that we can engage in the real debate. Will he do so?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00398)

I am sure that the First Minister is looking forward to meeting the Prime Minister. As he explained, it is proper to meet the Secretary of State for Scotland in the first instance, because he is leading the process for the Government. The First Minister’s goal is to separate Scotland from the United Kingdom and to replace those enduring links with ever-closer union with the European Union. Can the First Minister tell me how many times he or the Scottish Government has written to the relevant EU commissioner, asking about Scotland’s accession to the European Union?

That was an extraordinarily long way of giving me no specifics at all on a very simple question. We know for a fact that, for example, the current Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy, Štefan Füle, has never received correspondence from the Scottish Government on the topic, which begs the question: who has the Scottish Government been in contact with and what advice has been given? In 2007, the Scottish National Party asserted in a published document that an independent Scotland would continue in the EU, and the First Minister continues to make that assertion. However, the former president of the European Commission Romano Prodi; European commissioners Franz Fischler and Joe Borg; Professor Robert Hazell and Dr Jo Murkens, who are experts on government and constitutional law; and even the International Law Commission say that that is not the case. They all say that Scotland would have to reapply to be a member of the EU, with the consequence that our farmers would be bankrupt without European payments while Scotland waited for renegotiation, and Scotland would be forced to adopt the euro on accession. The First Minister believes that, if he says something often enough, it becomes fact, but the Scottish people demand more than mere assertion. The weight of expert opinion is that Scotland would not become automatically a member of the European Union. Will the First Minister publish any evidence that he has to support his claim, because the people of Scotland deserve an answer to the question?

Will the First Minister give way?

Does the First Minister agree with his minister Stewart Stevenson, who wishes that the Electoral Commission had overseen the 1979 referendum?

Like the First Minister, I enjoy a bit of political bandiage or bandinage myself but, on an issue as important as this one, I prefer information to obfuscation. The First Minister said that he did not want civic Scotland to be constrained in the debate but, as far as I can read from the Labour leader’s motion, not constraining civic Scotland is exactly what she is calling for. One of the few things in the First Minister’s speech with which I could agree was when he said that this is the most important decision for 300 years—but the next 1,000 days could decide the destiny of our country for not just the next 300 years but the next 1,000 years. It is that important. The ground on which the debate will rage is not whether Scotland can be independent but whether it would be better off alone. It is not a question of could; it is a question of should. Every opinion poll ever published shows that the people of Scotland agree with me—Scotland is better off in Britain. We have the best of both worlds: we have control over our own devolved affairs, with more powers on the way, and we are part of the most enduring and successful partnerships in the history of the world. We are a fantastic Scotland in a Great Britain. In 1,000 days’ time, or perhaps even sooner, 4 million people in Scotland will get the chance to reaffirm that they are proud to be both Scottish and British. History is in the making although, for the First Minister, I fear that it is not the history that he is hoping for. This is an epoch in Scotland’s story: it is the latest chapter for a proud country that is at ease with who we are. We are optimistic about what we can be, but we are comfortable and content with being in our United Kingdom. Much of this week, and today’s debate, will concentrate on the process that leads to the referendum, but the real debate—the stark choice between unity or separation—is the bigger issue. However, process matters, because the people of Scotland demand and are due a referendum that is clear, fair, decisive and legal. That means a date, and a fair and clear question. It means answers to the big questions about just what independence would mean. It means an honest debate in which differing views can be honestly expressed, and a contest in which people can advance their arguments without being shouted down just because they do not agree. It means robust debate, not personal abuse. It means recognising that we all want the best for our country, even if we do not agree on how that can be achieved. It means acknowledging that the debate is about the very future of our country and that both Scotland’s Parliaments and both Scotland’s Governments have a rightful interest in the matter. However, it also means recognising that a referendum must be legally held in Scotland for Scotland and in the court of Scottish public opinion rather than in the law courts of Scotland. For my part, I will always make the positive case for Scotland in Britain: that we are better united; that Scots can feel good about their dual identities; and that being Scottish and British is not a contradiction but a plus. I respect the First Minister’s right to hold that vote, and his long-held belief in separation. However, I do not agree with the destiny that he has set for Scotland, and I know that Scotland does not agree with it either. I had hoped that the spirit of reasonable argument could prevail.

On the idea of reasonable argument—yes, absolutely.

We are in the middle of a very big membership drive, and I would ask anybody who has an interest in centre-right politics to join the Conservative Party. Let us talk about that reasonable debate, because there is an ugly side to the argument that has been made in recent days, and it has come not from the Prime Minister but from the very member who has just intervened. I am sad to say—it probably says more about me than it does about anyone else—that I follow Joan McAlpine on Twitter, and I know that she has tweeted that Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives are “anti-Scottish”. That type of ignorant, petty nationalism is an insult not only to us but to Scots up and down the country. I know the difference between patriotism and nationalism, and I do not doubt for one moment the desire of all patriots and nationalists to do what they think is best for Scotland. However, the narrow opinion that the only true Scots are those who believe in separation is demeaning to those who peddle it and an insult to the majority of people who live here. Ms McAlpine’s intervention is a sign of how the SNP mask can slip: a sign of SNP members’ desire to play the politics of grudge and grievance, to complain when they do not get their own way and to act as if they own the hearts and souls of all Scots and as if only Alex Salmond can speak for Scotland.

I am terribly sorry—I am being advised by the Presiding Officer. If I am allowed extra time, I will happily take the First Minister’s intervention.

As the First Minister well knows, and as he has been told in the chamber by my predecessor on more than one occasion, Paul McBride was never the legal adviser to the Scottish Conservative Party. I make no secret of our desire to have the referendum sooner rather than later, and we need to ask why the First Minister is ignoring warnings from the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and Citigroup about the consequences of not taking forward the referendum more quickly. However, let the consultation take place over when the referendum should be and let the First Minister properly engage for the first time in mature discussions about the legality of the referendum and the reasonable and constructive offer from the United Kingdom Government to remove obstacles and clear the way for a fair, unambiguous and decisive vote. Surely, even Alex Salmond must want that—or is it that, given the frustration of the nationalists this week because their bluff has been called, he secretly wants confusion and legal wrangling? Does he prefer ambiguity, so that he can ask the woolly, soft, back-door question about being given a chance to negotiate possible separation terms rather than having to ask a clear, straightforward in-or-out question? As the debate unfolds over the coming weeks, there will be a clear dividing line between patriots and nationalists. We want clarity, the SNP wants confusion; we want co-operation, the SNP wants confrontation; we want it settled, the SNP wants to drag it on. Scotland gets the best deal when its two Governments work together. We want to remove obstacles to the referendum to make it legal, fair and decisive. Why would the SNP object to that? The most revealing aspect about today’s debate is the fact that the SNP refuses to back the reasonable motion in front of us. That tells us all that we need to know about the SNP. The Scottish Conservatives are happy to support the motion.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00381)

The First Minister spoke this morning about his desire for consensus on the referendum process, but in the next breath said that that consensus had to bow to his majority. In an answer to Ms Lamont, he said that he had no problem with a section 30 order—but without any strings attached. Let us look at one of the strings to which he so objects. The First Minister has cast doubt on the integrity and impartiality of those who serve on the Electoral Commission, and he now wants to hand-pick his own team to oversee the separation referendum. He might like to think that he is the team captain, but that does not mean that he also gets to pick the referee. Does the First Minister want to repeat the comments that were made in his name by his official spokesman to the press this week? Does he want to stand up now and impugn the reputation, impartiality and neutrality of the commissioners and the Electoral Commission?

I suggest that much of that ground was given when the SNP voted for the Scotland Act 1998, which reserved the constitutional issue in its entirety. I would like to get back to the question that I originally asked the First Minister. It was reported in the press on Wednesday—I quote from The Press and Journal—that “First Minister Alex Salmond’s official spokesman said the organisation” —the Electoral Commission— “should be barred because it has political appointees on its board”. I am glad that the First Minister acknowledged in his answer to me that he voted to extend the Electoral Commission’s role in Scotland and that the SNP voted to set it up. The SNP has also bemoaned the fact that the commission was not around to report on the referendum in 1979. I believe that the SNP was delighted when its former MP and MSP, and our former Presiding Officer, was appointed as a commissioner, so why does the First Minister not trust the Electoral Commission now? His accusations raise serious doubts about whether he really wants a legal, fair and decisive referendum. If he has any real evidence against the impartiality of the Electoral Commission or its commissioners, will he produce it?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00358) I add my and my party’s welcome to Johann Lamont on her election as the first leader of the whole Labour Party in Scotland. I also offer my Christmas wishes to members.

As the Scottish Trades Union Congress has revealed this week, eight of the 10 worst areas for rising long-term unemployment in the United Kingdom are here in Scotland. That news comes a week after figures revealed that the level of unemployment in Scotland is now higher than the UK average. Week after week, all that we hear is the First Minister claiming the credit when things look good but shovelling the blame elsewhere when things look bad. One ministerial job for one Scottish nationalist is not the same as thousands of jobs for the Scottish nation. Is it not time that the First Minister got his eye back on the ball and started doing the job that he was elected to do, which is delivering jobs for Scotland?

I did listen to the interview with Stephen Boyd and to the interview an hour later, which involved the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth wriggling out of answering questions on the areas that come under Scottish Government control. I will tell the First Minister what the UK Government has done to help employment throughout the whole UK. It has reduced corporation tax, it has invested in renewables, it has established a youth contract, it has cut national insurance and it has reduced the national debt. Let us remind ourselves of the awful facts that the First Minister is trying, once again, to run away from. Twenty-six thousand people face their second Christmas out of work, and that has happened on the First Minister’s watch. He needs to take responsibility for his actions. He has the powers that he needs to make a difference. The First Minister could be properly funding our colleges instead of ripping £74 million out of them; he could be cutting the tax burden on businesses, not hitting the biggest employers with more; he could be renewing the town centre regeneration fund instead of scrapping it; and he could be building the 6,000 social rented homes that he promised instead of cutting his own target by a quarter. The First Minister’s policies are damaging the Scottish economy. Will he finally take responsibility for the consequences of his own actions?

2. As this is Iain Gray’s last First Minister’s questions, I give him the best wishes for the future from the Conservative benches. He will now have more time to spend walking the fields of East Lothian. I know that he will continue to make a big contribution both to the debates ahead and to this chamber. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00340)

I am sure that the First Minister will remember that when he appointed a male journalist as an adviser to his team, that journalist also won the tartan bollocks. The difference between the First Minister’s adviser and mine is that at least mine had the balls to go and collect his award. In 2007, the First Minister told the Parliament that his Council of Economic Advisers was “our best chance in several generations to tackle the problem of systemic economic mediocrity.”—[Official Report, 28 June 2007; c 1329.] The council is supposed to meet every quarter. Can the First Minister tell me when it last met?

Despite that slightly patronising brush-off, the fact remains that the First Minister’s Council of Economic Advisers—his hand-picked group of experts; his wise men—has not met since September 2010. That is 14 months ago. In the 14 months since the council last met, we have been buffeted by debt crises in Greece, Portugal, Italy and Ireland and there is turmoil in the euro zone. In Britain, we have had a three-year spending review and an autumn statement, and the Scottish Government has put out a new economic strategy and a draft budget. There has been a raft of economic data, and in the most recent quarter alone unemployment in Scotland has gone up by 25,000. In the light of all that and on reflection, why the silence, while the First Minister was touring the television studios, as he told us? Why did not the council meet?

Does the First Minister acknowledge that an election campaign lasts six weeks, whereas the council has not met for 14 months? I am happy to stand by my Prime Minister’s actions in sorting out the best deal for the whole United Kingdom. Does the First Minister acknowledge that Scottish National Party member Joe FitzPatrick has signed an amendment to a motion that my deputy, Jackson Carlaw, lodged to exactly that effect? Members on his own benches are on our side on this one, too, as well as the country.

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing the debate. I start with the terrible admission that I am not a graduate of the University of Glasgow. Unfortunately, I did my degree 40 miles away in Edinburgh although, as a redeeming feature, I did half of a masters at Glasgow before politics got in the way. I did development studies with a focus on international development of the poorest countries in the world, so a high proportion of my classmates were international students. Joan McAlpine might be interested to hear that several of our lectures were conducted on two sites and by videolink between the Crichton campus and the west end campus in Glasgow. I therefore recognise that the university’s reach goes beyond Glasgow’s city boundaries. However, I will talk about the contribution that the university makes to Glasgow. As a resident of the west end, I know that the 4,500 foreign students from 130 countries who come to the city are a huge bonus to the life of not only Byres Road but the greater west end. Although those students might not be Scottish when they arrive, they are most certainly Glaswegian by the time they leave, because Glasgow is a city with which it is easy to fall in love. Those students bring a lot to the life of the city. Glasgow used to revel in the title of the second city of the empire. In the post-colonial age, although we might not use such outdated and outmoded terms, we can say that Glasgow truly is a global gathering of people. Institutions such as the University of Glasgow, the University of Strathclyde and Glasgow Caledonian University are some of the great draws that bring people from throughout the world to Glasgow. It is worth talking about the contribution that the University of Glasgow has made to the life of Scotland down the ages. Alumni of the university, including Adam Smith, James Watt, Lord Kelvin and John Logie Baird, used their ideas, discoveries and inventions to change not just Scotland, but the world. In the political context, people such as John Smith, Donald Dewar and Charles Kennedy came out of that famous institution. I would have liked to have seen a few more Conservatives, but I believe that the university holds the distinction of having the largest number of graduates in the Scottish Parliament. The university has a Conservative association that I must big up at this point. It is one of the oldest such associations in the country and is celebrating its 175th anniversary this year. It was founded in 1836 and continues to go from strength to strength. The 4,500 people who come to Glasgow would not come if they did not get a good educational experience. Sandra White and Drew Smith took us through the figures on the success that the university has had in many areas. That success comes from not just teaching quality, although that is imperative, but the quality of social life, extracurricular activities and research. Those figures do Anton Muscatelli and his team great credit. Drew Smith has drawn our attention to Glasgow Caledonian University’s proud record in the survey, and we have noted the University of Glasgow’s success this year. I hope that that will foster greater competition among all Scotland’s universities, including my alma mater in Edinburgh, and encourage them to step up to the plate and offer students from every country in the world the best possible experience when they come to Scotland.

2. To ask the Deputy First Minister when the First Minister will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00321)

We learned this morning from an Audit Scotland report that the price to Scotland of meeting the 2020 carbon targets will be £11 billion, which is £5,000 for every household in Scotland. However, we have also heard, in expert evidence given this week to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, that the SNP’s obsessive, dogmatic, one-track rush to a renewables-only energy policy will add another £4 billion to the nation’s bills. Can the Deputy First Minister tell me how that will be funded? Will it be through higher taxes, higher bills or more SNP cuts?

I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for her warm welcome to the chamber— Members: Deputy First Minister! I am sorry—I meant the Deputy First Minister. People across Scotland are asking themselves whether the extra £4 billion is a price worth paying. Scotland currently benefits from renewables incentives being spread among the 60 million people of the United Kingdom, but the SNP wants to place that £4 billion burden squarely on the shoulders of 2 million Scottish households. Every Scottish household can now understand the true cost of the SNP’s independent energy policy. It has been shot to pieces, and Scotland is getting a glimpse of the inconvenient truth: the cost of independence. Does that not prove—[Interruption.] I am glad to hear such braying from the SNP back benchers. I thought that non-essential staff had been sent home. Does that not prove that, when it comes to energy—as with so many other things—Scotland is better off in Britain?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00301)

The First Minister likes to claim the credit when he thinks that something is better in Scotland than it is elsewhere in the United Kingdom, but will he step up to the mark when Scotland is falling behind? Families who have young children in England receive 20 per cent more free childcare for their three and four-year-olds than those in Scotland—they get 15 hours a week and we get 12.5 hours. This week, the Chancellor of the Exchequer extended free provision to more than 250,000 two-year-olds from the most disadvantaged backgrounds south of the border. Evidence shows that the early years are the most crucial time in a child’s development. I believe that young families deserve support, particularly in the current tough times. The First Minister rose— I know that the First Minister is keen, but he can answer in a minute. I want Scots families to get a better deal. Will the First Minister pledge to at least match what is happening in England?

Great. I will claim that as a partial victory for Scotland’s families, but now I want to know when and how that will be implemented. I invite the First Minister and his cabinet secretary to a meeting with me and my team to take forward the issue to help Scotland’s families. It is time that we turned words into action, so will the First Minister meet me before Christmas to discuss the issue?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00280)

In March, Robert Foye and Morris Petch—two vile rapists of teenagers and children—had their minimum sentences cut. Such was the outrage that the Scottish National Party Government promised to do something about it. In the eight months since, it has happened time and time again: in May, Neil Strachan’s minimum sentence was cut and, last week, James Rennie’s minimum sentence was cut. They are two of the most sickening paedophiles, whose cases have shocked Scotland. They are among a string of sex offenders who could be free much earlier than their trial judges intended. In March, the Scottish Government said that it might change legislation to stop minimum sentences being cut, but in September that was absent from the legislative programme. Why is it taking so long?

I read the quotes from the justice minister at the weekend to that effect. It seems like it has taken headlines such as “Call This Justice?” to prompt them—that should not be the case. These cases point to a much greater issue. There are some crimes that are so heinous, so cruel and so vile, and some criminals who deserve never to be free again, whose victims demand real punishment and from whom society deserves real protection. In England, criminals can be sentenced to a whole-life tariff—in other words, they will never be free. Why is it that Scotland does not have the same protection as England? I know that the Scottish Government hides behind the European convention on human rights, but change starts with political will. I have the political will to ensure that, in some cases, life should mean life. The key question is, does the First Minister?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00277)

Forty-eight hours ago, Transport Scotland, a finger’s-length organisation of the Scottish National Party Government, published its plans for wrecking our railways by having slower trains, fewer stations, more crowding and longer journeys for passengers up and down the country. However, this morning, we read of a screeching U-turn and the SNP Government’s attempts to run a mile from its own consultation. I see that the first page of the document carries lovely pictures of Alex Neil MSP and Keith Brown MSP. How can anyone have the confidence to invest long-term in Scotland’s future when SNP ministers are talking down our railways?

I understand very well that this is a Government consultation. Indeed, that is my very point: it is a Government consultation from whose words and terms the Government is now running a mile, saying, “A wee quango did it and ran away.” We all want Scotland’s railways to be fit for the 21st century and to attract long-term investment. However, as the Neil-Brown document itself admits, there is a cloud hanging over such investment. On page 21, the document suggests that we might get only a short-term deal for our railways because investors could be worried about the unanswered constitutional question. So, there we have it. SNP ministers have come clean and the First Minister should come clean right now. Failing to answer the constitutional question is turning off long-term investment in Scotland. The SNP’s dither and delay on the constitutional question could sabotage long-term investment in Scotland, and this document says so.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00251)

I thank the First Minister for his birthday wishes. There are not many people who get the boost of the front page of The Scotsman on their birthday. I was reading a Scottish National Party press release today that quoted Liz Lochhead, the Scots makar, as saying: “if there was a referendum tomorrow, I’d vote yes”. Let me ask the First Minister this: if a straightforward yes or no referendum were to be held tomorrow, is he confident that he would win?

I guess that the question is, in that case, why does the First Minister not invite people to answer in a yes or no referendum tomorrow? We know the answer to that from the exchange that we have just heard; we know that the First Minister is feart. He is feart to publish the legal advice on an independent Scotland joining Europe. We know that he is feart to even ask Europe for its advice. He is feart to name the question for a referendum and we know that he is feart to name the day. No wonder. The First Minister is such a fan of polls that I shall mention a couple to him. At the weekend, we saw a BBC poll in which barely a quarter of people backed independence. A poll that is running currently on www.scotsman.com has attracted more than 35,000 votes and shows that by nearly three to one Scotland wants a simple and straightforward yes or no question. Liz Lochhead wants a poll tomorrow and Scotland wants a single, simple yes or no question. Why does the First Minister not just get on with it?

Will Roderick Campbell give way?

I will not quiz the member on those provisions, but does he acknowledge that many successful prosecutions have been made under them and that today’s amendment states that we should give greater consideration to what is already on the statute book?

Today’s debate has been vigorous, with flashes of passion and even temper, but it has also been welcome. Parliaments should not be afraid of difficult issues, nor should they shy away from tough questions. No Parliament serves its country by picking only the low-hanging fruit. I, like others, recognise and welcome the First Minister’s decision to give Parliament more time to scrutinise the bill, to take evidence and to attempt to navigate the difficult waters that such legislation entails. I hope that the Government recognises that the chamber is united in the goal of tackling sectarianism. Not one member—not one—wants to see a Scotland where vile, offensive and criminal acts are perpetrated against other Scots simply because of the football team they support or the faith they profess. I have seen today neither Humza Yousaf’s opposition for opposition’s sake, nor Neil Findlay’s assertion of a Government attempt to demonise all football fans. If the time that the Parliament has taken had made huge material improvements to the bill, I believe that the debate would have taken a different course. That is not the case, however. The Government has failed to convince many that the changes that it proposes will improve the situation rather than simply muddy the waters. Such worries have been raised in the chamber before. Both Annabel Goldie and Iain Gray have done so at First Minister’s questions and the response was disappointing. The messengers were attacked, as were the people who had raised legitimate concerns. There was no acknowledgement that more work might need to be done. Raising such worries is not about party politicking. We need to ensure that we get such things right, as they are too important to get wrong. It is not a case of just the Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Green parties saying, “Let’s proceed with caution and consideration”; the same is being said by the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish churches and the ordinary people of faith who have been writing to their MSPs because they are genuinely worried that their Christian teaching and debate might be in jeopardy because of the second part of the bill. I welcome the fact that the Government has given an indication that it will look at freedom of speech concerns but, as with other elements of the bill, there is a need to provide clarity rather than confusion. That takes us to the nub of the issue, which is the need to have in place a legislative framework that is clear, proportionate and easily enforceable. On each of those three fronts, the Government has failed to make the case that the new offences that are contained in the bill are required. On the issue of clarity, Aidan O’Neill QC, who is a leading human rights lawyer, has described the bill as “the worst drafted Bill I’ve ever seen.” The Law Society made several points about the fact that we do not have a clear definition of what constitutes an offence, which have been echoed by David McLetchie, Neil Findlay, Hugh Henry and Patrick Harvie. The minister even said, when she was asked by my colleague John Lamont whether singing the national anthem constituted an offence, that it depended on the circumstances. We do not have a clear definition of what “in relation to” a match includes. Does it apply just to people who are at the ground, to those who are wearing football colours or to those who are in a pub that has football on? Does a person have to be watching the football while it is on? Does it have to be a live transmission feed? Is it possible to prove that someone is watching the football while it is on? We also have no clarity on what constitutes causing offence to a reasonable person. The continued prevalence of sectarian incidents and the worrying events that took place in the most recent football season in my region of Glasgow rightly focused minds across the chamber. Everyone in the Parliament wants to get to grips with the issue, which should not be allowed to fester in a 21st century Scotland. Patrick Harvie and Graeme Pearson—who is possibly the most qualified person in the Parliament to comment on operational issues—have raised real fears that the wish to get things done has taken the Scottish Government down the route of viewing the creation of new offences as the only option, rather than looking across the piece to see what is the best option. That is why I must echo the point that James Kelly’s amendment makes, which is that, as the bill moves forward, greater consideration should be given to the use of existing laws. There is more work to be done within football, as Christine Grahame, James Kelly and Colin Keir said. It is not acceptable that, when the governing bodies of the game and the league are asked by the Parliament to step up to the plate on sectarianism, the rallying cry of “It wasnae me” is all that is heard. Throughout the debate, the minister and others have asked for constructive comments. Despite Humza Yousaf’s assertion, I counted more than a dozen from Graeme Pearson alone about changes that could be made that would have positive outcomes. We have seen hundreds of successful prosecutions for breach of the peace at football matches and beyond under the existing legislation. Provision is made for religious prejudice as an aggravating factor in prosecutions. We have seen successful prosecutions, such as that of Stephen Birrell, for threatening communications. That is what we already have. We need to consider greater use of those laws, plus others, such as those that relate to football banning orders, which are underutilised. In addition, we need further preventative measures such as education and early intervention. Most of all, we need the football authorities to step up and the culture to change.

Sure, I will do so. The Church of Scotland has issued a statement in which it says: “bad legislation is worse than no legislation at all and we urge the parliament to ensure that if this legislation is to be passed it should be amended to be fit for purpose.” We back the amendment and want to see changes being brought before the Parliament at stage 2.

I echo James Kelly and Bob Doris in saying that the debate will be much more consensual than the previous debate in which James Kelly spoke. Look—my acknowledging that shows that the consensus has already started. There is no doubt that rogue traders present an issue not just in Rutherglen, Cambuslang and Blantyre, as Mr Kelly acknowledged, but throughout my parliamentary region of Glasgow and throughout Scotland. The problem is not trivial. Trading Standards Institute figures show that rogue traders steal about £170 million from households across Britain every year—Mr Kelly brought that figure to our attention. At the simplest level, traders might offer to do cash-in-hand jobs and thereby avoid VAT and a paper trail. The Federation of Master Builders estimates that the UK’s housing repair, maintenance and improvement budget is about £22 billion a year, but a further £9 billion of work is estimated to be done in the informal economy. That has a significant impact on VAT and damages the legitimate economy and honest traders’ work. The problem of rogue traders runs much deeper than just avoidance of taxes. As the previous two speakers said, such traders specifically target the vulnerable, the elderly and the infirm. They cold call and tell householders that their roof needs to be repaired or that their chimney needs to be repointed—always something that such householders cannot check for themselves. Rogue traders offer to fix the problem cheaply. If a home owner can be persuaded to cough up some or all of the money up front, the trader will often leave without doing any work at all; if not, costs often spiral during work, which lands the home owner with a large bill for what is at best poor work. That affects the bank balance of the person concerned and plays on the fear of householders in their own home. Consumer Focus Scotland reports that about 13,000 complaints about uninvited traders are made annually, almost half of which concern home maintenance work. As I said, the most common complaints are to do with roofing, but other common issues are about tarmacking and, more recently, insulation. Regardless of the specifics of the work, the modus operandi is always the same: the rogue traders create fear on the part of vulnerable people by persuading them that the work needs to be done and then abscond, leaving behind either bad work or no work at all. It is estimated that that sort of rip-off affects about 89,000 people in Britain every year. As the majority of rogue traders target the housing maintenance and improvement sector, it is good to note that, as the previous speakers have acknowledged, the Federation of Master Builders takes the problem seriously. I echo the praise for the measures that the federation is taking to try to stop the practice. There are measures that we can consider, such as proper identification of tradesmen and increasing public awareness, including community awareness of when rogue traders are operating in an area. Members of the federation are in danger of being undermined by traders who leave with customers’ money after failing to do the work that they promised to do or doing a shoddy job that requires remedial work. Along with the Trading Standards Institute, and through the nail the rogues campaign, the federation is working to raise awareness of the problem. Information on how to avoid being scammed by rogue traders and how to find reputable ones is crucial in helping those who are most at risk. I hope that the Scottish Government appreciates the significance of the issue that James Kelly has brought to the Parliament, particularly for vulnerable people, and will consider the steps that have been mentioned to prevent the theft in question. That is the appropriate word, because it is theft from householders, legitimate businesses and the economy as a whole.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am duly advised, Presiding Officer. We have had a wonderfully lively clash today of claim and counterclaim of numbers of homes pledged and of social rented versus other affordable models, but as I sum up I would like to take a swift look at some of the facts. All house building in Scotland has slumped to its lowest level for almost 30 years. The number of houses that were sold between April and June was down by 10 per cent, according to Registers of Scotland, and mortgage lending is at a 30-year low. Nearly 200,000 households sit on council housing lists, and nearly 335,000 sit on housing association lists. Against that backdrop, we would expect the Scottish Government to inject more money into the sector to boost new building and social supply and to create jobs—but, no; it has not done so. I welcome Keith Brown to his first debate in his new post, but I am dismayed that the figures that he brings to the chamber are not a boost to the sector that is under the cosh, or to the hundreds of thousands of families who are waiting months and years for a home, but a cut, and not just any cut: a 40 per cent cut. Lewis Macdonald and Hugh Henry feigned surprise at the rolling back of the SNP’s recent manifesto pledge to boost the sector by building more than 6,000 new social rented homes, revised down in the spending review, but I am not surprised. I remember in another SNP manifesto another promise that was designed to help the sector and to help people to get on the property ladder: the £2,000 grant to first-time buyers went the same way as the 6,000 new social rented homes. I am pleased that Maureen Watt recognised the problems that first-time buyers face—first-time buyers perhaps like myself. In my early to mid-30s, I am still below the average age at which people can get a first-time mortgage: people are now 36 or 37 before they can get on the housing ladder because they need such a big deposit. Perhaps £2,000 could have helped me and hundreds of thousands of others like me, and perhaps Maureen Watt would like to see such a policy actually delivered to help the situation that she has identified. Mr Henry also made the point that the £40,000 unit-cost grant rate that has been provided for in the innovation and investment fund may be unsustainable. It is not just Mr Henry who thinks that: the Chartered Institute of Housing says that a number of successful bidders to the IIF will not be able to bid again at that level because the only way they could build units on the £40,000 rate would be when things are in play, such as their being able to draw down on bank accounts that they already have or free land being thrown into the bargain. The institute further points out that the level of subsidy will squeeze specific sectors such as rural housing, wheelchair-accessible housing and specialist housing for older people. On that note, I welcome the minister’s pledge to produce a national strategy on housing for older people and look forward to seeing the details thereof.

The £40,000 benchmark figure still represents a reduction from the previous figure, which was slashed. As in all debates on housing that we have in the chamber, there has been some knockabout stuff regarding the right to buy. The old myth of the right to buy taking housing stock out of the public sector was repeddled today by, among many others, Mike MacKenzie, Derek Mackay, Colin Keir and John Mason. Well, gentlemen, I am proud of the right to buy, which was the greatest passing of wealth from the state to the individual in a lifetime. It empowered hundreds of thousands of low-income families to enjoy or to aspire to home ownership for the first time.

No. My concern about the right to buy was the fact that, although we took the money that was made through the right to buy when people bought their homes and we reinvested it in building new homes, subsequent Labour Governments did not build new homes. We have heard much about the low level of house building that has gone on, which is the real scandal.

No. The SNP’s doublethink on the issue is astonishing. It supports rent-to-buy schemes that, in my opinion, echo the aim that money that is already paid in rent should in some way contribute to the lump sum that is paid for the purchase. I see some similarities and echoes there. Mike MacKenzie attacked my stout and very capable colleague, Alex Johnstone, for talking of housing without having laid a brick, lifted a hod or tiled a roof. The indignation bristling to my left was palpable, so I must defend my colleague. He assures me that he has done all those things; however, as with much on his farm and in his life, Mrs Johnstone is much better at bricklaying.

Indeed. SNP members have repeatedly challenged Opposition members’ talk of budget borrowing to give more money to housing. I remind them that it is their finance minister who has delivered a 40 per cent cut to the sector, which is clearly disproportionate. Jim Hume read a quote from the director of Shelter, Graeme Brown, which is worth listening to again. His response to the spending review was that it was a “hammer-blow to the ... families and households across Scotland who have been waiting for months and years for a home of their own and it undermines our nation’s commitments to badly housed and homeless people.” Other members have said that we need to suggest where the money would come from, but we have made suggestions already. I am sure that the Scottish Government has read the suggestion from the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, which suggests that the £67 million of Barnett consequentials that are being passed to the Scottish Government from the English council tax freeze could be employed to help to plug the gap. The Scottish Government has received exactly the settlement that it was promised in the comprehensive spending review. The SNP went into May’s election knowing exactly what the money in the pot would be. During the election, it promised more than 6,000 new social rented homes for Scotland each year, so we now demand the 6,000 new social rented homes that were promised. I invite the minister, in closing, to give a cast-iron commitment to building 6,000 social rented homes a year and I demand that he answer for the Government on whether 6,000 new social rented homes should be built this year, next year and every year of this session of Parliament.

The detailed spending plans show that the budget for Historic Scotland, which is doing a lot of the digital work to put archives on the internet, is being cut severely, by 24 per cent. Will that impact on Historic Scotland’s work in the area?

Scotland’s heritage does not speak just of our past; it speaks of who we are. From crannog to castle to computer, there is much in the cultural, antiquity, visitor and tourism sector that not only advertises Scotland to the world, but brings our ancestry to the fore and speaks to who we are as a nation, the flesh of our flesh and the bone of our bone. Although I am proud of the physical ancestry of place that we have—the museums, galleries, castles, libraries and collections—particularly in my region of Glasgow, where we see such truly inspiring centres as Kelvingrove, the Burrell collection, Scotland Street school, the new Riverside museum and St Mungo’s, which have fired the imaginations of generations of Scots and visitors alike to see the times before them and the world around them, I think that it is right that we try to widen the appeal of such centres and others to those who perhaps cannot cross a sea, but who can click a mouse. I am slightly old-fashioned and I love to see the physical depth and texture, and to smell the musty years, of an exhibit, but I recognise that there are many exhibits that neither I nor anyone else will be able to see as they are lost to fragility and decay. In those cases, a digital representation, rather than being a poor proxy is, in fact, the only way to bring an object, manuscript or artefact to a wider audience. The cabinet secretary and Ms Ferguson have, rightly, said much about the Scottish ten project. It is building a fine body of work and it brings together the best of the world with the finest that Scotland has to offer. However, I will use my six minutes to focus on a slightly different project. It is certainly lower profile and less flash in terms of spiffy graphics and multimedia presentation, but it is no less important in preserving our heritage. It is the intangible cultural heritage in Scotland site, which is run by a team from Edinburgh Napier University and does not focus on swords and spears, ruined dwellings or burial fragments. Indeed, it does not focus on things at all. As the name suggests, the intangible cultural heritage site looks to the traditions, practices, knowledge and skills that are also an expression of a community’s culture. A Borders common riding is therefore as valued as a fisherman’s folk tale, and a local festival is as relevant as the manner of making an Arbroath smokie. When we look at the living examples of human creativity that have persisted down the years, it truly is incumbent on us to preserve and promote those echoes of our forefathers for the generations to come. I am delighted to see that UNESCO supports the work that ICH carries out and I very much hope that the resource can gain a wider audience in the future.

As I have said for several minutes, I think that the site is a fantastic resource. I support ICH’s work and I support any investment and help that can be given to it, whether it comes from Government at UK or Scottish level, from private sources or from supranational bodies such as UNESCO, which already supports the site. I point out the site to the chamber and I hope to see it continue into the future. ICH is only one of many digital initiatives that we can be proud of. I acknowledge the attention that has been brought to Scran, ScotlandsPlaces and ScotlandsPeople and I praise the work that has been done by the National Library of Scotland and the National Galleries of Scotland to put their collections online. Much of the main funding for digital initiatives is derived from Historic Scotland. As I said in my intervention, Historic Scotland is one of the organisations that is hardest hit in the whole culture portfolio, with a real-terms cut of 24 per cent. I acknowledge the cabinet secretary’s assurance that that 24 per cent decrease will be met by efficiencies and subsequent further income, but I ask her to monitor the situation in case such offsetting does not occur. I have a second worry, which is not on the supply side of the equation—we are seeing a huge push to get Scotland’s heritage into the digital realm—but on the demand side. Research shows that there are issues regarding the take-up of broadband in Scotland; I have raised that matter in the chamber before. Broadband is important in ensuring the accessibility of the large data packets that are needed to convey properly the details that are needed to appreciate an object. Following my colleague Jamie McGrigor’s intervention, the availability of broadband was discussed but the issue is not just availability, but uptake. Uptake in Scotland trails far behind the rest of the UK at 61 per cent, in comparison with the national rate of 74 per cent. My own area of Glasgow has high levels of broadband availability but very low levels of uptake. That has been raised in the chamber before. I see much to applaud in the motion, which I will support. However, I remind the cabinet secretary gently that putting digital collections online requires funding and Historic Scotland is a vital provider of such funding. As well as putting more of our heritage online, we ask the Scottish Government to do more to promote broadband uptake, so that more people have access to the good work that is being done.

Does David Stewart acknowledge that some of us like dusty libraries and museums, that using a computer could direct more people to go and see things in the flesh and that both approaches have equal prominence and importance?

14. To ask the Scottish Executive what provision has been made for college bursaries for 2011-12. (S4O-00167)

The minister will be aware of college students’ long-held frustration with the current college bursary system and its first-come, first-served postcode-lottery nature. I was happy to hear in the cabinet secretary’s statement yesterday that the Scottish Government is considering exploring entitlement-based support for non-advanced study, which would give potential students, including those in my region, the security and certainty that they need when deciding on going to college. Will the minister confirm the timescale of his changes to further education student support?

First, I declare an interest in that I used to be employed by BBC Scotland, although I was never employed by the factual department in charge of the documentary “The Scheme”. In addition, I have never watched the programme. Having read a write-up of it, I had no wish to watch it. I agree that it sounded like tabloid television at its worst—a number of newspapers have called it “poverty pornography”—and that is not my kind of show. Therefore, I do not have the intimate knowledge of the programme that some members in the chamber have when talking about it. However, I know that nobody wants to see their community misrepresented, particularly on screen to a wide sector of Scottish society. I grew up in Fife and went to school in Buckhaven. I know that there are myriad ways in which communities can be represented. There were high levels of deprivation, drug abuse and economic inactivity in the areas of Methil, Buckhaven and Kennoway, but that was not the whole story for me when growing up. My school delivered a fantastic extra-curricular roster of activities that helped all the children at the school to make the most of their talents. Mr Coffey is right to refer to the Onthank school and the great work that it does at the heart of the community. The programme has, however, provoked a debate in Scotland about not just poverty and the representation of the people in the programme but addictions. I note that the text of Mr Coffey’s motion refers to recognising the challenges for people who suffer from addictions and lead chaotic lifestyles and to measures to assist those who lead such lives. Within Mr Coffey’s wider point, I want to talk about the new drugs strategy for Scotland, which a number of my Conservative colleagues helped the previous Scottish National Party Government to implement. The strategy is based on treatment and abstinence, and is a step forward. However, there are grumblings that the strategy’s implementation on the ground does not live up to its aims and ethos. A recent report from Audit Scotland, entitled “Drug and alcohol services in Scotland”, referred to the scale of the problem of drug and alcohol abuse in Scotland. We have a high level of such abuse, particularly compared with other European nations: its incidence has doubled in the past 15 years. The latest figures show that in 2007-08, £173 million was spent on combined drug and alcohol abuse services. That is not the whole story, however, because Government policy and wider health policy concentrate too much on inputs in drug and alcohol services for tackling what are complex and conflicting problems and not enough on outputs and—most importantly—outcomes, which are far harder to quantify. I hope that the Government recognises the merits of the suggestions in the Audit Scotland report on what we can do better to measure our progress on the ground in order to offer help to the large number of agencies involved in addressing alcohol and drug addiction in co-ordinating their work. It is entirely appropriate that we, as legislators in the Scottish Parliament, discuss the serious issues of poverty and drug and alcohol abuse, which affect all areas of Scotland and not just Onthank, and I thank the member for Kilmarnock and Irvine Valley for bringing the debate to the chamber.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive how much funding has been allocated by Glasgow City Council for suicide prevention in the last three years. (S4O-00055)

The information from mental health charities that are working in Glasgow indicates that that funding has been significantly reduced, particularly in the past 12 months. How will the Government meet the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment targets on suicide reduction by 2013 if Glasgow City Council is not supporting the charities, particularly given the disproportionately high rate of suicide in Glasgow?

With a second year of homecoming, will there also be a second gathering? If there is, will provisions be put in place to ensure that small businesses do not lose money over it?

Okay—I will use six minutes as a flexible friend. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to open the debate for the Conservatives today. I have been a bit of a wild rover of Scotland in my lifetime so far—I have lived in many different parts of the country. I was born and lived my formative years in the Borders—a good Selkirk girl. As it is not long past the first Friday after the second Monday in June, it is worth highlighting the common riding and the festivals in the Scottish Borders, which are a huge part of life there. I then moved to the east neuk, where I went to school. With reference to the industrial heritage in that part of the world, we have the Scottish fisheries museum, which speaks to us all about where we come from and who we have been. I was educated at university in Edinburgh, the cradle of the enlightenment—not that that helped get me a better degree, it must be said. Then I found my place in the world of work in Glasgow, which I am delighted to represent today as an MSP. Listening to Ms Ferguson talking about what we have in Glasgow, I reflect that it is true what a cultural jewel that city is, not just for the people who live within its confines but for people throughout Scotland and beyond. When it comes to fixed cultural and artistic assets, the Kelvingrove art gallery is a fantastic resource that is visited by tens, indeed hundreds, of thousands of people every year. The new Riverside museum on the banks of the Clyde will bring not just its exhibits but the architecture and the building itself to a new audience, showing what we can do as a nation when we dream big. We also have the St Mungo museum of religious art and life. Given the debate that we had in the chamber this morning, I hope that that museum will continue to play its part in the educational process in the west of Scotland and Scotland in general in relation to what we can do to move forward in areas that can be particularly difficult. We also have a number of excellent individual venues, such as the Tramway, the Barrowlands and the Citizens theatre, to name but a few, and the moveable feasts, such as the southside festival, the mela and Eid. In economic terms, all those institutions and events bring in huge amounts to Glasgow and make it a more prosperous city. However, they do much more than that: they bring a great deal to the cultural life of Scotland. I was pleased that the cabinet secretary mentioned what we do in Scotland to help others, such as the links that we have with Malawi. As I represent the region of Glasgow, which contains Blantyre, I think that it is right that we celebrate those links and do more. However, I will leave the issue of external affairs to my colleague, Jamie McGrigor. Despite the fact that he has the most wonderful singing voice of any member in this chamber—believe me, you have not enjoyed “Campbeltown Loch, I wish you were whisky” until you have been driven one-handed alongside it in a souped-up Subaru by the gentleman himself—and is possibly more qualified than I am to talk about cultural issues, he will talk about external affairs in his speech. I recognise the part that culture plays in our national life. I echo the cabinet secretary’s words about how rich we are in terms of heritage, history and legacy, particularly with regard to the inventions that she talked about, such as the goggle box, which brings all of that to a wider world and showcases it. Although it is important to embrace the cultural legacy of the past, we must refuse to be defined by it: we are the nation of Burns, Barrie, Stevenson and Scott, but we are also—for better or for worse—the nation of KT Tunstall, Christopher Brookmyre and “Grand Theft Auto”. There is so much of our heritage to be proud of, but that should not blind us to the good work that is going on now, from the physical theatre of “Black Watch”, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, and festivals such as Rock Ness and T in the Park, to the hardy perennials of the Edinburgh festivals and the Mod, which I do not think has been touched on yet. It is said that we Scots are an oral people. That is borne out by our tradition of storytelling and folk tales, and we have a strong traditional folk sector. I want to applaud all that is going on to make Scotland such a wonderful, vibrant, energetic, exciting and stimulating place in which to live, which grows artists and talented people and attracts them from abroad. However, there is much that we legislators can do to help the arts to progress and to open up access to artistic and cultural life. One of ways in which we can do that is through infrastructure. I was pleased to see that the SNP manifesto promised to encourage the expansion of community radio, and I look forward to seeing the proposals for how that expansion will take place.

I will look up their recording of transmission and listen to it. That was prescient. On Tuesday, I was in London speaking to the United Kingdom Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries, Ed Vaizey, who confirmed that the second tranche of funding for superfast broadband development in the UK is due to be announced next month, and that Scotland will do well out of that announcement. I welcome that because I think that we should not only be able to have footfalls in galleries in Scotland, but enable Scots to have access to the galleries of the world by clicking through virtual tours on the internet. Access is a huge part of the arts equation, and one of the best ways in which we can open up arts to everyone in Scotland is through the festivals that we have up and down the country. I have talked about the ones that we have in Glasgow, and there are other local festivals as well as national ones. Participation in festivals, including at the grass-roots level, can do a great deal. The voluntary arts—they have not been spoken about in this debate, but I hope to hear more about them—which include craft and traditional craft, do a great deal to help with wellbeing and sense of community, and issues such as confidence, team building and mental health. I want to touch on the Commonwealth games in my flexible six minutes. We all know that, alongside the Olympic games—that other huge multisport event—runs a cultural Olympiad. I hope that we can have something similar in Glasgow in 2014. I recognise what the cabinet secretary said about investigating options. We must get an accelerated start on that if we are going to make sure that it is a success in 2014.

I hope that the cabinet secretary will come back to that point in her closing remarks; I am just about to finish. The arts in Scotland have so much to give. Let us give them to the wider world that comes to visit us. Yes, £5.4 billion in the Scottish economy comes from the arts and culture, but they have so much more value than the number of pounds that we put on them. We have so much to be proud of and so many people who make Scotland the cultural giant that she is. From the biggest of the movie stars to the village theatre group, we are a race and a people with a hundred stories and a thousand voices to tell each one. I hope that the Government fulfils its commitment to the arts in the coming parliamentary session. It will find the Conservatives to be helpful and consensual when it has good ideas, robust auditing and firm foundations for the future but, by God, we will be harsh critics should it fail to live up to the high expectations of the people of Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Does the minister agree that we have a problem with take-up in certain parts of the country, particularly in my part of Glasgow, which, despite having some of the best digital infrastructure in Scotland, has a broadband participation rate of 53 per cent, which is lower than the Scottish average? Does she agree that making the supply available does not always lead to a big take-up?

Is the cabinet secretary criticising the Scottish Government for consulting her when it does not need to? That sounds a little like what she is doing, which is bizarre.

I meant the UK Government.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her good wishes to me on taking up my new post as the culture spokesperson for the Conservatives. I also welcome the ascension of the post of Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs to the Cabinet of the Scottish Government. I also thank the cabinet secretary for her speech about the Scottish digital network. As one of the many newbies in the Parliament, I recognise the amount of work that was done on the matter by members in the previous session of Parliament, particularly by my former colleague Ted Brocklebank. That work was impressive, but we need more information, particularly following the cabinet secretary’s speech. First, we need to hear more about the framework and vision for a digital network. Are we talking about linear or online programming? Would it be on demand or a mixture? How would it happen? What would the progression be? How would we future proof the content that would be sent out across the nation? We have issues surrounding the funding and timeline for establishing such a network. We also have grave questions about the impact on our current broadcasting output in Scotland, particularly concerning BBC Scotland, the jobs there and Gaelic broadcasting. I will get on to those issues in a moment. My colleague Alex Johnstone will talk in some detail about the boy side of it: the nuts and bolts, the heavy engineering and the pipes that will take all the content into people’s houses. Before that, I will come back on some of the points that the cabinet secretary raised. When we talked about the problem with the take-up rate for digital broadcasting, particularly broadband and the infrastructure that is at the crux of the debate, the cabinet secretary suggested that there was a deficiency of content and that, if we improved content, we would improve the take-up rate. The problem with that argument is that, in Glasgow—my area and Patricia Ferguson’s—the take-up rate is low. That is nothing to do with how Scottish or Glaswegian the available content is, because Glasgow is best served of all the areas of Scotland by an identifiably Glaswegian and Scottish television output. It is where the major two networks are based. It is where the jobs are. It is where many of the dramas, such as “Lip Service” and “Taggart”, are based. People there see themselves represented on the screen, but we still see a low take-up rate. I am not sure that content is the problem. The problem is that the digital network report and the cabinet secretary have conflated what is free and what is not. Glasgow has a low take-up rate because it has areas of great poverty. It has a low take-up rate because of the economics, not because of the programming and the output. The problem is that, although a digital network may be funded centrally, people would have to pay for the facility to have it in their homes. They would still pay for their broadband.

That is where the conflation and confusion are. We have always installed the strategic hardware centrally. That is fine, but if somebody uses their personal computer to access the digital pipes that we lay, they still pay whoever runs the software on it to connect to the internet. I have digressed slightly, so I will move on. We need structure and clarity on the proposed television channel. Part of the remit of the report from Blair Jenkins was inclusion for all. One great way of achieving that is on a platform such as Freeview. Like many other members, I welcomed the coming of BBC Alba to Freeview so that more people could watch it. However, I worry that BBC Alba will be the Government’s chosen method of transmission for the new content. If there was a business and political case for a Gaelic channel three years ago, where has that case gone if the channel is now to be used for English-language broadcasting? I would like some clarity on that.

I am glad of the reassurance that such a development would be by invitation. I worry about protecting a service for which members of the Parliament fought hard. My main problem is that there will be an impact on people. I have spent 10 years of my working life in broadcasting across Scotland—in the BBC, the commercial sector and the independent sector. Particularly with my most recent former employer—the BBC—I have seen job cuts in the past few years. In the three-year redundancy rounds between 2005 and 2008, 3,500 jobs went in the BBC in the UK; 700 journalists across the UK went, and Scotland was affected proportionally. The people who left the BBC—such as me and many of my colleagues who chose to take redundancy—did not stay in broadcasting in Scotland. When people leave the sector, they often go off to do other things. My problem with the Government’s proposed funding structure—top-slicing the BBC’s licence fee—is that it will have consequences, including for BBC Scotland. I want it to be protected. I hope to hear more from the cabinet secretary on all those issues in her closing speech. I move amendment S4M-00308.1, to delete from “and encourages” to end and insert: “without compromising existing broadcasting capability.”

Does the member acknowledge that the amount of UK network programming that has been commissioned, executed and filmed in Scotland and which has been shown to the entire UK audience has increased by 150 per cent over the past two years? By its very nature, such programming would not be available on a digital network.

Is the member suggesting that, for example, “Lip Service”, a network programme shown on BBC 3 and set in Glasgow, featuring a bunch of Glaswegian lesbians, was in any way just a box-ticking exercise rather than a fine piece of programming that was set in Scotland and designed for the entirety of the UK?

In the lead-up to last year’s general election there were a number of Scottish debates, which involved the Secretary of State for Scotland, the shadow Scottish secretary and Alistair Carmichael from the Liberal Democrats—but not Alex Salmond, who seemed to be complaining about leaders’ debates. He had four opportunities to speak up in 2010, but he chose not to use them.

Does the member have any statistical analysis to show that, on the two major networks that she mentions, the audience is not the same when a UK news bulletin is followed by a Scottish news bulletin or, in the case of STV, a Scottish news bulletin is followed by a UK news bulletin—in other words, that people do not choose to watch both because they want to hear from both?

Thank you for your generosity, Presiding Officer. I never need a second request to keep my mouth open and my gums flapping for longer. I start my closing speech by congratulating Angus MacDonald on his maiden speech. It was a thoughtful and dignified speech on an issue on which there has been broad agreement in the chamber. We are all supportive of a Scottish digital network, and I hope that the cabinet secretary has seen the questions that have been raised from the Labour and Conservatives benches as ones in which we have looked for clarification rather than just provided criticism. Looking across the chamber, I see the Labour members, and I appreciate their nostalgia for how far back they can remember, through all the progression that we have had to digital television. Helen Eadie and James Kelly talked about their flickering black-and-white cathode ray tubes, and Patricia Ferguson remembered the days before BBC 2. As a shameless copycat, I will mention the quirk of fate that means that I was born in the same week as BBC Radio Scotland as it grew out of the home service. In the past couple of years, we have both had a rather significant birthday, which I think we would both rather forget. There are two sides to the debate in hand. One is about broadcasting: television, content, what we want to see, the context we want to see it in, who it is available to, and how they get it. The other side is the infrastructure: the pipes that are laid, who gets what, how fast and whether they can upload and download, and how the technology and infrastructure are used to help ordinary Scots up and down the country. Let me turn first to the meat and two veg of broadcasting—the content. We have heard a lot from SNP members about having Scottish broadcasting in a Scottish context. In her contribution, Joan McAlpine basically said that, although she enjoyed watching networked BBC programming, she was upset that Scottish issues were not put in a Scottish context and that the programmes that she chooses to listen to on Radio 5 live and Radio 4 perhaps do not get it. First, we must consider what we mean when we talk about the BBC. We are not just talking about broadcasting and programming that is played across all four of the home nations; we are talking, too, about our own content. It is remiss of the member, when she talks about Scottish public service broadcasting and Scottish news and current affairs in particular, not to mention programmes such as “Good Morning Scotland”, “Call Kaye”, “John Beattie”, “Newsdrive”, “Scotland at Ten”, “Newsweek Scotland”, “Shereen”, “Reporting Scotland”, “The Politics Show Scotland”, “Newsnight Scotland” and “Frontline Scotland”. Those are just the BBC shows that I could think of while she was speaking. It is unfair to say that we in this country have a politics and news agenda that is unexamined.

People who work for STV news, for “North Tonight” and in commercial radio would suggest that there is no monopoly on news provision in Scotland but that people go across the way to get it. We also have “Channel 4 News”, which is funded by the licence fee. I rise to the challenge that was given to me by the cabinet secretary’s colleague, Mark McDonald, who said that, as a Conservative, I should not be afraid of competition for the BBC in Scotland. I absolutely am not. As I said during the debate, my worry is not about competition for the BBC. I want a Scottish digital network and I am supportive of it, as are all members around the chamber, but I do not want it to damage the fine programmes that I have mentioned. I want to see Scottish broadcasting plus; I do not want to see Scottish broadcasting flatlining and Peter being robbed to pay Paul. I am worried about the funding structure that has been identified, which is top-slicing the BBC licence fee by 2 per cent. First, it is recognised that it is unlikely that the licence fee round will be reopened before 2017, yet the timeline for a Scottish digital network precedes that. We have legitimate questions about how we will pay for its start-up and running in the first couple of years. Also, if we top-slice the BBC budget, what are the consequences for the 1,250 people who work for the BBC throughout Scotland? I am thinking not just of those in Pacific Quay, in Glasgow, but of those in the regional outposts in the Borders, in Aberdeen and the north-east and in Edinburgh. I am even thinking of—dare I say it—the parliamentary scrutineers that we have in the Tun at Holyrood. There are plenty of questions.

I am saying that there would be consequences for Scotland. I am not saying that the full £75 million would be taken from Scotland, but it is wrong to say that it would have no impact on the BBC in Scotland at a time when its budget has been reducing—as the whole BBC budget has, and as the workforce has been reducing. It would be a dangerous precedent to set. Questions have been raised both by Labour members and by ourselves, and we look forward to working with the cabinet secretary in the future. We need to examine the provision of broadband, and I welcome the on-going pilot in the Highlands and Islands and the work that is proposed for the south of Scotland. We need to look at take-up, which is far more to do with cost than with content and needs to be addressed. We also need a Scottish digital network that adds to the cultural life of Scotland, creates more jobs and gives us greater provision, not one that, in purely competitive terms, affects current broadcasting and the high standard of broadcasting that we have in this country.

It gives me great pleasure to be called to speak in this debate, to follow Richard Lyle, who gave a robust but dignified maiden speech, and to welcome, in absentia, the cabinet secretary to her expanded role. As the Conservatives’ newly minted cities spokesperson, I was delighted to hear in the last minute of her speech that, at a future date, we will have a wholly separate debate on city issues. Instead of discussing cities strategy today, therefore, I will turn to an issue of health and wellbeing that is of great importance to my own city of Glasgow and which was touched on by Alison McInnes. It is an issue not of acute care, which we have heard a lot about already, but of primary care—the issue of mental health. At this point, I give a nod to my colleague Mary Scanlon for her continued hard work in this area. Mental ill health is a huge problem in Scotland. It affects thousands of people in any number of aspects of their life. It is an element in one in three visits to the GP. It is not like a broken leg that can be reset, or an infection that can be cured. Anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, personality disorder and schizophrenia do not follow a linear diagnosis-to-cure pattern. Some conditions recur, some can stand alone, some are contributing factors to other health and social problems, and some mental ill health can be the side effect of those problems. The care across Scotland can vary widely in approach and timescale and the social stigma attached can be great. I appreciate the feelings of fear, confusion, shame and sometimes even guilt—at not being strong enough or at letting people down—that can surround the diagnosis of mental ill health. Considering an approach that too often sees pills as the answer and tells the patient that they will be put on a sometimes very long waiting list for talking therapy before they can see someone to discuss those feelings, it strikes me that we have not quite got the balance right. If members ask why that relates to Glasgow, the answer is fairly simple. As with a number of health conditions, a so-called Glasgow effect exists for mental health. Even if we account for age, gender, economic activity, physical activity and alcohol consumption, residents of the Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board area are still more than twice as likely to have symptoms of severe anxiety as people elsewhere in the country. If we look in purely numbers terms, that can be played out with pretty fatal consequences: Glasgow’s suicide rate is significantly higher than that of the rest of Scotland. I contend that we need to do better at addressing those conditions for the sake of both the patients and our communities. The impact and legacy of the conditions is great. The cabinet secretary has invested a great deal of political capital in minimum pricing by unit to reduce alcohol consumption. While it is true that alcohol abuse is a contributor to mental ill health, it is also true that mental ill health can be a contributor to alcohol abuse, so I ask that the cabinet secretary use a small portion of her political capital to address that side of the argument as well. Just as mental ill health can be a contributing factor to alcohol abuse, so it is in other areas that affect the health and wellbeing of not just our cities, but our nation—such as homelessness, criminality, family break-up and economic inactivity. The proportion of people on our streets, in our jails and in the welfare system who have an underlying mental health problem shows the wide scope and scale of the issue and how important it is that we make advances. I know that we are living in straitened times and that the allocation of taxpayer-funded resource must be weighed judiciously before it is apportioned. However, the social and health costs of mental ill health in Scotland are £8.6 billion a year, which is more than the entire NHS budget that the cabinet secretary controls. In its manifesto, the SNP promised to support the NHS in making £300 million of efficiency savings to be reinvested in the health service—not over the course of the Parliament, but in the next year. My plea is to consider whether any of that money could be reinvested to support mental health. In the same manifesto, the cabinet secretary expressed sympathy for a new mental health bill and said that she would consult on the development of a new national mental health strategy. I ask her to turn that sympathy into legislation that she can bring to the Parliament and that talking therapies be front and centre of any new strategy on mental health. I also look to my colleagues on the Labour and Liberal Democrat benches, for all our manifestos stated a wish to see a greater provision of talking therapies, earlier intervention and reduced waiting times. The Scottish Government has expressed the wish to gain consensus where it can, and this is one such area. My final point surrounds social stigma. We have come a long way in a short time on mental health, but there is more to do. People can still leave doctors’ surgeries with the same feelings of fear, confusion, guilt and shame, and those feelings can be aggravated by the treatment that they receive in the workplace, in education and even in their own families. Those feelings are often made worse not through badness but through ignorance. Campaigns such as the see me television and radio adverts can and do make a difference to attitudes and understanding, and I ask the cabinet secretary whether there is any provision for such campaigns. I know that it is not usual to see a Conservative arguing for more resource, but I am doing so at this time and on this issue because prioritising mental health could do so much for so many across this nation. I do not want to see the continuation of the Glasgow effect. We know that looking after our country’s mental health will help to reduce unemployment, the prison population, the level of homelessness, alcohol abuse, the amount of acute care that is necessary and all the associated costs of all those issues. It is not a silver bullet, but it is a place to start. Beyond the economic case for doing more on the issue is the human case: there are thousands of Scots whose lives will be poorer if we do not.

It gives me great pleasure to close this debate for the Conservatives. Frankly, it is an honour just to be speaking in this chamber and to be following the representatives from Glasgow who have gone before me. In particular, I would like to mention the member from my own party, Bill Aitken, who represented the city he loves for 12 years in this chamber. He gave many more years of selfless service at council level. I wish him well in his well-earned retirement. Given all Bill’s past associations and his continued vocal support, along with other members of the chamber, for Partick Thistle, it seems somewhat fitting to follow him in my first outing by talking about sport. The motion this afternoon is wide ranging in its remit, and the quality of debate has been high, particularly in the contributions from new members—I will try desperately hard to keep up. Health outcomes is one of the big issues that have been raised today, and I agree with Dr Richard Simpson on the need to ensure that the qualitative measurement of outcomes is up to scratch as we go forward. We heard too from Tavish Scott on the importance of leadership in schools, from Humza Yousaf and Alison Johnstone on the social dividend of sport, and from James Dornan on sport’s cultural impact. I would like to add a few comments of my own, as I believe that sport is part of our culture. It shapes and describes us as a nation every bit as much as art or music, literature or theatre. It affects the country’s consciousness and is part of who we are, whether that is on the march with Ally’s army in 1978—for some of the elder members of this chamber—or willing on Chris Hoy in 2008 for some of the younger ones. It is that glimpse of Murray mania at Wimbledon every year, the desolation when our team is put out of the cup, and the disgust and shame that we have all felt when a football match has spilled over into sectarianism, violence and hate. Sport has a power and influence. It captures the imagination, inflames passion and ignites ambition unlike any other pursuit. We must concentrate on making it a force for good. In Scotland we are blessed with a landscape that spoils us and a climate that does not—hence the point about the need for summer football, with which I agree. From first-class ice climbing in Kinlochleven to world-class mountain biking in Innerleithen, we have the building blocks to encourage excellence. Tavish Scott, George Adam, Clare Adamson and Jamie Hepburn all spoke of individual opportunities in their own area, and I would like to talk about my patch in Glasgow. From champions league football to world team badminton and table tennis, title fight boxing, indoor athletics and artistic gymnastics, Glasgow is and has been proud to welcome the world. We will do so again in 2014 for the Commonwealth games. I echo the words of Drew Smith when he highlights the importance of the good governance of the games and acknowledges that the current preparations are progressing on time and on budget. We need strong oversight to ensure that that continues. As such, like Dr Richard Simpson and others I welcome the appointment of Shona Robison as minister for the new portfolio of Commonwealth games and sport. I was heartened to hear that her door will be open to those from all parties who have an interest in seeing the games succeed. The crux of the debate is about increasing participation, which, as many contributors have stated, must be done at grass-roots and school levels. Liz Smith has ably set out Conservative plans for a sports trust to help the expansion of community sports throughout Scotland, and I support the amendment in her name, which calls for the Government to make more urgent progress on targets for PE provision in schools. All of us, across the chamber, want that to happen and we are concerned about the time slippage on that goal. I also inquire about the £1 million for outdoor education that was promised by John Swinney to Derek Brownlee in the 2009 budget negotiations. I hope that, in her closing remarks, the minister will clarify when that money will be forthcoming. As I stand here next to Liz Smith, it is pretty clear which one of us has been an international athlete—it is not me. I am a club player at best, taking the occasional hill walk or exercise class, and that is about my limit. Yet, despite those limitations, my life has been immeasurably improved and altered by sport. At all levels, sport has the power to improve mental and physical health. It imparts a valuable lesson about how to be gracious in defeat as well as in victory. It teaches teamwork, discipline and a selflessness in front of goal. It cements friendships and it makes the spirit soar. The lessons of sport truly are the lessons of life, which is why grass-roots and community provision is so important. Whether one is testing oneself against an opponent or trying to beat one’s own best efforts, sport is about the struggle for improvement, attainment and pride. It is about our striving to be the best that we can be. I urge the Government to help us to reach our collective best, making good on its promises of PE provision, outdoor education and making the Commonwealth games in Glasgow a legacy for all of Scotland that is measured not just in money, buildings or jobs—important as those are—but in the ambition, belief, opportunity and motivation of individual Scots to go out and compete at their own level, whether that is on a five-a-side pitch in the middle of a city or above the snow line up a mountain range. The work needs to start at grass-roots level now for us to build ourselves a healthier, happier and more ambitious nation.