Will the member take an intervention?

For anyone with an interest in social and economic justice and fairness, this, of all debates, must get the political juices and emotions flowing. However, I am equally embarrassed, ashamed and angry at having to take part in such a debate in a wealthy, developed nation. People in my home village, my county, my country, throughout the nations of the UK and way beyond cannot feed their children, their families or, indeed, themselves. More than 50,000 of our fellow Scots sought help in the past year alone. That is the equivalent of every man, woman and child in a full Ibrox or Celtic Park on a Saturday going hungry. It is a huge and growing scandal. Those who present to food banks are decent people. They are often hard-working people who are keeping down a job or several jobs trying to survive but they are forced to wipe away their tears, swallow their pride and walk through the doors of the food bank to ask for help to feed their children. I have been unemployed but I am very fortunate that it was for a short period and neither I nor any members of my family have ever ended up going hungry. I cannot imagine what it is like to look into the cupboard or fridge and see little or nothing there—indeed, I do not think that any of us can. I cannot imagine the mental turmoil, the pressure, the feelings and thoughts that people experience in the days and weeks leading up to the time when they are forced into a situation in which the food bank is their only option. We can only wonder how that feels. Even the thought of it makes my stomach churn as I speak. God knows what it is like for those who are in the real-life situation. We must be honest that the growth in the use of food banks has not occurred by chance. It has not occurred because of an individual’s behaviour. It has not happened because of somebody’s bad luck. It has happened because of deliberate political choices and a decades-long adherence to the doctrine of neoliberalism. That is an ideology that promotes the rule of the market, the free movement of capital and goods, deregulation, trickle-down economics, an attack on organised labour and freedom from the state. It celebrates reducing public expenditure for social services such as health and education, promotes privatisation and promotes individualism over a collective approach to our economy and society. It is a doctrine that has dominated political thinking over the past 40 years and has resulted in the mass redistribution of resources from poor people to rich people; repeated attacks on trade unions; market deregulation; the privatisation of our public services including, in some countries, the water that people drink; and poverty and food shortages across the developing world, which are now coming to us in the developed world. At the same time, the biggest corporations have been rewarded with yet more tax cuts and profits. All the time, benefits, services and social protection have been reduced. Food banks, homelessness, low pay and insecure work are the symptoms of such a system. Stuart McMillan referred to Westminster as the problem. I am as happy as anyone to put the boot into the Tories and the Liberals, but there are food banks in France, Spain and across the EU. Tory cuts exacerbate the problem, but they are not the root cause of the problem. That is much, much deeper. Of course, it is telling that not one Tory or pathetic Liberal could turn up to this debate to take the consequences. They are usually here for every members’ business debate, yet there is not one of them here today. I would like this to be a world in which we see feeding people as our priority over profit, and in which we use new technology and human ingenuity to banish the scourge of hunger for everyone.

I am reluctant to get into party politics, but I ask the minister: who is most affected by the cuts to council services? Is it people on the lowest income or people on the highest income?

According to the Government, the failure to construct the Almond curve on the line will mean that the Winchburgh tunnel will close for a minimum of 44 days at a cost of £10 million that will have to be paid in compensation to ScotRail. That will mean 44 days of expensive travel disruption across central Scotland. Will the minister look again at that crazy decision with a view to building the Almond chord, thus investing in much-needed infrastructure and avoiding the waste of scarce public funds?

While the member is on the bedroom tax, will he take the opportunity to commend the innovative use of the member’s bill process by Jackie Baillie, which forced the issue up the agenda?

The bedroom tax is one reform that is having a real impact on people’s health and wellbeing. Will the cabinet secretary therefore support Jackie Baillie’s proposed member’s bill that would help those people?

The cabinet secretary used to be a socialist. In a quiet moment, such as today, will he tell us—just us, nobody else—what his real view is of John Swinney’s voodoo economics, which will rip £350 million a year out of public services in corporate tax cuts? That policy will have a real detrimental impact on health and social policies, which in turn will impact on life expectancy.

My brother is a multiple sclerosis sufferer. He cannot walk because of his condition, so he uses a wheelchair permanently. Like many disabled travellers, he is sadly used to experiencing a wide range of problems when travelling at home and abroad, particularly when he is going on holiday. He could have problems with booking, poor information provision, problems with the hotel or his room, or issues with buses and taxis. The list appears to go on and on, and the problems will be familiar to many disabled travellers. On his most recent holiday, the experience that he and his partner had was so bad that I felt that it had to be exposed because, without doubt, many other people will have had similar experiences. Since I lodged the motion, and my brother’s case was featured in the Sunday Mail, many other people have come forward and shared similar experiences. Last year, John booked a holiday via a Scottish company, Barrhead Travel, and requested the usual adapted room with a roll-in shower and all the other things that he would need on holiday. On making the booking, he asked the adviser whether there would be an aisle wheelchair on board the aircraft so that he could get to and from the toilet while he was on the flight. Of course, that was confirmed. However, when he boarded the Jet2 flight, he found that, despite previous assurances, no aisle wheelchair was available. The stewardess he spoke to advised him that they did not have such a thing. Indeed, she did not even know what one was. He then had to board the plane last, in front of everyone else, which he found very embarrassing. As someone with limited mobility, he had to drag himself to his seat, which took a great deal of time and energy. He was then seated in the ninth row from the toilet and told that there was no aisle wheelchair to get him to and from the toilet, and that he was not allowed to move seats because he would be blocking the evacuation route for able-bodied passengers should there be an emergency. The cabin steward was very defensive—indeed, he was aggressive and unhelpful—and my brother had to endure the humiliation of discussing his toilet requirements and health problems in front of all the other passengers. He was told that the cabin crew could not assist him to move, if needed, as that was against the company’s health and safety policy. At one point, the situation became like a “Carry On” film, because the cabin crew suggested that his partner should carry him if he needed to be moved. That ignored the fact that she is small and he is over 6ft tall and weighs 13 stone. It was an utterly ridiculous suggestion. Customer service seems to apply only to able-bodied passengers as far as Jet2 is concerned. The company seems to be happy enough to take money from disabled passengers while treating them with complete contempt. I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, and I will not ask you to respond to the point, but I do not think that many of us could last for a four-hour flight without needing to go to the little boys’ or little girls’ room. Of course, the situation was repeated on my brother’s return journey. How did he feel? He was certainly embarrassed, angry, disappointed, and humiliated. He had been treated very much like a second, third, or fourth-class citizen. He felt that no one was interested and that they did not care about his most basic needs. For other passengers, things can be as bad or even worse. The trailblazers group of the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign has highlighted a number of related problems for wheelchair users travelling on flights. Some people have been unable to take flights because most of the budget airlines will not carry wheelchairs of above a certain weight. Wheelchairs have been damaged beyond repair, and people have said that they have low expectations of airlines’ ability to take care of their medical and mobility equipment. I thank the trailblazers group, the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign, and Roberto Castiglioni of the Reduced Mobility Rights campaign for their efforts to improve the rights of disabled travellers. Things need to change. We need to ensure that airlines provide a decent and dignified service for all passengers at all times. In June 2012, the European Commission issued guidelines to improve and facilitate the application of Regulation (EC) 1107/2006, but they are not legally binding. The guidelines state: “Under Annex II to the Regulation cabin crew are required to provide appropriate assistance to disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility in moving from their seat to toilet facilities if required. Any particular procedures implemented for the assistance of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility should neither compromise the performance or the health and safety of cabin crew in undertaking their duties”. The guidelines also state that on-board portable “aisle wheelchairs should be used for this purpose where available.” However, that is only guidance. The Civil Aviation Authority suggests that “providing assistance without the use of an on-board wheelchair should be avoided unless airlines are able to overcome inherent health and safety concerns.” Some airlines are doing very well in that regard and I commend British Airways, Thomson, Thomas Cook, Virgin Atlantic and Ryanair—I know that some people may be surprised by that. However, Jet2, Flybe, easyJet, CityJet and Aer Lingus do not provide on-board wheelchairs and Monarch does only if a special request is made. I say to those airlines: get into the 21st century and get your act together because your competitors are providing those services and you need to, too. Finally, since the events that I described and the publicity surrounding them, Barrhead Travel has updated its website on accessibility guidance, and I encourage other travel agents to do so because some of them are making poor provision for disabled passengers. New accessibility guidance has come from ABTA for its members. The reality is, though, that space and cost factors appear to be the only ones preventing airlines from adopting on-board aisle wheelchairs as a standard feature. However, given that Ryanair, one of the lowest-cost carriers, provides aisle wheelchairs on board its entire fleet, space and cost arguments simply do not stack up. Barring the physical limitations on smaller aircraft, all airplanes flying from and to Scotland, the United Kingdom, and all European countries should be equipped with on-board wheelchairs. It is only fair to say that the airline industry now has no plausible argument to further delay adopting on-board aisle wheelchairs as a standard feature on board each and every aircraft that has the ability to carry and use them. In this year of all years, when the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup are coming to Scotland and disabled passengers will come from all over the world to visit Scotland, every airplane landing in Scotland with over 60 seats that is capable of carrying on-board aisle wheelchairs should have them. That would allow every passenger to travel with some level of dignity.

I have two points. First, we are not asking anybody to adapt any plane; we are asking them to purchase a very small piece of equipment and train their staff to use it. Secondly, not one airline has made an approach to discuss the issue with me. I have had correspondence with some of them, but not one person from any airline has made an approach to discuss any of this with me.

I am grateful for the minister’s comments so far, but will she consider writing to the various organisations and Governments, the European Commission and the airlines themselves to see whether this proposal could be taken forward on a voluntary basis instead of waiting for legislation?

I am glad that Jackson Carlaw remembers that. Given that Mr Griffin was not born at that time, perhaps Jackson Carlaw can tell him about it.

Suicide affects far too many families and communities throughout the world. It is reported that an astonishing 1 million people commit suicide every year. That is one every 40 seconds—more than all the world’s murders and wars combined. There are, of course, many reasons why people decide to take their own life but, whatever they are, the fact that 1 million avoidable deaths take place through suicide every year is a truly shocking statistic. I echo the sentiments of the minister and the Scottish Government that much work needs to be done. Therefore, I welcome the new suicide prevention strategy that the Government is introducing. I hope that it will build on the good work already being carried out by the likes of the choose life programme and various other programmes in which local authorities, health boards, communities and many other agencies are involved. Prevention is the key to all activity and informs the new national strategy. However, in forming any prevention strategy, we must be fully aware of the facts and figures so that we can target resources effectively. For example, we need to know why men are nearly three times more likely than women to take their own life. We need to understand that the most vulnerable group is men between the ages of 35 and 44. However, men aged 25 to 34 and 45 to 54 also appear to be highly vulnerable. I find the socioeconomics of the matter stark. There is a very strong correlation between suicide rates and levels of social and economic deprivation. Between 2008 and 2012, the age-standardised rate was more than four times higher in the most deprived tenth of the population than in the least deprived tenth. I have to say that, with income levels falling, welfare changes and the general thrust of austerity, desperation can and does creep into people’s lives when they are on the breadline. The Samaritans report “Men and Suicide: Why it’s a social issue” points to an increased risk as income goes down, as well as to an increased risk in groups with poor education and among unskilled manual workers and social housing tenants. I will make one other point on statistics. I note that the figures in the motion and the Government’s new strategy state that there has been an 18 per cent reduction in the suicide rate in the past 10 years. However, I looked at local authority figures prior to the debate and it appears that there is a difference between the headline figure in the strategy and the local authority figures. Perhaps, in his closing speech or after the debate, the minister could clarify the difference between what is in the strategy and the figures that local authorities produced. I make that not as a political point but as a point of clarification. Beyond the statistics, we need to focus and refocus on prevention and on targeting people and groups in the communities where they live. As members would expect, there are many sources of information and analysis on the subject. The report to which I referred—“Men and Suicide: Why it’s a social issue”—highlights a number of points, but the socioeconomic dimension jumps out. We need to address the fact that suicide figures are significantly higher in the communities that I mentioned. As a general rule, the poorer someone is, the more likely they are to self-harm. At a basic level, if someone lives in poor housing, has a very low income, is under financial pressure and does not have support systems around them, and if their life seems devoid of hope, it is unsurprising but nevertheless upsetting that they might take the appalling option of suicide. For other people, major events or changes in their life are the trigger. That could be job loss, relationship breakdown, the death of a friend or loved one or a change in physical health or mental wellbeing. The Samaritans report points to a number of factors that contribute to the high figures. The main ones are whether they are male, their background, personality traits and emotional literacy and mid-life challenges. Those are issues that any strategy must recognise and address. Of course, we must draw people out to enable them to share their feelings and concerns. I am sure that we would all recognise that we Scots are not the best at talking about our personal difficulties. We may be free with our moans about the weather, the national football team, physical ailments or the after-effects of a good night out, but we are much more reticent when it comes to our inner feelings, emotions and what is going on inside our heads. We do not tend to share those feelings. Often, the last people we are willing to share our troubles with are the very people who can help us most: the people we live and work with and the people we love and care most about. There are many attractive things about our national character but that is a part of it that we have to change quickly because, for far too many of our fellow Scots, those troubled feelings, which are often caused by major events or experiences in their lives, cause them to self-harm or suicide. Of course, we need to develop platforms to help people to open up, and I hope that the Government's strategy helps to ensure that that will happen. I want to finish by giving voice to someone who has been affected by suicide and who is a relative of one of the 3,904 suicides in Scotland over the past five years. This person, who is a friend of mine, told me this week about his family’s experience, and I said that I would relay what he said to the Parliament. He said that the issue of mental health problems needs to be publicised more on television and online and in newspapers, magazines and the general media. He said that such awareness raising is important but that brief, infrequent adverts are never going to be enough. The first port of call must be to ensure that ordinary people—family and friends—can spot the signs that there are problems and know what they are. More awareness raising through the media would help, and I am grateful that the strategy points to greater use of social media. He also said that the health service must get away from attempting a quick fix by prescribing pills for mental health conditions such as depression rather than taking a longer-term approach, and that mental health services have to be more effective and accessible. That is still not happening. It takes months for a client to see someone and, when they manage to do so, the number of sessions that they are allowed is restricted. He also said that his family had great support from the charity Touched by Suicide Scotland, which runs eight self-help groups and works in five different council areas. It has expressed frustration at the different ways in which it is treated by local authorities. Some are very supportive but others appear to completely fail to recognise the support needed by individuals who are bereaved by suicide. On awareness training, the charity urges us to go much further and make the focus of training much wider than previously, when it has been mainly on health service staff. Of course, GPs, nurses, health visitors and so on need training, but we also need to train housing officers, benefits staff, advice workers, shop stewards, bar staff and people who work in bookmakers, bingo halls and the like, because they will come into contact with people who may be at risk of self-harm. I hope that, under commitment 2 of the strategy, training will be considered for those groups of workers. Touched by Suicide also expresses concern about support for children and young people who are at risk of suicide and says that not enough is being done in schools and colleges. It says that, if a child is at risk of suicide and is classed as priority, the quickest timescale for them to be seen by someone is within five days, which can often be too long. It raises concern about funding being a big problem for small organisations that support people who have been bereaved by suicide. If they support people in different areas, they often have to submit multiple applications for funding in each of the geographical areas that they work in. Five years ago, when I was a councillor, six constituents in my ward took their own lives in an 18-month to two-year period. Six lives wasted, six families shattered and communities devastated. I hope that the strategy has the impact that it is designed to have. I speak regularly to the friends and family of those six people. They never forget, and they never stop saying one word: “Why?”

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Could you provide members with guidance on parliamentary language? I am sure that if we did a basic search for the words “misled” or “misleading” it would show that they have been used dozens of times during the current session, whether in committee or in the chamber. Indeed, in yesterday’s health debate, the word “misleading” was also used. Can you advise us on how the rules will be applied consistently to all members, and whether the words “misled” or “misleading” are correct parliamentary language?

The NHS, which was introduced by that radical post-war Labour Government of Attlee and Bevan, is the greatest social policy that has ever been implemented by any Government. The principle of the collective payment of taxes for the universal provision of health services that are publicly owned and publicly accountable is one that the Parliament—certainly the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I—can agree on. In the spirit of consensus for which the cabinet secretary and I are well known, I say that we also reject the marketisation of the NHS and the so-called reforms that are wreaking so much havoc on the NHS in England. I believe that Scottish Labour and the Scottish Government are at one in doing that. Indeed, so bad are the Tory reforms that even Jackson Carlaw will not endorse them—that tells us everything about what is going on in England. We can also agree on the commitment, dedication and skill of the whole NHS workforce, without whom the NHS would simply not function. We ignore them and their concerns at our peril. Health is fully devolved and our responsibility in this Parliament is to hold ministers to account for what is going on here in Scotland. As the motion sets out, the reality is that the NHS in Scotland and the staff who work in it are under pressure as never before. There are budget pressures, fewer staff are being asked to do more for less, the social care system is in crisis and there is bed blocking. Waiting times are increasing, there is only a skeleton weekend service, vacancy rates are up and the number of cases of bullying and the use of gagging clauses to silence staff are up. In addition, junior doctors are being left to look after up to 100 beds while working up to 100 hours a week and patients are being left on trolleys and are sometimes being treated in cupboards. Only last week, at the Western general hospital, patients were being left on trolleys for up to 13 hours. Let us also not forget Scotland’s shame of health inequality, which is increasing despite the Scottish Government’s rhetoric—unsurprising, given the £1 billion of cuts to anti-poverty initiatives. In the summer, I called for a full-scale review of the NHS in Scotland. That call was not made on a whim or for narrow party-political reasons; it followed wide-ranging discussions that I had had with doctors, consultants, nurses, patients, trade unions and a range of stakeholders from across the NHS. The evidence that they presented convinced me that we need to look at the whole system to ensure that the NHS is fit to meet the needs and demands of the 21st century. We need such a review to examine how we sustainably finance and resource the NHS; to ensure that we have the right people in the right places to meet growing demands and expectations on health services; and to address not only the challenges but the opportunities of an ageing population. Let us look at some of the evidence to support that call. Caroline Gardner, the Auditor General for Scotland, told the Public Audit Committee about the hidden waiting times scandal. Let us remember that this was the scandal that Nicola Sturgeon said did not exist. Ms Gardner said that “the focus of attention of the Scottish Government and NHS boards during 2011 was on whether the 18-week treatment target time was being achieved rather than on how it was being achieved.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1218.] That information should have rung alarm bells with those in charge of the health service at the time. Caroline Gardner also said that the NHS budget was on an amber warning. We now see her organisation highlighting how only three health boards met the 12-week legal treatment time guarantee, with nine of the 14 boards failing to meet the accident and emergencies target. Caroline Gardner, in her most recent report, said that in 2012-13 pressures had increased and the health service was focused on short-term measures: “The health service needs to increase its focus on longer-term financial planning so that it is prepared for the challenges it faces.” Dr Brian Keighley of the British Medical Association said in October 2013: “NHS managers have the unenviable task of managing shrinking budgets whilst trying to achieve a range of annual targets, outcomes and performance standards that are set by government ... This can leave boards focusing on planning services for the short term; making savings from easy targets such as the workforce ... This is not sustainable and the BMA welcomes Audit Scotland’s recommendation to introduce structures that encourage longer term planning for NHS boards.” Theresa Fyffe of the Royal College of Nursing Scotland said that the Audit Scotland report “paints a picture of an NHS that is doing its best whilst”— listen to this— “creaking at the seams.” She continued: “next year’s health budget doesn’t look set to change much in practice. It is not sustainable to manage the health service in this way, as shown all too clearly by missed waiting times targets, growing vacancy rates for nurses and other healthcare staff and an increasing reliance on bank and agency staff as well as private healthcare.”

Mr McDonald makes my argument for me. We need an overall review of the NHS to look at those very issues. Theresa Fyffe is absolutely right. Private sector spend is up by a quarter; the use of consultants on triple time is up; the use of agency nurses is up 62 per cent; spending on bank staff is up 15 per cent; and the vacancy rate for consultants is up by around 4.5 per cent. As consultant Simon Barker of the BMA said: “Medical staff are working over and above what is expected of them and they are feeling under considerable strain as a result; clearly this is not sustainable.” Those are the words of Simon Barker and the various groups; they are not my words. Therefore, we have a duty to listen. We see those pressures in the increase in sick days. Only in the past few days has the amount of sick days come to light, with Tayside showing that 24.5 per cent of all sick days are stress related. The figure is 16 per cent in Fife and 14 per cent in Lanarkshire. Before Christmas, we were reminded of the tragic death of Dr Lauren Connelly, who died in an accident having worked excessive hours in the week prior to her death. We cannot treat young people who are the future of the NHS like that. That is why I have called on the Health and Safety Executive to examine junior doctors’ hours, and I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will support that call. Junior doctors are often asked to work 100 hours a week. That is unhealthy for them and their patients. I know that we will talk about averaging out the working time directive and all the rest of that, but a doctor who is working for 90 or 100 hours a week cannot function or deal with their patients properly. What about the cabinet secretary’s claim that the NHS is moving to 24/7 working? Although some health boards have yet to respond, we know from a recent freedom of information request that, in Forth Valley, 553 allied health professionals—who include physiotherapists and occupational therapists—work during the week, whereas only 40 work at the weekend. In Fife, 2,043 nurses work during the week, but only 648 work at the weekend. In Lothian, more than 1,100 medical staff work on weekdays, but only 25 work at the weekend. Does the cabinet secretary believe that those staffing numbers support his theory that the NHS is a 24/7 service? In addition, we had the report on NHS Lanarkshire, which covers the cabinet secretary’s constituency. As some of my Lanarkshire colleagues will undoubtedly cover, it is a service that is said to be in a “state of perpetual crisis”. Speaking of that report, Dr Neil Dewhurst of the Royal College of Physicians, said: “The findings of this review make depressing, but not surprising reading ... Clinicians across Scotland will recognise the challenges facing colleagues in Lanarkshire. Doctors and nurses work under severe pressure with rising numbers of patients treated by a workforce with high locum levels and local recruitment difficulties.” In social care, in Edinburgh 15 per cent of the places in private care homes are unavailable because of concerns about the level of care that is being provided. The knock-on effect of that is that there is no place for more than 100 patients who are waiting in hospital to be discharged. In the home care sector, which is based on the minimum wage, contracts have been driven down to the lowest levels and training, wages and care visits have been cut to the bone. In some areas, according to Age Scotland, the length of visits has been reduced to as little as seven minutes. That does not amount to “world-leading” social care, as the white paper claims. The system is not providing care and dignity to people in old age; it is failing our elderly and vulnerable people. It is also failing the staff who want to provide good care. Like many people, I have family and friends who work in the NHS and I know what pressures staff are under. I also know about the extent to which many of our staff go way beyond the call of duty to help patients. It is those same staff who are the most vocal and the most concerned about what is going on. They are desperate to provide the care that they have been trained to provide. The cabinet secretary has a choice: he can ignore those informed voices or he can act now and instruct a wide-ranging review of the health and social care system. To date, as those voices have grown louder, the cabinet secretary’s response appears to have been to stick his fingers deeper into his ears. That is simply not good enough. Our NHS needs to be staffed properly and managed effectively, and people and stakeholders need to have confidence in it. For the sake of our best-loved public service, I appeal to the cabinet secretary to initiate that review today. I move, That the Parliament believes that the NHS is the country's most valued and loved public service; notes the growing pressures on health services and staff across Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to conduct a full and comprehensive review of the NHS in Scotland to ensure that it can become a 24/7 service fit for the 21st century.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The cabinet secretary said that my call for a review was absurd. Does that mean that the RCN, the Chartered Institute of Physiotherapists and the calls for change in the BMA’s new year message are also absurd—or is it only me who is absurd?

Answer the question.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

When we come to this chamber, we should have the correct information. Given that the cabinet secretary has said something that is absolutely wrong, will you provide an opportunity for him to return to the chamber later and correct the record?

Theresa Fyffe of the RCN said: “The Scottish Government cannot simply continue to say that the number of nurses working in the NHS is higher now than it was a couple of years ago—this misses the point entirely. We need enough appropriately skilled nurses ... working in the right places to both meet growing demand and deliver good quality care.” Does Bob Doris acknowledge those comments?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member completely misrepresents what happened last week. He knows what we were voting on last week, but he just decides to make things up. That is nothing unusual; that is how his Government works—it just makes things up as it goes along.

If the member is supporting the call for a review, I would happily discuss the terms of reference with the minister; I am sure that the minister would accept the member’s input into that, too. However, can I nail something on this? We are reflecting the call from stakeholders from across the national health service, including a number who were at The Herald’s health conference and who called for a major review of social care as well. It is not just us who are calling for a review, but people from across the NHS.

Oh dear.

Is not it the case, however, that a social care system that is based on driving down contracts, terms and conditions and standards cannot meet the demands that are being placed upon it?

Will the minister give way?

NHS Lothian said it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

To clarify, NHS Lothian itself provided the information to which the minister referred.

In today’s The Herald, we read of the case of consultant psychiatrist Dr Jane Hamilton, who is a doctor at St John’s hospital in my region. Dr Hamilton has bravely spoken out about the attempt by her employers to gag her from raising concerns about the care that was being provided to women in the unit where she worked. Dr Hamilton has written to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on several occasions, asking him to examine her case independently, but to date her request has been declined. Will the First Minister step in in this case and will he condemn the use of gagging clauses in cases in which national health service staff raise concerns about patient care and safety?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how many classroom assistants have been employed in schools in each of the last five years. (S4O-02750)

Classroom assistants play a very important role in schools and often work and build positive relationships with some of the most vulnerable pupils. What actions is the minister taking to ensure that classroom assistants are employed in adequate numbers, so that they continue to play their vital role in our schools?

What is the corporation tax rate in Germany?

Will Mr Harvie confirm that none of the countries used as exemplars of social progress, such as those in Scandinavia, has the tax competition policy that is being pursued by the Scottish Government?

Presiding Officer, “It’s class warfare. My class is winning, but they shouldn’t be.” Those are not my words but the words of Warren Buffett, one of the world’s most successful investors. He described how the finance houses, the banks and the powerful elites turned a global financial crisis that they created into a war on the poor and the weak, who played no part in creating the crisis in the first place. His analysis is being made real by the actions of the present UK Government. It sickens me to the pit of my stomach to see Osborne and the braying crew of old Etonians in their all-out attack on the unemployed, the disabled and the poor. As Buffet said, they are inflicting class warfare via brutal and degrading welfare cuts while cutting taxes for the wealthy and the big corporations. That approach should be an affront to all decent human beings.

They are despicable because they are Tories, not because they want to keep the United Kingdom together. Warren Buffet’s comments get to the nub of the big issue in politics, which is the divide between those who have power, wealth and influence, and those who do not. That is central to my approach when considering Scotland’s future. I want to see a Scotland that is governed in the interests of ordinary, working Scots; a Scotland that works in solidarity with our friends and relatives across the United Kingdom, developing a collective ethos based on the values of dignity, co-operation, community and social progress; and a Scotland that has democratic and socialist values at its core. To achieve that, I want further powers that are devolved not just to this building and this set of politicians but powers that are devolved according to the principles of democracy and subsidiarity, with power brought to the lowest and most appropriate level, where we re-empower local government by repatriating powers to councils. Councillors must be allowed to make decisions on school meals, childcare and the many other issues that they have an interest in.

No, thank you. Councillors have to be able to lower or increase taxes to meet local needs and spend money how they see fit—they will, after all, be held to account for those decisions by the electorate, whom they represent. We need to trust the people to decide, not grab powers to the centre and dictate to them. Quality public services also need a progressive taxation system—a policy that is based on the ability to pay so that higher earners pay more. I will pay more to finance good-quality childcare, free school meals and education. However, we cannot finance those things and provide tax cuts—that is simply not credible. A recent poll suggests that, in relation to local taxes, the public takes a similar view, with 60 per cent prepared to pay more council tax for better services, including childcare. Not for the first time, the people seem to be ahead of the politicians on this. [Interruption.] Across the world, as Patrick Harvie mentioned—

That is quite all right, Presiding Officer. The noisier they get, the better it is. Across the world, Laffer curve trickle-down economics has been discredited and rejected. There is no evidence whatsoever that tax competition creates jobs and growth—none whatsoever; if it did, does the finance secretary really think that the Germans, the French and the rest of the European Union would not have caught on to that? Does he think that he has discovered some great wheeze that no one else has caught on to? Tax competition will be a disaster for working people. It will suck £350 million a year out of public services such as childcare, education and all the rest of it and, inevitably, it will be the low paid, the poor, the weak and the vulnerable who will suffer most. I reject that approach in its entirety. I want to maintain the economic solidarity that sees cash transfers from areas of wealth in the UK to areas of most need. That is a good thing. I want to see the living wage implemented now, across every sector in which the Government has any influence—and, yes, that includes childcare workers.

The corporation tax policy, as applied by different Governments, is fine as long as it is consistent across the UK. [Interruption.]

It is when we have tax competition that there is a problem because we end up in a spiral of decline. That is the problem that we have. We should be using the powers that we have now to support the interests of ordinary people by mitigating the bad decisions of others—we could do that today on the bedroom tax. Why will the Government not do it? I also want action on childcare now to help people get back to work. As Malcolm Chisholm said, the argument that we cannot act because the tax revenue would go to the UK Treasury is so stomach-churningly cynical that it is beyond belief. If that is the justification for not acting now on that, why create any new jobs, and why spend any Government money on anything that will generate any tax revenue for the UK Treasury? That is a scandalously cynical argument, and the Government knows it. I want Scotland to be a country of community, solidarity, co-operation, equality and justice, and extended devolution will allow us the opportunity to achieve that. I have argued for that for the past 25 years and I am sure that I will be arguing for it up until the referendum.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

6. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that Scotland’s social care system is world leading. (S4O-02742)

The white paper states that an independent Scotland will continue to provide high-quality, “world-leading” social care. In relation to adult social care, does the cabinet secretary really believe that statement? Does he believe that a system that exists on the basis of low pay, poor working conditions, limited training and care visits that in some cases—according to Age Scotland—are now as short as seven minutes is world leading? If he does, he is simply not living in the real world.

I thank the cabinet secretary for sharing his statement with me. However, such a brief statement that is devoid of much of the detail that we would have expected in a statement on such an important issue is a disgrace and an affront to the people of Lanarkshire, so will the cabinet secretary urgently bring the issue to the chamber in a debate so that we can discuss these life-and-death matters at length? The report on NHS Lanarkshire should make the whole of Scotland sit up. It is a damning report that highlights problems with discharge information, poor levels of care, failures to escalate risks, failures to support patients whose conditions are deteriorating, poor quality of improvement systems, a lack of medical staff, a reliance on junior doctors, serious concerns about the level of nursing and a management regime and culture that appear at times to be completely out of touch with what goes on in the wards on a day-to-day basis. The review team heard that staff at all levels indicated that there was a state of perpetual crisis in NHS Lanarkshire regarding unscheduled care, yet that did not merit a mention from the cabinet secretary. People have died unnecessarily in Lanarkshire due to failures in the NHS. I have no doubt that senior management will seek to pass the buck to those hard-pressed staff who try to provide care despite the failings of management, but the reality is that this happened in the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s own constituency.

The question is: what confidence can people have in those who lead NHS Lanarkshire and the cabinet secretary’s ability to deliver safe healthcare across the rest of Scotland? Let us be clear that many of the issues that the report raises are not exclusive to Lanarkshire.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on whether the number of hours worked by junior doctors is acceptable. (S4F-01757)

Two years ago, junior doctor Lauren Connelly tragically died in a car crash on her way home from hospital. Lauren had just finished four days of straight day shifts and the first night of a seven-day run of night shifts. In the weeks prior to the accident, Lauren had been rostered to work up to 107 hours. She, like many other junior doctors, routinely worked in excess of those hours. Lauren’s father is not looking for someone to blame or scapegoat; he just wants to ensure that no other junior doctor has the same experience as Lauren, and that no one else suffers the grief and misery that his family has suffered. Will the First Minister agree to meet Brian Connelly and me to look at ways in which we can bring about the change that is needed to avoid a repeat of this very sad situation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I am absolutely sure that in replying to my questions the First Minister did not seek to deliberately mislead Parliament. However, on the case that I mentioned, it is my understanding, having spoken to the family, that no fatal accident inquiry will occur. Perhaps I can invite the First Minister—through you, Presiding Officer—to return to the chamber at some point to correct the record.

One of the ways to help young children in particular is childcare. Today, we have learned that the Scottish Government will receive £300 million in consequentials from the United Kingdom Government. Can the minister commit to putting some of that money into childcare for some of the youngest and most vulnerable children?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Do we still have plenty time in hand in the debate, Presiding Officer? I know that you were encouraging us to develop ideas and, in doing so, I hope that I do not misrepresent Clare Adamson—I would never dream of doing so—but I think that she mentioned that this Parliament was at its best when discussing permanence orders during a previous debate. I think she implied that, because Parliament came to a consensus, that was Parliament at its best. I argue that this Parliament is sometimes at its best when there is no consensus and we are debating big ideas and topics. Of course, that has nothing to do with the debate; rather, it is a comment to help the Presiding Officer on timings. This is a vital report on young people in care and their future. The committee is correct to observe that “Few issues are of greater importance” than improving the outcomes for some of our most disadvantaged children. I start by thanking the committee of which I was a member for almost all the inquiry. The report asks some very searching and legitimate questions of the Scottish Government and society as a whole. I will be candid. When we consider the outcomes for looked-after children, only one conclusion can be reached: we have failed and are failing looked-after children very badly, despite the heroic efforts of front-line staff in some cases and the resilience of the young people themselves. Various measures evidence that failure. Liz Smith gave the stark educational attainment figures for looked-after children. The Scottish Prison Service’s bulletin from the 13th prisoner survey on “Prisoners who have been in care as ‘looked-after children’”, which was published in 2011, shows that 28 per cent of all respondents—prisoners in Scottish jails—had been in care at some point and 20 per cent had been in care at the age of 16; 38 per cent of young offenders had been in care as a child and 26 per cent at the age of 16; and 37 per cent of female prisoners had been in care as a child and 28 per cent at the age of 16. However, only 2 per cent of children are in care at any given time. The same survey found that 82 per cent of prisoners who were previously in care were using drugs in the 12 months before going into prison, compared with 60 per cent of those who had not been in care, and that 33 per cent reported being prescribed methadone compared with 19 per cent of those who had not been in care. Prisoners who had been in care also had greater problems with reading, writing and numbers. A range of other differentials exist between such prisoners and the population. Those figures and many other sets of statistics represent our collective failure of young people in care. The committee acknowledges those failures but also underlines the need for sufficient resources to be provided to ensure that those who are in care and who are most disadvantaged get the best and most effective support and help available. If we genuinely believe that how we are judged as a society depends on the support that we provide to our weakest and most vulnerable people, it will be the actions following the report that will, to use a cliché, test that to the full. One of the main issues examined was about the decision to remove children from their home and into care, as many members have mentioned. The decision to remove a child should always be based on what is best for that child. Will the child be better protected, cared for and nurtured and given more opportunity to develop well if they remain with or are removed from their family? Some young people who we met very powerfully argued that they should have been removed much earlier from their family; others suggested that leaving the young person with their family was the better option. It became absolutely clear through the inquiry that each case has to be considered individually and that the young person and their rights have to be at the centre of any decision making. I think that we can now put to bed the view that removing children is a last resort, as that is simply wrong. The committee heard that young people who remain at home, and their families, need much more intensive family support than they appear to get at present, and that requires resources. Unison, which represents many of the front-line staff, told the committee: “Our members are reporting more and more cases involving mental health issues. We are taking some children into care in cases where, if the proper services had been around and if their parents had received the mental health support in the community that was required, they should not have needed to come into care.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 28 May 2013; c 2514.] The same is true of young people who are removed from the family home. They have often experienced trauma in their relatively short lives and they need help to move on. In their lives, they have often been badly let down by adults for a range of reasons that may include addiction, abuse, crime, illness, homelessness or a parent being in prison. Too often, these young people are moved from placement to placement, separated from siblings or moved back and forth from home to placements, more often than not without the adequate support and tailored care that they need, and without counselling and psychological or emotional support that is tailored to their needs. The care that they do receive often finishes way too early in their lives. Those who have come through the care system positively, who are the exception, often point to a key individual who they trusted and who cared for them, respected them and treated them with dignity. That is fundamental to a successful young life for any child, but especially for those who need to be cared for outside their natural family. I think that the committee took a bit of convincing to take evidence from young people themselves. I am glad that it did that. Their evidence and their experiences were—

I think that that is the position that we eventually came to, but my view is that, at the beginning, there was some reluctance. I am not trying to do down the committee. It has done a fantastic job. However, I think that that reflects the reality of the discussions that we had at the time.

We can disagree on that. The young people’s evidence and experiences were the most powerful evidence that the committee took, and if the report lies on a shelf and effective action is not taken, I hope that they will hold every member of this Parliament to account for our collective failure. The issues are not unique to Scotland as countries across Europe are wrestling with the challenges, but we have a duty to do as much as we possibly can.

I thank Christine Grahame for lodging the motion. As a West Lothian councillor from 2003 to 2009, I was there at the beginning of the developing community development trust initiative in my county. In 2005 and 2006, I saw the potential in the vast array of community groups that operated in my home village of Fauldhouse—a working-class, ex-mining community that is not without its challenges but which has great people who have a lot of initiative. In that community, we had groups doing youth work, pensioners groups, religious organisations, sports groups and so on. They were all doing fantastic work in the community to support people and develop new projects, but they often competed for the same relatively small pots of money. Some inevitably felt frustrated and disappointed when the effort to raise funds through grant applications was unsuccessful. What did we do? In the first instance, I got together with a then West Lothian Council officer called Paul White, who now works for the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. I name him because he was influential in what developed. He and I looked at what was out there and saw the community development trust model as providing a potential opportunity to galvanise the community and take things forward. A year of often tortuous development work took place, funded by a European Union grant. That allowed the concept to develop in the minds of the groups concerned, which began to see the potential benefits of the new organisation. We were grateful for the encouragement that we received, particularly from Gorebridge Community Development Trust. Archie Pacey, who is in the public gallery, was a great help and an inspiration when we really needed someone to give us a bit of a boost—he certainly did that. Eventually, we formed a community development trust—a company limited by guarantee with charitable status. We appointed a skilled board with a wide range of people at the helm. I pay particular tribute to the chairman, Robert Russell, and the other board members, who have given up their time and put in effort over the years to make the trust a success. I served as company secretary and as a director for the first five years of the trust’s existence—I resigned this year only because of work pressures. I suppose that I should declare that as an interest. Since the trust was established, it has gone from strength to strength. It has grown projects and income as it goes along. The point is to generate enough income for the trust to be sustainable. We employ staff. We employed about 16 future jobs fund trainees on an environmental project before the Tories scrapped that scheme, and the trust employs community jobs Scotland trainees. With lottery funding and grant funding from the Levenseat Trust, the Coalfields Regeneration Trust and others, the trust bought and transformed an ex-council office. It now has a community cinema, a soft play area, a dementia cafe, a food bank drop-off point, a walking group, and it hosts the credit union, a fruit and veg co-op, a time bank project and an anti-sectarian project. It has meeting rooms and a conference room, it has held music festivals and organised remembrance Sunday events, and it hosts an annual fair. It helps to recruit volunteers for its projects and those of all the other community groups that operate in the area. It does that because it has dedicated staff who work at the grass-roots level to seek out the funding that can make things happen. The staff do not make everything happen themselves, because that is not the point. They help others to facilitate projects and help with grant applications that allow other organisations to grow and develop. That is part of the business plan and what they are supposed to do. The trust is a social enterprise that works at the coalface and delivers benefits in the community. I am proud of the work that it does and proud that I was involved from the start. Community development trusts do not and should never replace local government—that is not what they are there to do. In my area, we could not have set up the trust without local government support and I am very grateful to West Lothian Council for all its assistance over the years.

I reassure the minister that there has never been despair in my community. There has always been grit and enthusiasm to take things forward—not despair.

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that there is sufficient capacity in the NHS to deal with demand this winter. (S4F-01719)

I am advised that, this week, patients at Edinburgh’s Western general receiving unit have languished on trolleys for up to 18 hours. This week, we also found out that nine out of 14 NHS boards failed to meet A and E waiting times targets. It is only November and the weather is mild, yet our hospitals are struggling despite the immense efforts of NHS staff. Why has the Government failed to heed the warnings of the Royal College of Nursing, the British Medical Association, Unison, patient groups and many others, who have said for months and months that the NHS is not ready for winter?

Will the minister ensure that there is an anti-blacklisting provision in the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill, rather than just in guidance that is provided outwith the bill?

So that is a no.

The white paper was meant to show how the goose would lay the golden egg or how, on 19 September 2014, we would all be sitting at the bottom of the rainbow luxuriating in free pots of gold. However, like all fairy tales, we were soon returned to reality, this time by the thud of a white paper that is a cross between a fantasy novel and an SNP manifesto—two things that, incidentally, are not entirely unrelated. Yesterday, the First Minister, accompanied by the Deputy First Minister in her new designer threads, took to the catwalk at the science centre to launch the most detailed blueprint for independence ever produced. We know that the First Minister is never one to undersell himself—he is a man who cannot point to a molehill without comparing it to Ben Nevis—but even for him, yesterday’s launch was a bragging session too far. The “blueprint” or “vision statement”—what it is called depends on which interview one listened to—comes with all the detail and credibility of the Government’s EU legal advice. The First Minister claims that the currency in an independent Scotland would be sterling. The currency of the white paper is assertion, flannel and wishful thinking. It promotes a vision of a country where everything that is bad miraculously disappears and everything that is good in life just gets better—all with a simple cross on a ballot paper. It is a place with its economy based on oil that will never run out; where everything is green, but we scrap air passenger duty and build dual carriageways; where the bank of a foreign country controls the currency but, at the same time, we have independence; and where a currency once a millstone round our neck becomes the option of common sense.

No, thank you, Mr Harvie. The white paper promotes a vision of a country where business competition increases but so does the minimum wage; where childcare is expanded but just not now; where Royal Mail is renationalised but someone else pays for it; where we become a progressive beacon but where bankers and big businesses get a corporation tax cut of £350 million a year—a policy that even Blair Jenkins disowns—

No, thank you. It is a land where an oil fund will magically appear from the oil fund tree and where everything will be better, yet it will cost us nothing. That is the mirage, the charade, the fantasy that the SNP expects the people of Scotland to swallow.

No, thank you. If we apply that principle to our lives, our families and our communities, it is like saying that our family income will rise and our lives will be better in every way, that we can have free childcare, a better pension and increased benefits, and that we will pay less tax into the bargain. It is just not credible. The one thing that is certain from the white paper is that we will see a race to the bottom on taxation. The highly respected economist and assistant secretary of the STUC, Stephen Boyd, said that the Scottish Government’s corporation tax paper was “an excruciatingly awful piece of work”, in which “every argument presented is easily debunked”. That sentiment was echoed by the director of the Jimmy Reid Foundation, Robin McAlpine, who is no friend of ours—he is an independence supporter.

Robin McAlpine revealed that Salmond’s faith in the ability of reduced business rates to increase output “comes from a complex computer model ... built on a series of assumptions ... one of which is that tax cuts always create growth”. The frustrations that Boyd and McAlpine expressed are understandable. The SNP has yet to produce any evidence to back up its corporation tax claims, as is acknowledged by Joseph Stiglitz, who is one of the First Minister’s economic advisers. I reject that approach in its entirety. I would like to see a different Scotland: one that fully finances public services, that redistributes our wealth through progressive taxation, that tackles wealth and health inequality and poverty—

No, thank you. I would like to see a Scotland that lifts living standards, that democratises local government and that puts employment at the centre of a national crusade. That requires real political change and a challenge to the neo-liberal orthodoxy, which, incredibly, even after its utter and abject failure—[Interruption.]

Even after its utter and abject failure, that orthodoxy is at the economic core of the white paper. Mike Russell—wherever he is; I think that he has been locked in a cupboard till after the referendum—must be delighted. I believe that we will be much more able to challenge that orthodoxy if we work with progressive movements across the UK. Progressive reforms occur not by accident but through unity, solidarity and the action of working people across the UK. I want to see enhanced devolution, which is a position that the majority of Scots favour. Enhanced devolution would see us retaining our links with our friends and relatives across the UK, while maintaining the ability to move money around the country to areas of most need. That is a good thing. I give way to no one in my love for my country, but I love my community, its people and my friends and relatives across the UK, too. It is because of that and because of where I come from and the values that my community has instilled in me—values of solidarity, co-operation and justice—that I am a socialist, not a nationalist. It is for those reasons that I will be voting no—a no for change—and I recommend that other people do so, too.

I certainly appreciate the sentiments that Patrick Harvie has expressed, but will he also appeal for the debate to be held respectfully? When people express an opposing view, the diatribes and vile stuff that are expressed online against them are unacceptable.

Who was I discourteous to today?

We will support the bill at decision time, as we agree with its broad principles. As a West Lothian councillor for nine years from 2003, I saw how cultural change, co-operation and political vision from the Labour group on the council in 2003 advanced integration without any need for legislation. However, the issue of social care in Scotland is one of the scandals of our time, which has been swept under the carpet and kept as far away as possible from prying eyes. We sit in Parliament today pretending that all is reasonably well and that, with the bill, everything will be okay. Well, it will not, and I think that we all know that. Since the summer, I have met dozens of pressure groups, health professionals, trade unions and local authorities who have all, when asked directly, said that the social care system is in crisis. Yesterday, The Herald invited 30 stakeholders to a round-table session to discuss that and other issues. Not one person at that event mentioned the bill or believed that it would make the changes that are needed, and all of them said that the system is in crisis. Let me explain why I agree with their analysis. At present, councils are bearing the brunt of Government cuts, which is having a direct impact on the front-line services that they provide. That is nowhere more evident than in social care. Contracts that were awarded a few years ago at, say, £14 an hour are now being won at £12 an hour as contractors try to secure work in the face of council cuts that have been passed on from the Scottish Government. That may sound like a good thing, but the consequence is that, the day after they win the contract, their staff are told that they might have to work two more hours a week for the same money—and they are now in the fifth or sixth year of a pay freeze. That results in a high turnover of staff as people leave to get a better-paid job, maybe in a supermarket, while those who are left behind are demoralised and de-skilled, as training is often cut back to save money. Many staff members are on the minimum wage. Some have to pay for their own uniforms and use their own mobile phones, and do not get paid for travelling between clients. Those people often work for less than the minimum wage. The result of all that is that, as one care worker told me, people now work in care only because they cannot find another job and many stay only until they find another job. We simply cannot continue like that. How we treat staff has a direct impact on the quality of the care that is provided to our elderly, our disabled and our most vulnerable people. I ask the cabinet secretary to reflect on this. In the circumstances that I have described, what quality of service does he expect to be delivered? Does he really believe that, in the words of today’s white paper, Scotland has “world-leading ... social care”? If he does, he is the only person in Scotland who believes that. At the moment, many providers operate in 15-minute time slots. When those were introduced, if a person needed an hour of care, four 15-minute time slots were provided for them. Now, it seems that one 15-minute slot has become the norm, irrespective of the care that is required. In The Times today, Age Scotland highlights the fact that care visits are now down to seven minutes. Is that a world-class social care service? I think not. What level or quality of care can be provided under such a system? I repeat: we cannot continue like that. A few weeks ago at my surgery, I spoke to a young woman of 18 who had just left school. She wanted to work in the care sector, so she got a job with a private provider. After being given four days’ training in an office, she shadowed a fellow worker for one and a half days and was then sent out with her own client list. On day 1, she was given 30—I stress 30—visits to do. On her first visit, she was verbally abused by a client who suffered from a mental health disorder. She was quite scared. The second client whom she visited was a male in his 70s who had a catheter in and she did not have a clue what to do; and so things went on throughout her day.

Mary Scanlon has hit on a very good point. I think that care at home is extremely difficult to assess. It is easier to assess care in a care home—the inspectors turn up at the home and they inspect the care that is provided there. Care at home is much more difficult to assess. The fact that the provider that I am talking about got a clean bill of health from the inspectorate did not prevent the person who spoke to me, who worked for that provider, from having the experience that I am describing. That experience went on throughout the young woman’s day, which lasted from 7.30 in the morning until 10 at night. She was, of course, paid for only the eight hours that she was supposed to work. The princely sum that she was paid was £5.03 an hour. Is that the value that we place on the care of the elderly? I say to the minister that this is a scandal and that, no matter how deeply he puts his head in the sand, it will not be wished away. The bill is very limited and it is woefully inadequate in addressing the care crisis—not the care crisis that is coming, but the one that is here now.

I think that we should all be addressing such issues, because they are the fundamental problems with the care system as we know it. Let us not pretend that they are not there. The bill is inadequate in addressing the care crisis that is here. We will support it, but we need to have a much bigger national debate about how we as a society value our elderly and most vulnerable people. We need to look at the support that is available for those who provide unpaid care and those who simply act as good friends and neighbours. We need cultural as well as legislative integration of health and social care that looks at pharmacies, general practitioners, families and communities, and we need to state clearly whether we are prepared to invest to create a service that is based on dignity, care and respect rather than one that is based on a race to the bottom, because one thing is certain—we cannot allow the current situation to continue. At stage 2, issues of governance, staffing, shared services, budgets, service user involvement, scrutiny and the powers of ministers will be considered, and I am sure that the bill will be amended. It needs to be improved and we will contribute to that process. However, the bill should have been about addressing some of the issues that I have raised. It should have been about putting people at the centre, pursuing a rights-based agenda that was focused on high-quality care, and having a skilled and motivated workforce. Alex Neil rose—

However, the bill is about none of that. Councils are heroically trying to deliver services in the face of unsustainable pressures and I salute them for their efforts, but a failure to address the real issues is—in my view—a dereliction of the cabinet secretary’s duty and of the Parliament’s.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the minister’s acknowledgement of the excellent work that is being done by that Labour council. I am sure that it will be a shining example for other councils to follow.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action the education sector is taking to promote good health and help tackle health inequalities. (S4O-02593)

The report, “Equally Well” and, more recently, Professor John Frank, of the Scottish collaboration for public health research and policy, said that if we are serious about tackling health inequality, we must provide early years education from the age of two. Does the minister agree? What steps is he taking to tackle health inequality through early years education?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether it is in order for a member to shout “You are a disgrace to Scotland”, to a member who is defending her constituency interests and who has a long record of doing so. Will you rule on that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you would allow the opportunity for the member to withdraw that disgraceful comment. [Applause.]

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to address the amount that the national health service spends on medical overtime. (S4F-01673)

Vacancy rates in the NHS are up, and Audit Scotland has highlighted a 62 per cent increase in spending on agency nursing and a 23 per cent increase in payments to the private sector. Now, we find that some consultants are doubling their salary on triple time in the evenings and at weekends. Will the First Minister end crisis management in the NHS? Will he commit to staffing our hospitals properly?

Yesterday I welcomed the cabinet secretary’s announcement that there is to be a new GP contract and a review of access to GP practices. Will he respond today to my party’s request to convene all-party talks on those two very important issues?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was under the impression that question time is about the responsibilities of the Government and not of anyone else. I wonder whether you could rule on that, Presiding Officer.

Will the minister give way?

SNP ministers are very vocal in attacking other levels of government when they make bad policy. They attack councils forced to implement their Government’s cuts and they wash their hands of any responsibility. They rightly attack the coalition Government at Westminster for its health service reforms. In doing so, they do not put any blame in the hands of national health service trusts or NHS bureaucracies; they blame the Government. Contrast that with their attitude to what is happening with the police service in Scotland. When the chief constable takes a wrecking ball and seeks to wipe out one in three of our local police station front counters, does the cabinet secretary rear up in condemnation? Does he tell the chief constable to stop? No. The cabinet secretary is uncharacteristically silent—not a word of condemnation, just a faint whisper of “This is an operational matter for Police Scotland.” He is like a wee laddie with his hand caught in the biscuit tin. Instead of taking responsibility, he turns round and wants to blame somebody else. I want to focus on West Lothian, in my region. West Lothian is an area that the cabinet secretary knows only too well, having fought and lost six elections there. It is an area with the largest projected population growth in the country. Take a place such as Armadale and Blackridge, where the cabinet secretary stood for the Lothian regional seat. The population is 14,000, and a train station development will see another 3,000 houses built. It is a growing area, with many new items of infrastructure, including two train stations. To complement all that positive development, it will have a closed police station on its main street.

No, thank you. What about Linlithgow, the cabinet secretary’s home town? It is, again, a town of 14,000 people, which attracts large numbers of visitors throughout the year. Guess what, though? It has no publicly accessible police station. Does the cabinet secretary seriously believe that the good people of Linlithgow have no interest in that issue and that they have made no representations on it? He knows them better than that. What about West Calder and the Breich valley, where villages such as Polbeth and Addiewell—communities that really need police support and access to a station—will be left without that support and access? At Addiewell, there is a prison of 800 inmates. For the village in the vicinity of a prison to have no accessible police station is just plain stupidity. Christine Grahame, who I see has left the chamber, says that she works in new ways, including by holding surgeries in Tesco. I bet that she does not close her constituency office for ever when she does those surgeries. For only 70 or so members of the public to have responded to the Police Scotland consultation shows not that people are not interested but that the process is fundamentally flawed. In West Calder, I conducted my own consultation. In that town of 5,500 people, I received more than 100 written replies to my questionnaire, all of which have been passed to the chief constable. Why are they not included in the consultation response numbers? I also received 120 emails—he will know about that because 120 copies were sent to him as well—and a petition complaining about the attack on community policing, which was also sent to the chief constable. Had there been time to do so, I would have done the same in other affected communities, but of course the consultation period was unbelievably short. If we had, however, I believe that we would have got the same response. The cabinet secretary is, as he famously said, tired of marching, but surely even he can muster up the energy to stop that sham in its tracks. He is politically accountable for the decisions, and I am afraid that, on this one, he is guilty as charged.

Appalling though the bedroom tax is, its impact on councils and housing associations is nothing compared with what will happen when the payment of universal credit moves from landlords on to tenants. The Northern Ireland Executive successfully lobbied to prevent that from happening there. Has the minister approached the UK Government to ask it not to pay universal credit direct to tenants?

Before the cabinet secretary moves off the subject of GPs, will he address the system of GP appointments? In some practices, people have to take a ticket as though they are buying sausages at the butcher’s, and they must sit there all day holding their ticket until they are called. We should have moved on from that in this day and age. Will the cabinet secretary look into that?

I begin by declaring an interest, in that my wife and daughter work in the NHS. I say at the outset that Scottish Labour shares and supports the good intentions of the Government motion. Person-centred healthcare, as it says on the tin, puts the patient at the heart of their healthcare. Patients should, of course, be centrally involved in all key decisions that affect their journey along the treatment pathway, so the text of the Government motion, which stresses those points, has our support. It is not just in that area that we agree with the Government. In its 2020 vision, the Scottish Government states that it is committed to the values of the NHS—the NHS that was created by that great post-war Labour Government—which are timeless values of solidarity and co-operation, and the collective sharing and pooling of resources in a system that is based on need and not the ability to pay. I am absolutely delighted that the Scottish Government shares those Labour values. I am glad, too, that the Scottish Government opposes the marketisation of the NHS and expresses its support for continued investment in the public rather than the private sector. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s rejection of the disastrous so-called reforms that are being introduced by the coalition in England. Thankfully, what is happening in Scotland’s NHS is different from what is going on in England, but the cabinet secretary should not use Tory ideology and an attack on the NHS there as a diversionary tactic to cover up what is happening here and now on his watch. Patients should always be at the centre of health policy, funding decisions and clinical priorities. I am sure that all members of the Parliament agree that all decisions should be considered on the basis of how they will impact on the patient, but there are many areas of current policy in which that approach is very much an afterthought or is missing completely. For months now, policy makers, professional bodies and trade unions have been raising the issue of how prepared the NHS is for winter. Such preparation is key to delivering person-centred care, particularly at the most testing time of the year. Last year, accident and emergency units were full to bursting and patients were stuck on trolleys for hours on end because bed and staff numbers had been cut. Since 2007, the system has lost 1,000 beds and there are 1,200 fewer nursing and midwifery posts than there were in 2009. How would the patients affected by those cuts view our warm words about person-centred healthcare? Doctors and nurses complain about having to look after increasing numbers of patients without the support that they need. How would the patient who has not seen a doctor all day because of the pressures that the doctors are under view the warm words about person-centred healthcare? Further, what about the repeated boarding out of patients during their stay in hospital because of pressures? Staff tell me about patients being moved time and again from ward to ward to free up space. Who could forget the appalling story last winter, exposed by the Daily Record, of John McGarrity, a frail 84-year-old who was left for eight hours on a hospital trolley without even a pillow after being rushed to hospital with chest pains? John was not the only patient to be left on a trolley, but his son described the scene to me as “like a scene from a third world country, not something you would expect to see in Scotland.” How would John and his family view their experience of person-centred healthcare?

That might be the case from a survey, but I tend rather to speak to people on a daily basis who come to my surgery, email me and talk to me. I am sure that members across the Parliament, irrespective of which party they are in, have the same experience as me. Of course, we also have A and E waiting times, with targets that were missed for four years and then changed to try and help the Government to meet them, which mean that the goalposts were moved in the middle of the match. How does that sleight of hand fit with person-centred healthcare? The cabinet secretary mentioned GP practices, but there are some practices in which patients cannot get an appointment, staffing is stretched and GPs want to spend more time with patients with complex needs but are unable to do so. It is those areas and the general state of the nation in Scotland’s NHS that should be debated. I suspect that the people of Scotland, the patients and their families, and the staff working heroically under enormous and growing pressure would prefer us to consider the nuts and bolts and day-to-day realities of the world as they face it rather than the woolly but worthy motion presented today. In such a debate we could hear from the Government on basic questions. Do we have enough staff? Are they in the right places? How many patients should doctors be expected to look after? Is the level of financing right? How do we develop a long-term approach? What level of care do we as a nation want to see? Those fundamental questions have been highlighted very ably by The Herald in its NHS campaign, which reflects the concerns raised by people in our communities and in our mailbags day in, day out. One consultant I spoke to recently summed it up when she said: “If I can appeal to you to raise one thing with the government it is the need to end crisis management in the NHS—at present we just lurch from one crisis to another, we cannot go on like this.” How does person-centred healthcare sit with that view from a person in a front-line post in the NHS? We as a society owe the vast majority of staff working in the NHS and other care services a huge debt of thanks for their tireless and unstinting efforts to ensure that our NHS continues to function and look after us. However, the reality is that they are being asked to do that while the Government makes decisions that make their lives much more difficult. Not only are they being asked to do more with less, but the very people expected to deliver the person-centred care to which we all aspire have seen their incomes cut as wages stagnate. What kind of message did it send out to them when the cabinet secretary awarded a miserly 1 per cent pay increase to the lowest-paid staff while giving a 4 per cent rise to senior managers? Is that redistribution Alex Neil style? How will the healthcare system support people this winter? Will the cabinet secretary give us a sign of his confidence in winter planning by guaranteeing that the waiting times will be met? Will he guarantee that? I am happy to give way to the cabinet secretary if he wants to intervene. I see that he is not taking that opportunity, which is maybe telling. The Government itself states in its 2020 vision that there are economic challenges ahead, but those challenges are undoubtedly having an impact on healthcare across the board. Scotland’s Auditor General expressed concerns about that, putting the NHS on a financial amber warning last year. The Auditor General raised similar concerns about long-term financial planning this year. Audit Scotland noted that pressures increased in 2012-13 and that the focus is all too often on short-term measures. A senior nurse, speaking to the media, remembered the worst years of the Thatcher Government, when hospitals were desperately underfunded, and said: “We are definitely getting back to that now.” What about the critical role of social care in person-centred healthcare? As a society, not just as a Parliament, we have to address the morality of a system that has been driven down to the lowest common denominator by cuts to local government. At the moment, we have a system in which care providers compete for contracts that are ever more squeezed and care staff are often paid at the lowest level. Contracts are cut to the bone, followed by wages that are at or sometimes below the minimum wage, 15-minute care slots even if people need more than that, and elderly people being put to bed at 6 o’clock because that is when their care slot is. Where is the person-centred approach in that? What is happening in social care in the community is being repeated in the care home sector. What is going on in social care is grossly unfair to the councils and the good providers who are doing their best with reducing budgets, immoral for the staff who are involved, and inhumane for the elderly and vulnerable people who need the person-centred care that we all aspire to. We support the principle of person-centred care—healthcare has to be built around the individual. However, I fear that this winter will be one of the most difficult yet for the NHS in Scotland, and unfortunately it will be staff and, most important, the patients who will suffer.

I move amendment S4M-08155.1, to insert at end: “; commends the hard work and dedication of those working in Scotland’s health and care services, and calls on the Scottish Government to guarantee that the health service is ready for winter and that all waiting time targets will be met over the winter period.”

Maybe I could mention the other side of self-directed support. People come to us from third sector organisations that provide person-centred support and they tell us that when their organisation bids for a contract but cannot win it at the cost at which it won it the previous time they tendered, they put in a lower price. They win the tender, but what happens? The day after they win the tender they are told that for the sixth year in a row, their wages are frozen and they will be working two more hours a week. What does that mean for the quality of care that is being provided?

I am sure that the member will be gracious enough to acknowledge that, because the Government could not meet the targets, the cabinet secretary had to change the targets.

Will the member take an intervention?

Being accused of being wrong about everything by the member is surely a badge of honour.

We should also not have a debate that skates over the real issues that people bring to us on a daily basis.

The situation at Grangemouth saw one wealthy, very powerful individual control one of the most important strategic industrial assets in the country. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the episode has put the debate about the common ownership of such assets firmly back on the political agenda and that we cannot allow actions such as those of Jim Ratcliffe to threaten our energy supply and distribution in the future?

One of the ways of helping some of the most hard-pressed families in Fife would be to provide adequate support around the bedroom tax. Will the minister now sign up to Jackie Baillie’s bill?

I would very much like to thank the Health and Sport Committee for its report, and I commend its convener, Duncan McNeil, for his excellent speech. The report is a very good one that makes an informed contribution to what is a vital debate that is being watched by many people in the chamber, across Scotland and beyond. For many of those who have tried to navigate the current system of accessing new treatments, it is at best confusing and at worst downright frustrating and unfair. The former health secretary defended the IPTR system by saying: “We already have a very fair, rigorous and quick system for appraising NHS drugs in Scotland. The Scottish Medicines Consortium considers whether newly-licensed drugs should be used nationwide and recommends them for use where they are proved to be safe, clinically effective and cost-effective. Even where a medicine isn’t recommended by the SMC for general use, patients in Scotland can still get it on the NHS if their clinician believes it is appropriate and obtains permission from their local health board.” For many patients, that description simply did not reflect the reality on the ground. In case after case, patients with serious conditions such as cancer and multiple sclerosis were denied access to new-generation drugs. As the committee’s report states, they were often denied access “despite them submitting clinical and expert evidence as part of the request.” High-profile cases emerged as my colleagues Jackie Baillie, Graeme Pearson and Johann Lamont, along with other MSPs, represented their constituents in Parliament. The patients who were involved in those cases did not seek the limelight or public exposure—all that they wanted was the chance of an extended life for themselves and their loved ones. In support of those brave individuals, we had the campaigning work of the people who took petitions through the Parliament’s public petitions system. They are the people whom we must commend for getting us to where we are today. It is their petitions and campaigning that have influenced the committee’s inquiry and forced the Government’s hand. They have done the Parliament and the people of Scotland a great service. Although the Health and Sport Committee welcomed the previous Swainson and Routledge reviews, it said that they would “do very little to improve access to new medicines in any meaningful way and that more fundamental changes were needed.” Those changes must, of course, be fair and transparent but, ultimately, they must provide greater access to medicines that have not gone through the system. There is no simple solution—none of us is suggesting that there is. It is a complex and highly sensitive area in which answers do not come easily. The committee captured those difficulties well when it said: “decisions need to be made about the value of treatments in relation to their effectiveness, cost and wider societal benefits, but within the context of a public sector under increasing budgetary pressures. When these issues combine with personal circumstances and experiences of individual patients and their loved ones and the impact that decisions can have on their length and quality of life, it is probably not surprising that the answers to the questions posed by this issue are not easily found.” A good example of the failings of the existing system was provided in the evidence of Dr Stephen Harrow from the Beatson west of Scotland cancer centre. He recounted how he had made an individual patient treatment request that was refused not once but three times, despite its being supported by clinical evidence. That was a situation that clinicians, patients and stakeholders found difficult to understand. There are always ways of doing things better, and the system has to support patients in getting access to the medicines that they need when that request for access is supported by clinical judgment and expertise. The Health and Sport Committee’s report has identified many areas where things could and should be done better, including improving transparency, patient involvement, data collection, sharing expertise and standardising paperwork. However, although such steps are welcome, the report also makes it clear that “urgent consideration should be given to encouraging greater flexibility in the IPTR process to approve drugs where there is clear, clinical evidence that a particular patient would derive material benefit from such a drug even if existing IPTR criteria had not been met fully.” I am pleased that the Scottish Government has accepted the need to improve access and that, in its words, “the procedure for accessing drugs in exceptional prescribing circumstances, when all other treatments have been exhausted, should be clearly linked to clinical opinion.” Although the replacement of the IPTR system with a new, peer-approved clinical system is a move in the right direction, the proof of the pudding will be in how that impacts on patients and whether more people are able to access the life-saving or life-extending drugs that they so desperately need. I ask that, in summing up, the cabinet secretary responds to the following questions. First, how will the new system be implemented and rolled out? How will it be monitored to ensure that guidelines are not ignored? How does the fund fit with the statement of intent on innovation? How will he avoid the new locally run PAC system becoming another postcode lottery? I know that the cabinet secretary has said that he wants a national system, but I point out that it will be run locally. Finally, when will he publish the timescale for implementing the new system? Sadly, these changes have come too late for many, but I hope that a new supportive system will help save and extend the lives of many other very needy people.

I think that one of the lessons that we can take from today is that when people at the grass roots tell us that there is a problem with a system or policy, we are duty-bound to listen and correct it.

I will stand up to respond, but I may collapse after hearing that. I congratulate Mr Doris on giving me what I think is the first compliment that I have ever had from an SNP member.

I disagree with hardly a word that the member has said. In the ding-dong in here, we seldom get to discuss such issues quietly, but how does the corporation tax policy that his party is pursuing sit with what he is proposing? I ask that question genuinely and am not trying to trip him up on a political point.

I did not intend to speak in the debate, but it has been good and I will make a few brief comments. Through my life in my community and in my street, having worked in the social housing sector previously in places such as Broomhouse and Wester Hailes and throughout West Lothian, and having worked in education in many communities, I have seen at first hand the impact of crushing poverty on people like me and of my class who have been drained by the desperate attempt to keep their families together and a roof over their heads, and who desperately want to look after their families but find it difficult to clothe their kids and put food in their bellies. It fills me with rage when I hear some politicians and media commentators who have no concept of living on employment support allowance, of living with a long-term condition with Atos hassling them to get a job that does not exist, or of the indignity of queueing at a food bank or hiding from the housing officer who has been sent to collect the rent. It fills me with rage when I hear people speaking about the low-paid and the unemployed when they have no idea what their life is like. We do not need people to patronise the low-paid and the poor. We need to see the colour of their money and their policies to help people change their lives. I commend my colleague Jackie Baillie for bringing the debate to the Parliament. I encourage members who want to see what is happening in people’s day-to-day lives to contact their local council or housing association and go along, not to don a hard hat or a high-visibility vest to cut a ribbon, but to go out with a housing officer and see what is happening on the front line to people in the real world. The situation in which many people in the community find themselves is not just difficult; it is scandalous in what we attempt to call a civilised society. On the bigger picture, I find myself agreeing with a great deal of what John Mason said—I do not know whether that should worry him or me. We absolutely need a taxation and economic system that puts addressing inequality and unfairness at the heart of policy making and budget decisions. I commend the churches, the trade unions and the vast range of community groups that work every day on this agenda. Two years or a year and a half ago, Drew Smith and I went to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland to hear the report of its commission into economic activity. I commend that report to everyone. It is a fantastic piece of work, and I hope that, in future, some of the recommendations that it made come to fruition.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve the quality of careers guidance provision in schools. (S4O-02454)

In a recent study of the my world of work website, University of Edinburgh academics Cathy Howieson and Sheila Semple confirmed that web-based services should never replace face-to-face contact, because face-to-face contact is most valued by the majority of young people. Given the recent Skills Development Scotland research, in which only 859 pupils out of 200,000 who are registered responded to the survey, does the minister accept that conclusions that are drawn about the value of my world of work from such a small survey should be treated with extreme caution?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the information technology problem at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde.

Obviously, the situation is very worrying. Many people have had their appointments cancelled. Will the cabinet secretary advise what will happen to patients who have missed appointments and cannot get another one immediately? What reassurance can he give patients who are waiting for treatment over the next few days? It is my understanding that similar systems are used in other health board areas. Will the cabinet secretary instruct an independent review of all IT systems that are being used to ensure that robust contingency plans are in place across Scotland?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to improve the quality of residential care for older people. (S4F-01577)

The Pentland Hill care home in Edinburgh has had a series of poor inspection reports. The most recent one was truly appalling and there is now a police investigation into four deaths. Does the First Minister agree that there is something seriously wrong with an inspection regime when it has repeatedly identified problems in key areas but little or nothing appears to have been improved?

Over the past few years, I have attended the Scottish Disability Golf Partnership events. At the most recent event, I played with a golfer who was blind, and it was one of the best experiences that I have had on a golf course. His putting was absolutely fantastic, so I encourage Mr Robertson to take up golf.

I declare an interest as a member of Greenburn golf club and a member of the cross-party group on golf. I really do love my sport, but I am afraid that this is one of those times when people looking in from outside the Parliament must wonder what relevance this place has to their lives. I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, but my postbag is not bulging with letters asking for my views on the subject of a year to go until the Ryder cup—

Certainly—I am sure that Annabelle Ewing’s postbag is.

Annabelle Ewing will know that I am always positive, so she has nothing to fear there. As I was saying, I do not know how many members—other than those from very local constituencies—have had emails and letters about the Ryder cup; I do not think that many of us have. I am wondering what debate the Government will bring to the chamber next to allow its members to go to the Dunfermline by-election with: perhaps “Christmas—three months to go” or “Pancake Tuesday—six months of excitement left”.

Do not worry—I will go on to the substance of the debate. There are many great things going on at the elite end of the game in Scotland, and we have a crop of very high-quality players who are among the top 500 in the world. They include people such as Martin Laird, Paul Lawrie and Stephen Gallacher—and, of course, Catriona Matthews, who was a member of the team that was recently victorious in the Solheim cup, and Carly Booth, who is coming through very rapidly. Over the past few decades, Colin Montgomerie and Sam Torrance have been standard bearers for Scotland, flying the flag worldwide for the home of golf. The hosting of the Ryder cup next year is, of course, eagerly anticipated. The match is, alongside the open and the masters, the top event in the golfing calendar. Over the years, as members have mentioned, there has been thrill after thrill. Any golfer—or any golfing or sports enthusiast who was watching—will never forget Bernhard Langer’s anguish at Kiawah Island, Torrance’s putt at the Belfry, or McDowell’s victory at Celtic Manor. The most recent Ryder cup at Medinah was just something else. I watched the match on an iPad in the middle of a ceilidh at the Labour Party conference—the things that one will do to avoid dancing with Margaret Curran, but there we go. Over the years, Scots such as Bernard Gallacher and John Jacobs have played prominent roles not only as players but as captains too. Graeme Dey referred to the greatest Scottish story, in which the legendary Brian Barnes beat Jack Nicklaus at the peak of his powers twice in one day. I recall seeing Brian Barnes play at Dalmahoy when I was in primary 7. He was perhaps not the most shining example to young golfers, as I remember him marking his ball on the green with a beer can, which went down in golfing legend; I hope that people would not do that these days. All that at the elite end of the game is fantastic, but at club level things are quite different, and many clubs are struggling in the current economic climate. Ten years ago many local clubs had waiting lists of five or 10 years, or even longer. Membership was a reasonable price, and demand was very high. In my area of West Lothian, clubs catered largely for the communities in which they were located, and local people made up a significant part of the membership. Now, due to falling incomes and wages being frozen, waiting lists have largely been wiped out as people give up membership or take their name off the waiting list because they simply do not have the money to join. According to the Scottish Golf Union, adult male membership rates have fallen by 15 per cent since 2004, and there are 25 per cent fewer women playing. That has resulted in clubs’ income falling considerably while costs are increasing, and many are facing significant financial problems. In such circumstances, the temptation for clubs is to cut fees and day ticket prices to compete for a diminishing group of potential members and visitors. Such a race to the bottom on price could be a grave mistake, with clubs competing themselves out of existence. Instead, we need to support clubs in planning ahead to maximise their income and cut their costs while maintaining the quality of their unique selling point: golf played in the country where the game was invented on natural courses and in beautiful surroundings. To that end, I want the Government, sportscotland, councils and the business community to work very closely with the Scottish Golf Union and clubs to expand the clubs’ business planning skills and knowledge, and I want the SGU management development programme to be rolled out to as many clubs as possible to support their long-term planning and sustainability and a not insignificant number of direct and supply-chain jobs. Given some organisation and time, there will be obvious opportunities to develop revenue and make savings—renewables development is an obvious example—and if clubs could work together and establish joint initiatives to save money on energy supply, insurance, the purchasing of maintenance materials, food and equipment they could achieve significant economies of scale. The Ryder cup will be a huge global event in 2014 that will excite and thrill people; it will certainly excite and be relished by Scotland’s large army of fans. However, I hope that one of the greatest events in the game will not be followed by the disappearance of some long-established community clubs, because that would be a legacy that we could really live without. Finally, a number of colleagues have mentioned David McLetchie. I twice partnered him in the annual match between the Parliament and the press pack and our partnership was socially successful if not always a sporting success. I am sure that it will surprise no one to hear that I tended to hit to the left and David much further to the right but in his excitement about the Ryder cup coming to Scotland he was like a wee boy. It is just very sad that he will not be here to see it.

Members across the chamber will know that many staff are concerned and frightened at their work, with increasing pressure being put on them every day. Cases of bullying and harassment are a serious issue. Previously, the cabinet secretary has told us that the whistleblowers helpline would be printed on NHS payslips. When will that happen?

I was going to appeal for the debate to reach a new level, but I am afraid that, with that speech, it already has. [Interruption.]

I do not—and never will—question anyone’s commitment to their country or community, and I hope that no one will ever question mine. Opposition to independence is not anti-Scottish, unpatriotic or an act of treachery. It is my deeply held view that the SNP’s version of independence is fundamentally flawed and absolutely not in the interests of working people in Scotland or beyond our borders. As Alex Bell, the First Minister’s former adviser, has said: “Scotland’s problems are common to” all countries in “the developed world”. That is very true. Currently, poverty and inequality in Scotland are at appalling levels. If someone is born into a poor household and community, they are likely to become ill and die sooner than a more affluent Scot who may live in the next street or the next community.

No, it is not because of the union. This is what SNP members need to get into their skulls: it is not because of the union; it is because of the system that we operate under. [Interruption.]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It may be unusual, but I would like to do it. [Interruption.]

When the debate started, the First Minister was heard with courtesy. Since then, Opposition members who have spoken have not been. I wonder whether we can maintain courtesy throughout the debate.

There is an 11-year gap between the life expectancy of men in the most deprived communities and the life expectancy of those in the most prosperous communities. That scandal will not change simply by the erection of a new border. The fact that, in this day and age, families cannae feed their weans and have to attend food banks to survive is due to Tory welfare cuts. However, there are things that the Scottish Parliament can do to help with its current powers but the Government chooses not to do them.

No, sit down. Last month, we saw—

Last month, we saw 10,000 more Scots join the dole queue. Some 48,000 fewer young people are attending our colleges, and poverty pay and zero-hour contracts are the desperate norm for many young people. Those are not issues that will be tackled by drawing a new line on a map or swapping one flag for another.

I will come to that point. Those issues will certainly not be tackled by replacing UK and EU neoliberalism with a more parochial and further entrenched Scottish version, as promoted by the First Minister and his party. That is what is being proposed in the SNP's version of independence. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth regularly reminds us that he wants Scotland to be the most competitive place in Europe. However, in this context, the word competitive is a euphemism for low pay, poor conditions and the ripping out of cash from our public services. It will result in hundreds of thousands of pounds being ripped out of schools, roads and hospitals and gifted to corporations in a tax cut. How on earth will that address the inequality and lack of balance in the economy that is mentioned in the First Minister's motion? It is nonsense. The fact is that it will do the opposite. I know that Mr Swinney, Mr Ewing and Mr Russell support trickle-down economics, but it appears that the famous young radical who we all remember being thrown out of the House of Commons for protesting against Nigel Lawson's corporation tax cut now champions cuts that even George Osborne dare not make. I would like us to learn from past mistakes. Last week, 25 senior academics, trade union leaders, politicians and activists launched, “Class, Nation and Socialism—The Red Paper on Scotland 2014”. It is in the Parliament’s shop. I recommend that the First Minister get a copy and educate himself. The book promotes a positive agenda for political change in Scotland—one that argues for a major political and democratic reform to free up and re-empower local government so that it can work in the interests of citizens and not just obey the diktat of central Government. It argues for an economy that is more democratic, with forms of social, co-operative and public ownership so that we can balance societal, environmental and economic considerations for the wellbeing of the entire society, with the renewables industry being a prime example of where that can be achieved. It argues for an industrial policy where Government support and intervention create and sustain jobs and investment. The Forth bridge contract is the greatest missed opportunity that we have had in that regard. We need a taxation system that supports and services communities, not financial institutions and transnational companies.

I will not, at the moment.

We need a housing policy that is linked to an industry and employment strategy that drives social justice, and we need a public procurement policy that ensures that companies are given contracts only when they pay a living wage, pay taxes and do not blacklist workers. Many of those steps could be taken here and now, as well as in the future. I believe that that would best be achieved through enhanced devolution. A race to the bottom in taxes and wages and public services is in no one's interest, least of all the interests of working people who, in the end, will suffer most when the big business agenda that is promoted by the SNP comes to fruition.

Does John Mason not realise that, if we simply take a system of economics such as that which operates across the European Union at present and apply it parochially to Scotland, nothing will have changed? In fact, some of the policies that he promotes will make things a whole lot worse for the people whom he is talking about.

When the member mentioned the leader of Scottish Labour, I thought that he might have referred to the leader of his party, because I understand that he is a supporter of Labour for independence.

Will the member give way?

As many members have mentioned, Scots are not very good at dealing with these types of things. Death is a time that brings out the best and worst in people. Often, we do not like dealing with all the practicalities surrounding death, expressing our emotions and taking time to look at the practical steps that we need to take. We do our best to avoid those things until we have to do them. We do not tell the people who are closest to us simple things such as how much we love them until it is too late. Often, we do not address key divisions in our families and things that have burned away, sometimes for generations, until time is at its shortest. It can be a healing time and a healing process, but it can also cause many further divisions that leave the people who are left behind with lifelong regrets. As the report suggests, patients are often offered palliative care very late, and the experience of going through the planning for death often puts pressure on families, who have to help the sufferer, and the people in hospitals who deal with people in their final days. I agree with Nanette Milne that we need a national debate and discussion about these important issues if we are to become more comfortable talking about them and related issues such as spiritual, medical and financial issues, and relationships. If we can take the debate to a more mature level, it will help not just patients and their extended families and friends but everyone who is affected by people being in that position. When my father was in the Marie Curie hospice in Edinburgh, the help and support for my family was fantastic, but it came very late in the day. That was not the hospice’s fault but probably ours, because we did what other people do and avoided the issue until death was almost imminent. People need to talk about death and dying and share their feelings, fears and medical needs. People also have a lack of understanding of what palliative care is. I certainly did until it came to my doorstep. My wife works in the NHS as a clinical support worker and she often provides palliative care to cancer sufferers. She tells me heart-warming stories of people’s humility and humanity, the reconciliation of families and people finding peace with themselves through that period, and all of that is greatly assisted by the carers who help people through that time. I will give a simple example. My wife used to be a hairdresser, and if someone who is receiving palliative care wants their hair cut, she will do it. A simple act such as that makes them feel so much better. Such issues might be minor to us, but they are major to the person who receives support. We all want to die with dignity, and I hope that the report takes us down the road towards a mature debate about such matters. On a lighter note—there ain’t many light notes on this issue—I was cycling by the canal in West Lothian last year when I met a guy who was walking his dog. I asked him where he was going that evening, and he said that he was going to a dying party. I said, “What do you mean, a dying party?” His friend had only a few weeks to live and had paid for a party in the pub for all his pals, so that they could have a great send-off for him. That was someone who was at peace with himself and was—I hope—moving on to a better place. There is a lesson in that for many of us.

There are major barriers to people with disabilities accessing politics but there are also major barriers based on a person’s class. If someone is working class and disabled, they have two barriers to politics, therefore it is very important that any internship is a paid internship and that people also receive a payment to cover travel to any internship, so that everyone, not just those who can afford to take part, can take part.

Given that several hospitals in my region have had to close this year to deal with norovirus, including two wards in the past few weeks, why is the finance secretary taking £10 million from the budget that supports hospital cleaning?

Can the member tell us how the proposal for a currency union would increase democratic control?

I wish I had missed your speech.

Will the member give way?

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

Would the cabinet secretary care to refer to the Audit Scotland report, which said that there are 40,000 fewer students in our colleges?

I am afraid that I have to repeat much of what my colleagues on this side of the chamber have been saying since the debate began yesterday, and suggest to the Government that the legislative programme really does show a crushing lack of ambition from the SNP Scottish Government. Rather than use existing powers to tackle the problems and issues that are facing our people today, and rather than look to use the powers that we have to tackle poverty, to improve education and health inequality, and to invest in our public services and people, the Government has put on hold any effort to address the day-to-day struggles of ordinary Scots. Instead, of course, the Government chooses to use legislative inaction as a referendum tactic. It is very clear that the desperate attempt to portray this Parliament as impotent has trumped the plight of our young people, providing jobs for the unemployed, the situation with food banks and the bedroom tax as the Government’s real agenda.

Mr Hepburn is well aware that we have devolved Government in Scotland and that the relevant spokesperson for Labour in Scotland has today announced Labour’s plans to bring in a member’s bill on the bedroom tax. I fully expect a radical like Mr Hepburn to sign up to that bill. Last week, I met people from across the UK who work in the national health service, and I heard of the disastrous privatisation of the NHS in England. I am glad that there is a largely public, if not wholly political, consensus in Scotland whereby we reject the marketisation of our most cherished and respected public service. However, it would be a complete dereliction of our duty as members of the Scottish Parliament were we not to highlight the multitude of very real issues that are rapidly piling up in our NHS, which are being brought to members at surgeries week in and week out by staff and patients alike. It has been a long hot summer for the NHS in Scotland and I suspect that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has been getting a little hotter under his starched collar over the past few months. We have had reports from the General Medical Council concerning staff shortages; indeed, it was so concerned about NHS Lothian in particular that it described the staff shortages as “dangerous”. We have had reports from the College of Emergency Medicine, which reported that 21 out of 24 accident and emergency departments are regularly unsafe—a fact that it informed the Scottish Government of in April last year, but which the Government apparently did not admit until the following January, a whole nine months later. We have heard of bed shortages, inappropriate boarding out of patients and consultants warning that hospitals are regularly at crisis point, at full capacity and “sailing ... close to the wind.” All the while, fewer staff are expected to deliver more for less as wages stagnate, pension contributions increase and pressures rise and rise. I would like there to have been more in the programme—or, at least, in the First Minister’s statement—to address how fit for purpose our NHS is and what the Government will do to tackle some of the social ills that shame our country today. The failure of anyone on the Government benches to mention those matters is, quite frankly, astonishing. Early in the summer, I called for the Health and Sport Committee to hold an inquiry into the state of the NHS in Scotland in 2013. I repeat that call today and hope that the cabinet secretary will join in with that. As one consultant said to me recently, we cannot go into the winter in the current climate of crisis management. Scottish Labour wants integration of health and social care to succeed, and for it to improve care of our older people in particular. Labour-led councils are doing some fantastic work in that field, and we will closely scrutinise the passage of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. Where proposals are good, we will support them, but we will also seek to amend the bill to make it better and fit for purpose. The same applies to the proposed mental health and adults with incapacity bill. I hope that the Government will support Richard Baker and Graeme Pearson’s proposed member’s bill on alcohol, Drew Smith’s proposed member’s bill on organ donations and Labour’s proposals for a new health inspection regime. Those are all positive health and wellbeing proposals. I hope that all sides will support my colleague Kezia Dugdale’s proposed bill on the living wage. Here is a clear example of how the Government can use the powers that it has to put cash directly into the pockets of the low paid. Alternatively, it can choose not to do that. Time will tell. As we have already mentioned in talking about the hated and obscene bedroom tax, there is no proposed bill to amend housing legislation to protect tenants from eviction. The powers exist, but the Government chooses not to do it, so Labour will introduce a member’s bill on that. I regret that Christine Grahame has left the chamber, because her speech of despair was not about the socialism that I recognise. A socialist has to be an optimist, and I am one of those optimistic people, as members well know.

On you go.

I ask Mr Paterson to join the Labour Party. We will instil some optimism in him. Finally, prior to the summer recess, the Government came and told me that it would take over my proposed bill on lobbying transparency. The proposal has cross-party support, the consultation has been done and the bill could have been drafted over the summer, but there is no bill. Why? Will someone from the Government front bench tell me that?

I would very much like to continue, but if I have no more time, I will give up there. Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the failed leadership contender for that. [Interruption.]

Given the mince that Mr Neil has just said about me, it is no surprise that he has talked mince about everything else. I bring Mr Neil back to his portfolio. He has a torrid time over the summer. Will he mention health at all in his speech?

Why was there no mention of national pay bargaining in the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill when it was first published?

Through amendments 5, 16 and 76, we want to ensure that, when the principles that govern our universities are discussed, debated and/or even changed, the main and most important stakeholders in our universities are included in those deliberations. That would include the student associations that represent those who attend universities, the trade unions that represent the staff in higher education, the business community and other relevant groups. The recent development of the code of governance was heavily criticised by staff and students for being an exclusive exercise that was conducted by a narrow, self-appointed group and excluded staff, unions and the National Union of Students. The amendments would ensure that that would not happen in future, and I hope that the Government will accept them. We support Joan McAlpine’s amendment 100, which is on staff and students being on remuneration committees. That is a good move that will, I hope, open up the remuneration process to more scrutiny, debate and transparency. I move amendment 5.

I press amendment 5.

Throughout the passage of the bill, Scottish Labour has been consistent in its view that our universities need to open up access so that many more people have the opportunity to access higher education. It is not acceptable that some of our higher education institutions have made such little progress in that area and continue to draw students from a very narrow section of society. Higher education should be accessible to students from all classes, backgrounds and cultures. Throughout the debate, Scottish Labour has sought to amend the bill, working with disability charities, NUS Scotland and others, so that the system can be opened up and can enhance the prospect that disabled students and others, including those from the SIMD—Scottish index of multiple deprivation—20 most deprived areas, will gain access to higher education. It was a great disappointment that the cabinet secretary rejected the very progressive proposals on that. We lodged such amendments again for stage 3, but they were not selected. Let me state clearly, so that there can be no misrepresentation of our position—as has frequently been done in the past by the cabinet secretary—that we support widening access and, indeed, we want to go further than the Government proposes. However, that has been rejected by the cabinet secretary.

We acknowledge that there has been progress during the progress of the bill and that the Government has acknowledged some of our arguments, but instead of accepting our proposals, the Government has lodged amendments in Marco Biagi’s name. Our genuine proposals were supported by a broad coalition of charities and campaign groups but, sadly, they were rejected by the cabinet secretary. The bill is a lesser bill for that.

Will George Adam give way?

Amendments 25 and 26 would ensure that staff representation on college boards is drawn from the relevant trade unions that represent staff at our colleges. Trade unions are recognised as representative of college staff, and it is right that they are represented on the boards of the colleges to which they contribute so much. Governance will be better for their presence. Amendments 27 and 63 would ensure that recommendations of appointments to boards are made by the board and submitted to the chair and ministers for final approval. That will give the board the power to make its own appointment, which is the right thing to do. Amendment 28 would increase representation to two members from one, which would ensure that colleges that are not regional colleges will have two staff representatives on boards and that the set-up is similar to that of regional colleges. We accept Mike Russell’s amendments 29 and 31 because they are similar to my amendment 28 in that they would ensure that colleges will have two staff representatives—one teaching and one non-teaching—which is the same as the regional colleges. Amendments 30, 60 and 61 will ensure that representation of teaching and non-teaching staff will come from those recognised trade unions. Amendments 32 and 33 seek to ensure that assigned college boards will be able to appoint their own board members in the same way as regional colleges, recognising the role of the regional strategic body and that its approval will be needed to appoint other members. I move amendment 25.

I have no further comments to make. I will press my amendment.

Amendments 55 and 56 relate to the ability of colleges to transfer staff between regions. We believe that, in many cases, the distances involved mean that transfers could be problematic, as the commuting distances for those affected will fall outside what is reasonable. I understand that there is established employment law on the issue so, although the Government of course has the right to insert a section on it into the bill, the provision will be difficult to apply in practice. We therefore think that a straight deletion is best. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary said that it might be beneficial for neighbouring regions to be able to transfer to one another—for example, when sharing services. Amendment 110 from the Government attempts to clarify that and how, in such a scenario, consultation would be required with colleges, trade union representatives, students and so on, with a view to getting an agreement to the proposed transfer. Although that is a little progress, we still believe that our amendment is more appropriate. Amendment 59 recognises that TUPE applies to the transfer of staff and would write that into the bill.

We have heard for some time from the cabinet secretary that he is committed to collective bargaining in the college sector and that he desperately wants it to be reintroduced but, unfortunately, there is no mention of it in the bill. With that in mind, we moved amendments on the issue at stage 2 and we again seek to introduce them into the bill today. Amendments 1 and 2 aim to put references to collective bargaining in the bill and ensure that the Scottish Government lives up to and fulfils previous commitments. Let us make it absolutely clear that Scottish Labour has successfully forced the issue on to the agenda. We have successfully brought the issue into the bill but, rather than accepting our sensible amendments, the cabinet secretary acts in the same manner in which he has acted throughout the passage of the bill, by taking our proposals, creating his own amendment and introducing it at this very late stage in an attempt to claim the credit. It is the same cynical approach that he has taken to so many sections of the bill. We will, of course, support amendment 79, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will, in his usual gracious manner, recognise the work—[Interruption.] I hope that he will recognise the work that we have put in on this important issue and support amendments 1 and 2. I move amendment 1.

I intend to press my amendments. If this was such a high principle of the cabinet secretary, he would have put it into the bill. He put nothing into the bill. He relied on us to bring the idea forward, such are his high principles. We introduced it at stage 2, and he knows that. The cabinet secretary will know all about misleading Parliament, as we all know; we heard that last year. Finally, the reason why the meetings were so short is that I felt very uncomfortable at the large portrait of the cabinet secretary staring at me in the room.

As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I have been involved in scrutinising the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill from the outset. I have observed its passage at close hand, as it has gone through each stage of the legislative process, and I have to say that it has not been a pretty sight. I will be frank. As a relatively new member of this place, the bill is the first significant piece of proposed legislation that I have observed at all stages of its passage through Parliament. I expected policy making and the legislative process to be much, much better. I was led to believe that the committee system was one of the Parliament’s great strengths. Turning ideas and policies into legislation and creating the laws of this land is the role of the committees and this chamber. As such, it is right that legislation must be properly scrutinised rather than rushed, and the rationale for introducing it must be made clear from the outset. On both those counts, the bill has failed miserably. The reality is that this has been a shambolic botch job from the beginning. During the committee’s evidence session with the bill team, it became clear that the team that was dealing with the detail of the bill was just as unsure of the bill’s purpose and that detail as we were. I am not criticising those public servants, who were doing their jobs to the best of their ability, but am simply sympathising with their plight. Then we had discussions with the stakeholders—the universities, the colleges, the trade unions, the students, the National Union of Students Scotland, the local authorities and the charities—almost all of whom had very serious concerns about the bill and its content. Such was the extent of our genuine concerns, which were shared with the other two Opposition parties on the committee, that we called for the bill to be withdrawn. At the time, I called the bill “a dog’s breakfast”; on reflection, I want to withdraw that charge because I now realise that that was an unfair slight on the pet food industry. In any case, the bill should have been withdrawn and brought back in a more coherent and comprehensible state. That would have been the right and responsible thing to do. Our motivation was the production of good legislation and the avoidance of bad, but—true to fashion—the cabinet secretary blustered on regardless. There has been some improvement during the bill’s progress through the parliamentary system, although I have to say that that would not have been difficult. Had the cabinet secretary filled 42 pages with randomly selected words from the dictionary, we could have amended them into a more coherent piece of legislation with fewer amendments than we have witnessed to date. Let us be honest—it could not have been any worse. David Belsey of the Educational Institute of Scotland exemplified the confusion very eloquently when he said about the new colleges structure: “If it’s the Government’s wish to create a nationally incoherent FE structure with a myriad of different types of colleges, governing bodies and funding mechanisms with separate regulations for each, then this Bill is the way to go about it.” That comment was about a structure that the cabinet secretary described as “simple”. It was so simple that the sections of the bill relating to colleges required more than 110 amendments to get the bill into the state that it is in today. Of course, most of those amendments came from the cabinet secretary himself. With every dozen amendments that he lodged, the case for withdrawal became stronger and stronger. This is a bill that had the cabinet secretary almost pleading with the committee to come forward with amendments to bail him out—and come forward we did. We lodged amendments on college regionalisation, on equal opportunities, on trade union representation, on collective bargaining, on widening access further than the government proposes, and on many other areas. What happened? All 76 amendments that were lodged by the cabinet secretary and most of the Scottish National Party amendments were agreed to, but how many of the 48 stage 2 amendments that were lodged by Labour were accepted? Surprise, surprise! Not one was accepted, and neither were the vast majority of amendments from the other Opposition parties. So much for the great unifier—so much for cabinet secretary’s commitment to working together to improve the bill. All the amendments that we lodged reflected the concerns of third-party groups and stakeholders, but all were voted down and rejected and the same thing has just happened during today’s stage 3. This is a bad bill. Much of what is in it could have been achieved without legislation. It centralises power in the cabinet secretary’s hands—

If we end up not voting for the bill, that does not mean that we are against everything in it. Mr Brodie’s argument is nonsensical. We have argued our case constructively throughout the process, and the cabinet secretary has rejected it time and again. I will take no lectures from Chic Brodie or anyone else on this matter. As I have said, it is a bad bill. Much of what is in it could have been achieved without legislation. It centralises power, compromises autonomy and accountability, confuses college governance, has limited ambition with regard to widening access and fails to challenge gender bias in our higher education governance. The bill was hurried and badly thought out. It sought to cover the tracks of a disastrous colleges policy that was based on cuts to courses, jobs and places and was not aimed at improving opportunities for our young people. It is a fundamentally flawed bill with the stamp of the cabinet secretary all over it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Oh, come on.

I thank John Wilson for securing the debate and for the work that he does on the cross-party group on credit unions. I offer my apologies for my absence from the group’s meeting tonight; I have to be elsewhere. I declare an interest as a member of the Blackburn and Seafield Credit Union, an organisation that—along with the West Lothian Credit Union—does tremendous work in my area. The motion refers to the credit union expansion project and members have rightly highlighted how the £38 million will, we hope, allow credit unions to grow, to expand, to increase membership and savings and to grant more low-interest loans, which is all excellent stuff that I fully support. I want to speak about credit unions and welfare reform. In the past few months, the bedroom tax has gone from being a bad idea to becoming a real-life here-and-now crisis for thousands of our fellow citizens. Although that living nightmare is hugely significant, it is a mere drop in the ocean compared with what is coming, especially when universal credit, including the housing element, is paid directly to the tenant rather than to the landlord. That will undoubtedly mean that tenants and their families who are under pressure to feed and clothe their kids might in desperation make the choice to buy food or shoes, as opposed to paying the rent. Tenants with addiction problems may, in desperation or under duress, use the money to feed their addiction rather than pay their rent. It could mean that a violent or controlling member of the family who receives the payment on behalf of the family might spend it elsewhere rather than on the housing. It will without doubt lead to major problems for a large number of tenants and their families. Having worked as a front-line housing officer, I know that that will be the case unless we act, and act now. What can be done? A number of credit unions across the UK have been working on new products to help with budgeting for that particular client group. The main way they are doing that is through so-called jam-jar accounts—or budgeting accounts. Tenants would have an active account into which the benefit is paid and the tenant mandates the payment to the landlord, who has first call on the monthly cash payment, with any residual cash being left in the account or put on a card for the tenant to use. Some accounts would also provide a small overdraft to help with working cash. If such accounts were rolled out across the country, it could save families from crisis, prevent evictions and—I believe—quite literally save lives. Two weeks ago I, along with representatives from the West Lothian Credit Union, met civil servants to discuss funding to help to roll out a scheme that the credit union has developed. To my astonishment and dismay, we were told that it was a good idea but that unfortunately, there was just no funding stream available to help with the project. I do not intend to shoot the messenger—those civil servants were just doing their job—but I must ask the Government what is going on. We have a simple solution that could help hundreds of thousands of our most vulnerable people across Scotland but, when it is presented with the solution, the Scottish Government appears to be ambivalent, at best. That is not good enough. We need action now because the crisis is here, now. Today I spoke to the Association of British Credit Unions Ltd—ABCUL—which is an excellent organisation, at its Manchester head office. It tells me that it is likely to be developing new budgeting projects in partnership with credit unions over the next two years of the expansion project. But welfare reform is not two years away. Welfare reform is here, now, and by that time, people will have lost their tenancies, their families and, I fear, some will have lost their lives. I hope that the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism will speak to the Minister for Housing and Welfare and urgently look into these matters. This is an area where Parliament can help people now, with the powers that we have. We have to act now—not in two years, or further in the future. We have to act now.

Will the member take an intervention?

I might be wrong, but I understand that, when previous third sector funds were announced, no credit unions were funded through them. That might be the problem.

Will the minister take an intervention?

You have got the power; that is the issue.

Let me tell the First Minister that it has not been a “good” or “sparkling” week for employment in my area. What help can be given to the people in my region, now that Robert Wiseman Dairies has entered consultation over 116 job losses at its Whitburn depot? The area is already reeling from the loss of 1,700 jobs at Hall’s of Broxburn.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. One of the most difficult decisions that any council or councillor might have to take is to close a school. A school closure is a very emotive issue that often provokes a great deal of concern among the affected communities, and the decision to close a school is never taken easily. In 2011, following a lengthy consultation process and a democratic vote, Western Isles Council decided to close a number of rural schools, and the cabinet secretary, in a rather desperate attempt to shore up his party’s political support on the islands, intervened to call in the closure programme. Now we find that the courts have rejected the cabinet secretary’s position and that the council’s closure programme was indeed legal and followed due process. How much did the Scottish Government spend on the court case? How much did it cost the Western Isles Council, and will it be compensated? Moreover, if the issue is so dear to the cabinet secretary and his Government, why does it apply only to rural schools and not to all schools? If the independent body makes a decision that has financial implications for the affected council, will the council receive the necessary financial support to keep the school open? Who will the independent body be accountable to? Who will appoint its members and how can the public get rid of the members who sit on it? Currently, the decision to close a school is made by democratically elected councillors who are then held to account by the electorate through the ballot box; after call-in, a Government minister is accountable to this Parliament and the electorate. What is being proposed is scandalous and political cowardice. The cabinet secretary proposes to remove responsibility from democratically elected councillors and is now refusing to take responsibility himself.

Instead, the cabinet secretary proposes to hide behind a new quango, presumably appointed by himself and accountable to no one for its decisions. He clearly does not have the courage of his convictions. He should either leave responsibility with elected councillors or take responsibility himself.

In West Lothian, heart disease patients and others who have used the accident and emergency services at St John’s are extremely unhappy that NHS Lothian’s A and E contingency plan contains proposals that include as one of the options an end to 24/7 doctor-led services at St John’s. Will the minister join me in demanding that that option is removed from NHS Lothian’s contingency plan?

Does the minister agree that, to avoid fines and penalties, those who act aggressively in an antisocial manner towards innocent bystanders should apologise—preferably in person—reflect on their future behaviour and consider the impression that it gives to those who are caught up in the antisocial act?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will want to correct the record rather than continue with a mistruth, because he knows that in the committee we wanted to widen access even further but he rejected our amendments.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Is the member aware that the cabinet secretary wrote a book during the time when he was not here? Is he aware of what the cabinet secretary said about education and universities in that book? I assure the member that it makes interesting reading.

Meanwhile, let us get back to the terms of the motion for today’s important debate, which is on support for low-income students. For young people leaving school or leaving home for the first time who are filled with the exciting prospect of a new academic life and of new life challenges, and for adults who are returning to or moving on in higher education, the issue of how they finance and sustain themselves through their studies is often at the forefront of their thoughts. Student finance and the pressures of increased day-to-day living costs mean that it is now normal and no longer the exception for students to take on part-time—and sometimes full-time—jobs to make ends meet. On the face of it, the Scottish Government’s announcement of a student minimum income guarantee, which was trumpeted as the “best student support package” in the UK, appears to be very good news. Of course, in this area of policy, as in so many areas of Scottish Government policy, smoke and mirrors and mythology and spin cloud reality. Once again, the Scottish Government appears to be reinventing the English language. Just as we have the non-profit distributing of financing, whose only snag is that it distributes profit, we now have the minimum income guarantee for students who want to enter higher education. Now, I do not know whether the cabinet secretary has any debts, but I am afraid that I have. My mortgage on my house and my loan on my car are just that—they are loans—so I do not classify them as income. Why would a young person’s student loan be classified as income? In no other walk of life or area of finance would an increased loan be classified as increased income. Indeed, the dictionary defines the word “loan” as “something lent or furnished on the condition of being returned” and the word “income” as “the monetary payment received for goods or services”. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can advise us which of those definitions he believes best describes his proposal, but I do not see him rising to do so. What of the increased loan guarantee? In essence, the amount of loan available is increasing as non-repayable bursaries are decreasing. For students from households that earn less than £25,000, the grant that is lost will be between £890 and £1,640. As Neil Bibby, Hugh Henry and Murdo Fraser said, poorer students are having their bursaries reduced and loans increased—under the guise of what we might call the mythical income guarantee—while students from wealthier backgrounds will see their access to loans increased further. Those significant cuts will affect the neediest students. For a student from a family in which two parents earn the national minimum wage of £6.19 per hour, the total family income is just over £21,000. That student’s annual bursary is only £1,000 per year, which means that £1,945 more of borrowing will produce only £427 of additional spending power, with the rest needed to make up for the lost grant. For a family income of £18,000, £1,760 of increased borrowing will produce only an extra £120 over and above the previous situation. Of course, with student accommodation in halls of residence in this city at about £100 a week, it is easy to see the pressure on students trying to pay for rent, food, books, computers and bus fares—although, of course, that is not an expense that students will ever share with the cabinet secretary. Far from being a great deal, that to me seems like another Government con. My understanding is that the original plan was for a taper from a maximum grant of £7,000 for those on the lowest income to a maximum loan of £7,000 for people at the other end of the scale. Hugh Henry quoted an article by Lucy Hunter, the former head of student support at the Scottish Executive, in The Scotsman today. She highlights that low-income Welsh students can access more than £5,000 in bursaries and will at the same time leave with less borrowing than Scottish students who are in the same position. Although the cabinet secretary likes to point to the great Satan in terms of fees and debts in England, the reality is that the difference in cost for low-income English and Scottish students is very small. Last week, Sheila Riddell from the centre for educational sociology wrote a well-informed article on these important issues. In setting out her critique of Government policies, she said that inequality in education is still rife in Scotland. We agree with her. Far too many children and young people from working-class backgrounds and from the villages, towns, cities and regions that we all represent are not realising their potential or being given the opportunity. That is not because they are less able, willing or ambitious than others; it is because they are not gaining access to universities while others are. For example, in Scotland, only 6 per cent of the school population attends independent schools, yet 34 per cent of students at the University of St Andrews come from that sector and the figure is 20 per cent at the University of Edinburgh and the University of Aberdeen. Clearly, there are many reasons for that, but I cannot for the life of me see how reducing bursaries for poor students helps to redress that inherent inequality in our education system. Mr Russell, along with Clare Adamson and George Adam, claimed that Labour opposes everything that the Government does. However, I ask the cabinet secretary how many amendments he accepted from the Labour Party during the deliberations on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. Among the 200 or so amendments that were lodged—about 150 or so by the cabinet secretary—how many did he accept from the Labour Party? None, yet he asks us to contribute. If we are serious about tackling deep-seated educational inequalities, we need to work closely with our communities, schools, colleges and universities to ensure that they do everything possible to encourage and help people from all backgrounds who have the ability and willingness to go to universities and, crucially, to provide them with the support that they need when they are there to complete their course. I am afraid that Government spin dresses up debt as income and gives the impression that students are whooping in celebration at the prospect of the mythical minimum student income guarantee. As always, the reality is somewhat different. So, although the rocks perhaps have not yet melted with the sun, it is clear that bursaries are melting day on day.

I absolutely agree with John Mason about the need to improve financial education in schools, but it is RBS that very often does that education in schools.

I apologise, because I will have to leave when I finish my speech. I thank John Mason very much for bringing the debate to the chamber. Many of us, like Mr Mason, have a direct constituency interest in the issue. Indeed, given the volume of banking closures that are on the cards, I think that hardly a town or village in Scotland will be unaffected. Mr Mason’s motion specifically identifies RBS. In its current incarnation, it is a bank that is 81 per cent nationalised—it is 81 per cent owned by us as taxpayers. However, it is a bank that acts like the most arrogant capitalist and that still pays eye-watering bonuses to executives—£600 million last year—while imposing a measly 2 per cent increase for staff pay. Sums from the Klondike were paid to those at the top at a time when they had overseen an information technology disaster that meant that customers could not access their own cash. Many of the same executives took decisions that resulted in a £390 million fine for fixing the London interbank offered rate—LIBOR—and for miss-selling. It was not the branch staff in Edinburgh, Livingston, Bathgate or Glasgow who caused that—it was the people at the top. If what they received was not a reward for failure, I do not know what it is. Of course, it will be the workers in the branches who will suffer the consequences, as will the communities affected—they will lose their jobs and their branches respectively. In May, Sir Philip Hampton, the chairman of the bank, announced to the RBS annual general meeting—like a starving man over a dripping roast—that the worst was over and that the bank was ready for privatisation. Members must forgive me for not jumping up and down with delight. Where is the logic in nationalising the debt when the bank is in trouble and privatising the profit when it goes back into the black? That is economic madness. Of course, it is not just RBS that is up to those tricks. Lloyds Banking Group is getting rid of 1,300 staff across the United Kingdom, many of them in Scotland. It is estimated that 40,000 jobs will go over the next five years in the group’s learning, pensions, insurance and IT departments. In addition, IT jobs are being offshored on the back of a claim that there is an IT skills shortage. As with RBS, Lloyds branch after Lloyds branch will close: in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh, Aberfeldy, Barrhead, Alloa, Bathgate, Carluke and Cowdenbeath—the list goes on and on. The banking crisis led me to believe that the banks would mend their ways, but on this evidence no one can believe that to be the case. I thank John Mason for securing the debate, but I am sure that, unfortunately, many members will be deliberating and campaigning on the issues that he has raised as the closure programme comes to a village or town near them.

In his discussions with NHS Lothian, did the cabinet secretary make it clear that any proposal to reduce 24/7 doctor-led accident and emergency services at St John’s hospital will be completely unacceptable to the people of West Lothian?

BAM Construction and Balfour Beatty are contractors that are bidding to build the new Edinburgh sick kids hospital. Those two companies have been up to their necks in the blacklisting of more than 3,000 United Kingdom and 500 Scottish construction workers. Will the First Minister use his influence with those companies to get them to own up to what they have done, apologise to those involved and agree to pay compensation for ruined lives and careers? Does he agree that, if those companies do not do that, they should not be awarded any public sector contracts?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the banking sector regarding help for small businesses. (S4O-02176)

I have been approached by businessmen in my region who face the real prospect of going out of business because of the outrageous costs that the Clydesdale Bank is imposing on them for breaking a commercial fixed-rate tailored business loan. My understanding is that that is a growing problem for many small and medium-sized businesses. What discussions have the minister and the finance secretary had with the banking sector in Scotland about that developing mis-selling scandal that is threatening many small businesses?

One of the ways to help over-25s who are out of work is through adult learning. Has the Scottish Government joined every country in sub-Saharan Africa in signing up to the “International Adult Learners’ Charter” and, if not, why not?

Presiding Officer, I wonder whether you can give me some guidance on ministers’ answers to questions. In one answer, the cabinet secretary has deliberately misled the Parliament twice. One was—

Yes. Well—it is a point of order, or whatever way you want to take it, Presiding Officer. First, I did not say yesterday what the cabinet secretary suggested. I hope that he will withdraw what he alleged that I said. Secondly, the point that Claire Baker mentioned was made in evidence to the Education and Culture Committee yesterday. Maybe the cabinet secretary will reflect on that as well, and apologise to Ms Baker.

12. To ask the Scottish Government whether concerns have been expressed about the new materials that have been provided to teachers to support the new national qualifications. (S4O-02146)

At briefings with ministers and civil servants, we were assured that all teachers now had well-developed resources and materials and that they were all tooled up for teaching all phases of the curriculum. However, we have reports from teaching unions and others that in some subjects, such as maths and the sciences, teachers are complaining that what they have received is unsatisfactory. What is the Scottish Government doing to speak to teachers and the teaching unions about those concerns?

The minister mentioned encouraging women into science. Why has he mentioned that only briefly? Why does his motion not elaborate on the problems that we face in bringing women into science?

Could the minister tell us how much it costs for a child to get into Our Dynamic Earth?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned the science hall of fame and said that it is like a boys’ and girls’ whatever—I cannot remember how he referred to it. However, there is not one woman in the top 10 scientists. Is that not the problem that we are trying to address?

It used to be the expectation that politicians were men. However, if people look at this side of the chamber when it is full at question time, they will find that there are more women because we put in place systems to ensure that that happened. That was not about expectations; it was about positive action.

It was a pleasure to listen to Iain Gray’s speech, which was very good and thoughtful, as was Mark Griffin’s speech on his experience at university and in the real world of work. I was also struck by the contributions from Jim Eadie and Nigel Don, and especially by Mr Don’s reference to the fact that young people should be using tools more and building things. In one of my primary school teaching courses only a few years back, that is exactly what we did. I was the eco-schools co-ordinator—I know that it is hard to believe, but it is true—and we built greenhouses and raised beds. We built bird boxes with cameras in them so that we could see what was happening to the birds, and we grew plants and all the rest of it. That ensured that the young people were not only doing good active stuff, but were learning about science, technology and maths—and they did not even know that they were doing it, which was all the better. I was interested to hear Willie Coffey’s tour of eastern Europe and the far east—and, of course, the far west; or, at least, as far west as Kilmarnock. Science and scientific development, discovery and innovation are vital for our social and economic progress as a nation, and more broadly for the development of humanity around the world. We all know about Scotland’s rich scientific heritage, which many members mentioned, and about the leading role that Scots have played down the centuries, which continues to the present day and which will, no doubt, continue in the years to come. Willie Coffey said that Scotland has punched above its weight. We are rightly proud of that fact. I am setting out our great achievements and my respect for the work of the scientific community because I do not want what I am about to say to be misconstrued or misrepresented. Many of us begin our speeches by saying how pleased we are to be contributing to such an important debate et cetera, et cetera. On this occasion, I am sorry, but I cannot bring myself to say that. That is because of the motion that was lodged by Dr Allan, which is banal and self-congratulatory and which has all the substance of a blancmange. Yes: we value science centres. Yes: we support Scottish Government public funding for science initiatives. Yes: we think it is vital that science should be accessible to all, especially young people. Who could disagree? It is a bit like saying, “Fresh air is good. We value it. We think that all people should breathe it in. Oh, and by the way, while we are breathing it in, the Scottish Government is absolutely terrific.” Of course, it is only a few months since we had the last non-debate on science and scientific issues. It looks to us as though we have a Government that is shying away from the real debates and the real issues that we should be here to discuss. Instead, the minister has been told, “We’re struggling for a debate topic, so get your hand in the unlucky dip bag”, and he pulled out the ball marked “science” once again.

It is my understanding that this is a Government debate. However, we will introduce some of the issues that we want to discuss. When the Government says that science must be accessible to all, we have to ensure that it really means it. That has to include the people who do not have the financial wherewithal to access the science centres that we are championing today. Science centres should not be the preserve of those who can afford what are often quite high admission fees. If we are going to inspire young people from across society to be the scientists, astronauts, physicists and chemists of tomorrow, perhaps the Scottish Government could look at the pricing structure for entry to those centres. I asked the minister about the centre across the road, Our Dynamic Earth, which costs £7.50 for a child to enter. At the Glasgow Science Centre it costs £7.95, at the Dundee science centre it costs £5.50, and at the Aberdeen science centre it costs £4.50. When salaries are being frozen and benefits are being cut, many families will find it difficult to afford those prices, which will result in many children missing out on the potential spark that could ignite a lifelong interest in science and science-based research. Hugh Henry mentioned the curriculum for excellence. I am sure that we all hope that it will spark an interest in science and develop a whole new generation of scientists who will serve Scotland well in the future. In the debate in December, we raised the issue of the underrepresentation of women in science—Mark Griffin talked today about the low number of female students in his university class. There are real issues with recruiting and retaining women in science disciplines. That has historically been a problem, and it remains a problem. The minister referred to it only fleetingly, but we have to get into the guts of these hard issues, which have been a problem for some time. We need a plan for redressing the imbalance. Perhaps the minister will bring that forward, should there be a future debate on the subject. I also suggest that the issue of constitutional change has to be considered when discussing this topic. There have been genuine issues raised by some eminent scientists who are concerned about the impact of constitutional change on science, scientific funding and research and development. If Scotland should separate from the United Kingdom and the UK research bodies, what will happen to science funding?

I do not raise these issues to make a party political point. [Laughter.] Members might laugh, but they cannot laugh at the scientists and research councils that are raising the issue. That is what is happening. I am not scaremongering.

Iain Gray raises a good point, but the minister does not address those issues and nobody across on the SNP seats will address them either; they just do not want to. I am not scaremongering or making party political points; I am raising the genuine concerns of people in the sector.

So, that is fine; everything will just stay the same. If members read the briefings from the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the comments from Hugh Pennington and others, they will see that they are raising those issues. If we want to raise the quality of the debate over our constitutional future, it is no good people raising concerns and then being barracked because they have done so. We must address the issues because the people expect us to address them. They do not expect a baying mob shouting them down every time they raise an issue. The Royal Society also raises the issue of the science community’s not being involved in policy discussion and development at an early stage in the policy process, which results in—in the society’s opinion—the input of the science community not being as effective as it could be. Ministers need to address that point, too. I find myself moved to remind members that we raised many of these points in December when we had a science debate, but the Scottish Government has made no reference to them. To refer back to my opening remarks, today’s debate adds very little to what we discussed in December. It is clear that it serves no purpose other than to fill valuable parliamentary time. There has been no policy change, no announcement, no proposed bill and no plans for legislation. That makes me ask: Why this debate now, and why is Parliament debating matters that are, arguably, more pressing to the scientific community? I stress again that science is very important to Scotland, and our proud history of achievement shows that. We knew that before this debate and not one thing has or will have changed following today’s proceedings. I do not think that I will see our scientists punching the air and high-fiving each other with delight following the debate. It is more likely that they will be scratching their heads and asking, “What was all that about?” I fear that that question might even be beyond our brightest scientists.

Could the minister tell us how much it costs for a child to get into Our Dynamic Earth?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned the science hall of fame and said that it is like a boys’ and girls’ whatever—I cannot remember how he referred to it. However, there is not one woman in the top 10 scientists. Is that not the problem that we are trying to address?

It used to be the expectation that politicians were men. However, if people look at this side of the chamber when it is full at question time, they will find that there are more women because we put in place systems to ensure that that happened. That was not about expectations; it was about positive action.

It was a pleasure to listen to Iain Gray’s speech, which was very good and thoughtful, as was Mark Griffin’s speech on his experience at university and in the real world of work. I was also struck by the contributions from Jim Eadie and Nigel Don, and especially by Mr Don’s reference to the fact that young people should be using tools more and building things. In one of my primary school teaching courses only a few years back, that is exactly what we did. I was the eco-schools co-ordinator—I know that it is hard to believe, but it is true—and we built greenhouses and raised beds. We built bird boxes with cameras in them so that we could see what was happening to the birds, and we grew plants and all the rest of it. That ensured that the young people were not only doing good active stuff, but were learning about science, technology and maths—and they did not even know that they were doing it, which was all the better. I was interested to hear Willie Coffey’s tour of eastern Europe and the far east—and, of course, the far west; or, at least, as far west as Kilmarnock. Science and scientific development, discovery and innovation are vital for our social and economic progress as a nation, and more broadly for the development of humanity around the world. We all know about Scotland’s rich scientific heritage, which many members mentioned, and about the leading role that Scots have played down the centuries, which continues to the present day and which will, no doubt, continue in the years to come. Willie Coffey said that Scotland has punched above its weight. We are rightly proud of that fact. I am setting out our great achievements and my respect for the work of the scientific community because I do not want what I am about to say to be misconstrued or misrepresented. Many of us begin our speeches by saying how pleased we are to be contributing to such an important debate et cetera, et cetera. On this occasion, I am sorry, but I cannot bring myself to say that. That is because of the motion that was lodged by Dr Allan, which is banal and self-congratulatory and which has all the substance of a blancmange. Yes: we value science centres. Yes: we support Scottish Government public funding for science initiatives. Yes: we think it is vital that science should be accessible to all, especially young people. Who could disagree? It is a bit like saying, “Fresh air is good. We value it. We think that all people should breathe it in. Oh, and by the way, while we are breathing it in, the Scottish Government is absolutely terrific.” Of course, it is only a few months since we had the last non-debate on science and scientific issues. It looks to us as though we have a Government that is shying away from the real debates and the real issues that we should be here to discuss. Instead, the minister has been told, “We’re struggling for a debate topic, so get your hand in the unlucky dip bag”, and he pulled out the ball marked “science” once again.

It is my understanding that this is a Government debate. However, we will introduce some of the issues that we want to discuss. When the Government says that science must be accessible to all, we have to ensure that it really means it. That has to include the people who do not have the financial wherewithal to access the science centres that we are championing today. Science centres should not be the preserve of those who can afford what are often quite high admission fees. If we are going to inspire young people from across society to be the scientists, astronauts, physicists and chemists of tomorrow, perhaps the Scottish Government could look at the pricing structure for entry to those centres. I asked the minister about the centre across the road, Our Dynamic Earth, which costs £7.50 for a child to enter. At the Glasgow Science Centre it costs £7.95, at the Dundee Science Centre it costs £5.50, and at the Aberdeen Science Centre it costs £4.50. When salaries are being frozen and benefits are being cut, many families will find it difficult to afford those prices, which will result in many children missing out on the potential spark that could ignite a lifelong interest in science and science-based research. Hugh Henry mentioned the curriculum for excellence. I am sure that we all hope that it will spark an interest in science and develop a whole new generation of scientists who will serve Scotland well in the future. In the debate in December, we raised the issue of the underrepresentation of women in science—Mark Griffin talked today about the low number of female students in his university class. There are real issues with recruiting and retaining women in science disciplines. That has historically been a problem, and it remains a problem. The minister referred to it only fleetingly, but we have to get into the guts of these hard issues, which have been a problem for some time. We need a plan for redressing the imbalance. Perhaps the minister will bring that forward, should there be a future debate on the subject. I also suggest that the issue of constitutional change has to be considered when discussing this topic. There have been genuine issues raised by some eminent scientists who are concerned about the impact of constitutional change on science, scientific funding and research and development. If Scotland should separate from the United Kingdom and the UK research bodies, what will happen to science funding?

I do not raise these issues to make a party-political point. [Laughter.] Members might laugh, but they cannot laugh at the scientists and research councils that are raising the issue. That is what is happening. I am not scaremongering.

Iain Gray raises a good point, but the minister does not address those issues and nobody across on the SNP seats will address them either; they just do not want to. I am not scaremongering or making party-political points; I am raising the genuine concerns of people in the sector.

So, that is fine; everything will just stay the same. If members read the briefings from the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the comments from Hugh Pennington and others, they will see that they are raising those issues. If we want to raise the quality of the debate over our constitutional future, it is no good people raising concerns and then being barracked because they have done so. We must address the issues because the people expect us to address them. They do not expect a baying mob shouting them down every time they raise an issue. The Royal Society also raises the issue of the science community’s not being involved in policy discussion and development at an early stage in the policy process, which results in—in the society’s opinion—the input of the science community not being as effective as it could be. Ministers need to address that point, too. I find myself moved to remind members that we raised many of these points in December when we had a science debate, but the Scottish Government has made no reference to them. To refer back to my opening remarks, today’s debate adds very little to what we discussed in December. It is clear that it serves no purpose other than to fill valuable parliamentary time. There has been no policy change, no announcement, no proposed bill and no plans for legislation. That makes me ask: why this debate now, and why is Parliament not debating matters that are, arguably, more pressing to the scientific community? I stress again that science is very important to Scotland, and our proud history of achievement shows that. We knew that before this debate and not one thing has or will have changed following today’s proceedings. I do not think that I will see our scientists punching the air and high-fiving each other with delight following the debate. It is more likely that they will be scratching their heads and asking, “What was all that about?” I fear that that question might even be beyond our brightest scientists.

Will the member take an intervention?

I was recently part of a deputation to observe elections in Venezuela. The people over there asked me a very basic question, which I could not answer; I wonder whether the committee has considered it. How do we ensure that the person who turns up to vote, whether it is in a referendum or on polling day, is who they say they are?

Before Tavish Scott finishes his speech, will he apologise for associating some of the SNP members with those of us who classify ourselves as left wing?

Yesterday, the UK Government dropped plans to regulate the lobbying industry. Does the First Minister think that that was a mistake and does he support plans to regulate the industry in Scotland?

Last week, NHS Lothian announced that it will close nurseries in St John’s hospital in my area. Will that help people to get back to work, particularly in the health service?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I declare an interest in that I am a member of Unite the Union and was previously a member of the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians. In the 1980s and 1990s I worked in the building trade as a bricklayer. Across the industry, rumour and speculation about blacklisting were rife, but hard evidence was difficult to find. Following raids in England by the information commissioner on the Consulting Association—which, in effect, is the successor organisation to the infamous and sinister Economic League—we now have evidence beyond any doubt that the biggest construction companies in Scotland and throughout the UK were involved in financing, supporting and using systematically a centrally held secret list that companies used to check whether prospective employees were deemed suitable to employ, and to provide to the Consulting Association their own details of employees whom they deemed unsuitable for further employment in the construction industry. I pay tribute to the blacklist support group and to Ian Davidson MP and the Scottish Affairs Select Committee at Westminster for exposing this scandal. The committee’s report shows how, as a result of those practices, workers were denied employment without explanation, financial hardship was caused and lives were disrupted and sometimes ruined. There was no right of appeal or challenge to the information that was held on the list or the decisions that were made. Those affected, although they might have had their suspicions, had no evidence that they were being discriminated against in such a systematic and methodical way. Liberty, the human rights group, has called that a major human rights abuse and it is absolutely correct. The Scottish Affairs Committee report highlights how people were blacklisted for the heinous crime of looking out for their fellow workers; for raising issues of health and safety; and for exposing dangerous site practices that could and did injure, kill and maim their workmates. They were blacklisted for raising concerns about site welfare, refusing to accept no toilet or washing facilities, speaking up about wage rates and raising trade union issues. Shop stewards and health and safety reps were at the top of the list when it came to the Consulting Association, as were environmental campaigners and political activists, and even people related to them. Members should listen to some extracts from the recovered entries from the blacklist records—these are direct quotes. Mr A was “Involved in a dispute to try and enforce the main contractor to take responsibility for the non-payment of several weeks wages”. Someone was therefore blacklisted for the crime of wanting to be paid for the work that they had done. The entry for Mr B says: “While at xx, drew H&amp;S issues to the attention of site manager”. He was blacklisted for keeping a workplace safe. Of Mr C it was said that it was thought possible that he was the twin of another employee—he was blacklisted for being someone’s brother. There are many, many other examples of reasons that were given for being listed: “shop steward”, “communist”, “militant”, “sells the Socialist Worker”, “attended union meeting”, “attended meeting at a labour club” and “environmental activist.” That shows the extent of the victimisation of those workers. It is McCarthyism writ large. Across the UK, more than 3,000 workers were on the list, including about 400 in Scotland. Some of our biggest names were involved—companies that have repeatedly received huge amounts of public money from contracts awarded in Scotland—such as Amec, Amey OW Ltd, Amey Infrastructure Services Ltd, Amey Roads (North Lanarkshire) Ltd, Bailey Maintenance, Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd, Balfour Beatty Civil Engineering Ltd, BAM Nuttall Ltd, Carillion Construction, Laing O’Rourke, Morrison Construction, Skanska Construction UK Ltd, Sir Robert McAlpine Ltd—the blacklister in chief—Norwest Holst Ltd and, scandalously, the Forth crossing bridge constructors joint venture. All those companies have won contracts here in Scotland and have used the Consulting Association’s blacklist. We are looking for a name for the new Forth crossing. If we do not watch out, it will be known as the blacklisters crossing. The Parliament should make it clear that we expect those companies to own up to the extent of their activities, release all information that they hold on individuals, apologise and pay compensation to those affected. The individuals involved should be held to account for their actions. Through the procurement bill soon to go through Parliament, we should commit to putting in place guidance to ensure that this situation never happens again. If companies do not comply, those named on the Consulting Association’s list should be barred from every public sector tendering list. We need to take a very hard line. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities has committed to working with trade unions and others in the Parliament to examine how we deal with the issues. I look forward to engaging in those discussions, but I make it clear that, if no solution is reached, I intend to move amendments to the procurement bill when it is introduced. According to Unite, the GMB and UCATT, the scandal has not ended. Shop stewards and union activists are still being sacked from the crossrail project in London. We cannot allow that to happen, especially in relation to one of the biggest construction projects in Scotland—namely, the Forth crossing. I ask the minister to explain in her summing up how we are ensuring that the companies operating on that contract are not blacklisting as we speak. I pay tribute to the real heroes of this story, who are not politicians or trade union leaders but ordinary electricians, joiners, bricklayers, steel erectors and scaffolders. In the course of upholding health and safety standards and the principles and values of good trade unionism in looking out for their fellow workers, they were victimised and had their livelihoods taken from them. Their families suffered greatly as a result. They are people such as Dave Smith, Steve Acheson, Francie Graham and Steuart Merchant, to mention only a few names among thousands who refused to be beaten. I hope that, because of their actions and the actions of their trade unions, the construction industry of the future will be better than the industry of the past. Finally, we need a Scottish-focused inquiry into these activities. It is only in that way that we will expose the true extent of this appalling scandal and how it has affected so many of our fellow Scots. I ask the minister to support in her summing up my call for a Scottish inquiry into blacklisting.

I am very pleased that Christina McKelvie supports changes to the procurement process. Given that she referred to a “live conspiracy”, does she support my call for an independent inquiry in Scotland into blacklisting?

That hits the nail on the head, to use a phrase from construction. This lot has to get its act together and get its house in order. The member mentions an inquiry. Can I take it that the Scottish Conservatives support an independent inquiry in Scotland? That support would be very welcome.

Will the minister give way on that point?

Justice is devolved, too. Will the minister confirm that, although the Scottish Government does not see any merit in having an inquiry now, as the report is an interim one, that position will be reconsidered once the full report has been published? Secondly, will she address the point that I made earlier and say what steps are being taken now on major construction projects such as the new Forth road bridge to ensure that no blacklisting is still going on?

I apologise to members, as I have to go after my speech. I congratulate George Adam on an excellent speech. I know that the illness is close to the hearts of a number of members in the chamber. It is a horrible, frustrating illness that affects young and old alike. In my family, my auntie suffered from it in the latter years of her life, and my brother John was diagnosed with it in his very early 30s. The illness has resulted in his progressive deterioration to the stage where he has been using a wheelchair for the past six years. He has to use a car with hand controls and he needs assistance in many areas of his life, given all that the disease entails. However, he maintains as much independence as he can, which I think is very much a characteristic of the people who suffer from the disease. My concerns—I have no doubt that they are shared across the chamber—are about inconsistency of treatment and advice. Different health boards operate different policies, with access to consultants almost impossible in some areas but much more easy in others. Access to specialist nurse services in some areas is very inconsistent, too. Some people have their nurse’s mobile phone number and can speak to them almost immediately. Others have never seen a specialist nurse. It has been suggested that each patient should have two comprehensive medical reviews a year, which would be a revolution for some sufferers. When new specialist drugs become available people have to go through an exhausting, endless process of application and appeal, pleading their case time and time again. In my brother’s case, that happened when beta interferon came out. The lengthy process that he went through—to get a drug that made him worse when he took it—added to the stress and anxiety. A big issue with MS is the mental exhaustion that accompanies the physical exhaustion. If someone cannot walk a step or swing their body around, just getting out of bed in the morning and getting dressed must be massively stressful and exhausting. I do not think that many members can imagine how it would feel to go through that every day, before our day had even begun. MS patients are hugely resilient and cope tremendously well with an illness that currently has no cure, but they need our help. They need hope, and they need our support. In some areas, such support is significantly lacking. I make no party-political point when I say that; I make the observation merely as someone who has family experience of MS.

When the cabinet secretary came before the committee, I asked her whether Lord McCluskey’s group went beyond its remit and she said yes. Since then, Lord McCluskey has written to the committee, disputing what he calls “that assertion”. Can she elaborate on how she thinks that Lord McCluskey went beyond his remit?

If the member wants the poodle to be put down, what does he want to be brought in in its place?

Will the member take an intervention?

In the debate we have travelled from the House of Lords to Banff and Buchan FM with Stewart Stevenson and from south Australia to Motherwell with John Pentland—and rightly so; the modern press and media are a global phenomenon with no respect for borders. We have had some excellent speeches and, like the clichéd football manager, I will say that I do not want to pick out any individuals only to immediately do so. The speeches delivered by Helen Eadie, Patrick Harvie, Graeme Dey and Graeme Pearson in particular were excellent and insightful. Since the exposure of the phone-hacking scandal, a broad debate has developed across the UK and the world on press conduct and ethics and on how we should regulate our press. That is of fundamental importance not only for the newspaper industry but for the functioning of our wider democracy, which many members have mentioned. At its best, the press holds decision makers to account and exposes wrongdoing and hypocrisy. It provides scrutiny, it stimulates public discourse and it can be a great educator. When I taught in schools, we often used different newspapers to stimulate discussion, particularly in the social sciences. However, as we found out through the Leveson inquiry, the press does not always adhere to high ethical standards. Leveson laid bare elements of the press—I stress the word “elements”—that appeared to be out of control, unaccountable and all-powerful. They appeared to have a grip over politicians and often seemed above the law of the land. We know the names of the celebrities who have been subject to press intrusion—to libel, phone hacking and all the rest of it. Household names such as J K Rowling and Sienna Miller came before the inquiry. The relatives of famous people have also suffered. Charlotte Church’s mother’s experience was particularly disturbing. Such people have undoubtedly been wronged, but the public’s sympathy lies more with people such as the Bowles family, who suffered extreme press intrusion after their son died in a bus crash while he was on holiday, the family of Milly Dowler, whose experience is simply beyond comprehension, or Christopher Jefferies, the landlord in Bristol who was hung, drawn and quartered by the press, despite the little fact of his complete innocence—we all remember the photographs of him. Several members, including Paul Martin, Patricia Ferguson and Stewart Maxwell, talked about the case of the Watson family. The Watsons’ daughter was murdered and their son committed suicide because of the subsequent press intrusion. Mrs Watson gave evidence to the committee a few weeks ago. Her evidence was moving and very disturbing. After all this time, she still feels that she has not had an appropriate apology from the publications involved. The editor of one of the newspapers apologised at the committee meeting, but I hope that, in light of Mrs Watson’s powerful comments, that publication will look again at the issue and consider how to make the fulsome apology that the family is looking for. Helen Eadie brought us back to reality by telling us about a current case in her constituency. However, it is not just individuals who have been wronged. Communities have been tarnished by and written off in newspaper caricatures that bore no resemblance to the reality of life on the ground. I can think of a few communities in my region whose people have been insulted and stereotyped and which are seeking to rebuild their reputations after enduring inaccurate reporting. We should also consider how industrial disputes are reported and how the people involved are presented by some sections of the media. Graeme Dey talked about that in his excellent speech, and the NUJ has raised the issue with me. And who could forget the appalling reporting of the Hillsborough disaster, when an entire city’s reputation was traduced by a particular newspaper? Our duty is to look at what has been proposed in Scotland and throughout the UK. As we heard, the royal charter will underpin an independent regulator, which will be predicated on the guiding principle of freedom of the press and will have the power to impose fines and demand prominent corrections. As Patricia Ferguson said, it is crucial that the regulator will not have the power to veto publication. People who appeal to the regulator will have access to a cheap and efficient arbitration service. I listened to what the cabinet secretary said when I asked her why she thought that the McCluskey report had gone beyond its remit, but I am still rather in the dark. I will take an intervention from her if she wants to intervene. I still do not know what her view is on how far McCluskey went beyond his remit.

Absolutely—I would just like to hear more of that opinion. Those arguing against a royal charter cite concerns that press freedom and independence will be threatened. Some might argue that the press is free only for those who own it—I think that that was the point that Patrick Harvie was making—but I can see why people might raise the issue. We need to protect journalistic and editorial freedom and to ensure that there is no political interference in the press, but surely the independence of the press and its ability to report, scrutinise and act as the fourth estate will be enhanced, not threatened, by the proposals. The charter should help to uphold and raise press standards and prevent the individuals responsible from reverting to the murky depths that Leveson exposed. We heard limited evidence in committee—Liz Smith and Neil Bibby covered that. I think that all the committee members would agree that the process that we went through was wholly unsatisfactory, given the limited time that we had to look at the issue. What we heard from the newspaper editors was encouraging—they accepted that things had to change—although they maintained their position that unfettered self-regulation is the way to go. The consensus is that that is not a suitable option, given what we now know. Self-regulation clearly failed in the past. We need a new and more robust system that will prevent abuses and provide a means of redress to those who are wronged. We cannot have the Government controlling the press, and neither can we have elements of the press running amok with impunity in the way that they appeared to. The world has changed post-Leveson and I hope that it has changed for the better. I am minded to believe that on this occasion both Parliaments—Westminster in developing the charter and this place in accepting it—have got the balance right. A royal charter that stays true to Leveson with some concessions to the press seems to be a balanced and fair outcome and one that can perhaps reassure the far too many people who have been victims of those in the media who sought to ply their trade outside the law.

International workers memorial day originated in Canada in 1985, and was introduced to the UK by hazards campaigner Tommy Harte. In my area, my former council colleague and past trade union convener at British Leyland, Jimmy Swan, brought it to our county. I congratulate John Pentland for securing the debate. As we have heard, the event’s motto is “Remember the dead; fight for the living.” Too tragically, every year, we must mourn the dead. Internationally, a staggering 2 million of our fellow global citizens die at, or as the result of, their work. Each year, families are left without fathers or mothers, and tragically—this is particularly relevant where child labour exists—mothers and fathers are left without sons or daughters. Around the world each year, more than 2 million men and women die as a result of work-related accidents and diseases. Workers suffer approximately 270 million accidents each year, and fall victim to 160 million incidents of work-related illnesses. Hazardous substances kill 440,000 workers annually, and asbestos still claims 100,000 lives. As has been mentioned, one worker dies every 15 seconds worldwide, which is 6,000 workers every day. More people die at work than at war. Those are truly shocking and appalling statistics. The Trades Union Congress estimates that in the UK more than 20,000 people die prematurely every year as a result of injuries or accidents that are caused by their work. More than 2 million people suffer some form of occupational ill health—and all that at a time when, according to the trade union Prospect, there are only three occupational health physicians and 18 occupational health inspectors left in the HSE—down from 60 of each in the early 1990s. All in all, the HSE has lost hundreds of staff and, as Bill Kidd mentioned, proactive investigations have been cut dramatically. The HSE cuts are built on nothing more than myth and dogma. Health and safety is seen by right-wing politicians, think tanks and free-market disciples as a burden on business that must be slain; David Cameron has vowed to do something about the “health and safety monster”. The Conservatives are doing something about it—they are actively and rapidly destroying the Health and Safety Executive and are making our building sites, factories, chemical works and other workplaces less safe and more dangerous. Make no mistake—people will die as a consequence and others will suffer injury and disease. Of course, that is another price that workers must pay for dogma. I am actually pleased that none of the members from the UK coalition parties is present for the debate, because I do not think that I could stomach it if they were here. In the past year, I have followed the investigation by the Scottish Affairs Select Committee at Westminster into construction industry blacklisting and have campaigned on the issue in Parliament. The investigation is a direct result of concerns about Scotland’s poor health and safety record in comparison with that of the rest of the UK. It transpired during the committee’s inquiry that trade unions believe that the figures were worse because health and safety representatives had systematically been denied employment and been drummed out of the Scottish construction industry. That is a scandal, but I will not dwell too much on it today: I will cover it in my members’ business debate next week. No family should experience the loss of a loved one simply from their going to work. On Sunday, a number of us will, I am sure, join many in mourning the dead but, the day after, we must continue the fight for the living.

Given that John Mason has expressed his excitement about today, will he express some contrition about opposing the Calman commission and the Scotland Act 2012, which brought us to this very exciting day?

I welcome the debate for a variety of reasons. Land and buildings transaction tax generally appears to be a good thing—it moves us in the right direction. As members have said, it should be more responsive to the Scottish housing market. I am pleased to see that the system will be much more progressive than the stamp duty system that it replaces. It should always be that those with more pay more, and the land and buildings transaction tax sets a good example for the Scottish Government to follow in determining not only that tax but all others. Labour supports the principle of progressive taxation throughout the tax system. Again, that is a good thing. As far as the bill is concerned, I support the proposal to curtail tax avoidance by ending the loopholes that have been extensively exploited by clever accountants and others. The proposed changes to the reliefs regime are therefore very welcome. Under the proposals, avoiding the tax will be much more difficult, and I commend the Scottish Government for introducing that element. That is the right way to go on this bill and, I hope, other bills, too. We need to ensure that the revenues to pay for public services are collected efficiently. On that note, I hope that there will be further provisions in the forthcoming procurement bill to prevent companies that engage in systematic tax avoidance from winning contracts and securing Government grants. I was heartened by John Mason’s comments that tax is a good thing and that it should be progressive. I certainly hope that he will use the outstanding influence that I know that he has in his party to convince the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth that his party’s corporation tax policy is exactly the opposite of that. It is vital that the revenue from tax meets the shortfall that will arise as a result of the adjustment to the block grant, as Malcolm Chisholm eloquently explained. I understand that Mr Swinney’s approach is to promote a position whereby any reduction in the grant would be calculated on the basis of a five-year average. I do not know whether the Treasury will agree to that, but I am sure that that is something for his negotiating team. However, it is vital that, at the very worst, a neutral settlement is the result, because we cannot afford to lose any money from a public services pot that is already under intense pressure. The bill is a lesson to us. As members have mentioned, it comes as the first of three bills, the two others being on landfill tax and tax management. The bills come as a direct consequence of the Scotland Act 2012, which is an act that shows how devolution has developed and grown in the interests of our people. It shows how, since 1999, devolution has been not a static settlement but one that is adaptable and able to develop over time to deliver Scottish solutions that best meet our needs. It also shows how progressive policies can develop within the framework of devolution, and that imagination and political will are much more important and effective than standing on the sidelines repeatedly stamping your feet and saying that only independence can deliver change. The bill shoots that fox. It highlights how we do not need independence and all the unknowns and vagaries that come with it and shows how we can develop our own solutions while retaining our link to our brothers and sisters in the rest of the United Kingdom. Perhaps that will encourage the Scottish Government to put more of its energies into using the powers that we have and the ones that we will soon have before squealing about the ones that we do not.

I most certainly would not like Mr Mason’s party to have powers over corporation tax. Absolutely not. Finally, Presiding Officer—[Interruption.]

Mr Mason set himself up for that one. The bill has emerged from the Scotland Act 2012, which, in turn, arose as a result of the Calman commission. That commission was proposed by Labour and supported by some of the other parties in the Parliament but, unfortunately, not the Scottish National Party. That follows a familiar pattern that we can trace back through the history of devolution: Labour proposes the significant transfer and decentralisation of powers only for the nationalists to rubbish it, refuse to take part in any discussions on it, deride it as a useless waste of time and then—lo and behold—when all the hard graft is done, jump on the bandwagon and claim that it is a progressive step that they fully support.

Not at the moment. The nationalists did that with the Scottish Constitutional Convention and they are doing it now. I support the introduction of the land and buildings transaction tax. It strengthens devolution and reforms land transactions positively and progressively. I urge all parties to support it—even the repentant sinners who opposed the Calman commission and the Scotland Act 2012.

If we did that, what would Lord Stevenson’s official title be?

I suggest that Mr Macdonald and Mr MacAskill speak to the traders in Linlithgow to see whether the removal of the court from there was a good move.

Today, I received an email from Unison, which has done a quick survey around the City of Glasgow College and identified almost three pages of courses that have been cut. The courses, which ran last year but are not running this year, are: the higher national certificate in engineering; courses in electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, sports science and sports coaching; the European computer driving licence; and additional needs courses. The list goes on and on. How does that widen access?

As a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I, along with my colleagues, sat through many hours of evidence on the bill, and my view on it has been shaped by what we heard from the students, staff and relevant interested parties—those who know most about further and higher education—who appeared before the committee. As parliamentarians, we have a duty—particularly in our committee work—to interrogate and question what is brought before our Parliament. The Education and Culture Committee has done that to good effect, as is apparent to anyone who reads the committee’s report or who listened carefully to the convener’s speech. I say at the outset—so that there is no room for misrepresentation, pretence or false indignation—that I and probably all the committee’s members support the broad aims of the bill. I certainly support the aim of improving the governance, transparency and accountability of universities, for which students and trade unionists have called. I support the reform of tuition fees for rest of UK students, for which student leaders have called. I support improvements to and the democratisation of college governance. I recognise the need to improve collaboration between colleges and universities, and I support improved data sharing to support people into employment. I bow to no one in my support for widening access to higher education. A college education changed my life by providing me with the opportunity to enter higher education, and for many students like me it is the route to university. However, the evidence that we have heard has raised some serious concerns that strongly suggest that the bill as it stands is deeply flawed. For example, the committee’s ability to fully comprehend the provisions on higher education governance was severely hampered. The Scottish funding council was supposed to commission a working group to develop a new and improved code of governance for universities, but instead the chairs of court took it upon themselves to undertake that work and appointed a steering group. The code has been neither published nor scrutinised by the Education and Culture Committee, and that is wholly unsatisfactory. Indeed, the group’s development of the code was heavily criticised in evidence from the University and College Union Scotland, the Educational Institute of Scotland and NUS Scotland, which complained bitterly about the lack of student and staff representation on the group. Despite the unrepresentative composition of university boards, the university chairs told the committee that “there is no particular problem with governance in Scotland to be solved.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 2011.] Given that their assertion was contradicted by students and unions, I have some concerns about the steering group’s findings—whatever they may be. I am also concerned that the findings will be accepted entirely by the Government, with the result that the code “would effectively become the ‘principles of governance’”. Professor von Prondzynski himself said that governance was overwhelmingly excellent. Those views were rightly challenged by the UCU and NUS Scotland, and if Professor von Prondzynski thinks that governance is currently excellent, that raises the question of why a new code is needed. There is also an apparent difference of opinion between the cabinet secretary and the chair of the funding council on whether the new code would be voluntary or compulsory, which is a pretty fundamental issue. We do not know whether the new code will deal with issues such as gender equality or staff and student representation on university boards of governance. Section 3 of the bill relates to widening access, which is a subject that is close to my heart, but many questions that were asked about that subject remain unanswered. How is the objective to be achieved? What actions are to be taken by institutions to improve access? What is the target? Which groups are to be targeted? Who will be counted in the widening access total? What rate of improvement will be deemed a success? Which initiatives have been successful, and which have failed? How are admissions staff to be protected if they apply contextualised admissions? Will there be displacement? How will access be widened with no extra funding? What is to happen if universities do not play ball? Government officials said in evidence that financial sanctions were unlikely in the event of a failure to widen access, but only today the cabinet secretary said in his letter to the committee that financial penalties may indeed be imposed. What about retention, which is so vital to widening access? How can we talk about widening access when the very students who—like me when I went through the system—are most likely to access higher education through college are at present being denied a college place as part-time places and adult learning provisions are slashed? What relevance does widening access have for them? I think that we all want access to continue to be widened and for the pace to increase significantly, not least because—as we heard in evidence—some institutions are failing miserably. However, although the bill may reinforce widening access efforts, the questions that I have raised need to be answered first, particularly those that relate to funding and displacement. In the interim, through the conditions attached to the university grant process, the Scottish funding council could tackle the issue now, which is indeed what it should be doing. College regionalisation is another element in the bill about which there are many concerns. The committee’s report states clearly that, in the policy memorandum, “there is very little information provided about why changes require to be made.” There are major concerns about the complexity and bureaucracy of the proposed college landscape, which will include regional strategic bodies, regional boards with assigned colleges, regional colleges and a completely different set-up for the University of the Highlands and Islands. David Belsey, of the EIS, summed up the situation very well: “If it’s the Government’s wish to create a nationally incoherent FE structure with a myriad of different types of colleges, governing bodies and funding mechanisms with separate regulations for each, then this Bill is the way to go about it.” Some witnesses expressed the view that the changes to the structures and bureaucracy of colleges are simply a cover for cuts—we know that another £25 million is to be taken from college budgets. The submission from Angus Council community planning partnership stated: “However, in practice, recent changes to college funding for school-college partnerships have already restricted the range and volume of provision available to young people. It would be unwelcome if college regionalisation compounded this by diverting time, energy and money from core functions.” Unison argued that “the whole thrust of regionalisation is not really about taking a regional approach. Rather, it is about delivering budget cuts”. The Unison representative went on to say that colleges are being forced into merger because “they are afraid that if they do not, they will be cut out after the regional boards start to distribute the funding.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 5 February 2013; c 1953, 1957.] There are many more issues on which clarity is needed. How will relationships between the regional bodies and assigned colleges work? Will that result in a bidding war? Will some colleges be preferred over others? Will the charitable status of colleges remain, given the increased ministerial powers and less autonomy? How will academic freedom be maintained? Will there be centralisation of courses? What will happen to local access? We have already witnessed the impact of regionalisation on local access with the closure of Edinburgh College’s construction campus at Dalkeith.

What a fantastic question from Ms MacDonald. I just wish that she had put that point to the minister.

The committee asked the cabinet secretary question after question after question, as did the people who gave evidence, so that is utter nonsense. What about the strategic forum? How will that work? What are the costs of regionalisation and the projected savings? Is £50 million realistic? Is increasing ministerial powers over the appointment and removal of chairs desirable?

Section 14, on “Review of further and higher education”, is a provision on which Universities Scotland has raised concerns. Finally, on section 15, following the committee’s evidence session with SDS—Mr Maxwell also alluded to this—it would be fair to say that the committee was not much further forward in understanding the data-sharing proposals, on which many questions remain unanswered. Although we largely agree with the aims of the bill, the bill itself is badly drafted, ill defined and clumsy. It is a confused piece of legislation. Anyone who reads the committee’s report will see that. Question after question remains, so a far greater degree of clarity is needed. The NUS, Colleges Scotland, Universities Scotland, the UCU, the EIS, the chairs of university courts, college principals, Unison, the Scottish funding council and members of all three Opposition parties on the Education and Culture Committee—and, indeed, Scottish National Party members of the committee—have all raised repeated and serious questions about the bill.

I take no pleasure in saying that the bill is not fit for purpose. The Government should recognise that, withdraw the bill and come back with one that the sector can support.

Will the member give way?

I know that Mr Mason will have discussed this with the colleges but is he aware of the number of courses that have been cut as a result of the merger process?

Not many.

Will the member take an intervention?

Your nose is growing.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the audit of college waiting lists. (S4T-00299)

The report into college waiting lists was written by the Scottish funding council under the direction of the Scottish Government, although it could have been written by Hans Christian Andersen. Does the cabinet secretary take students, lecturers and members of the public and this Parliament for fools? Are we supposed to believe that a waiting list of 12,866 at seven colleges in Glasgow and Lanarkshire was somehow magically reduced to 500 and that that figure accurately reflects the numbers on the waiting lists at those colleges?

Getting lectures from the cabinet secretary about misleading the chamber is a bit rich. I have a heavily redacted freedom of information request from the funding council that relates to the report. It shows that the main aim of its research was not to identify the numbers on college waiting lists, but to “identify why college waiting lists cannot be a robust indicator of demand for places.” It goes on to say: “the sooner we can go on to produce our ‘our own version’ of events and discredit the Scotland’s colleges survey the better.” Does the cabinet secretary agree that the exercise was fundamentally and deliberately flawed from the outset and designed not to help students to get a place at college, but to provide cover for a colleges policy that lurches from one disaster to another?

By how much more than George Osborne has done would the Scottish Government cut corporation tax in a separate Scotland?

Surprisingly, the First Minister failed to answer this question at question time so I will give him another chance. In his statement, the First Minister spoke about progressive policies. How is the desire to halve the rate of corporation tax that is currently being applied by Osborne—a move that will rip hundreds of millions out of public services for working people—in any way a progressive policy choice? In the First Minister’s own words, no “dodging” the answer, please.

Will the member give way?

Will Annabelle Ewing give way?

Will Annabelle Ewing take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

It is good to get someone to give way, as none of the SNP members would give way when I attempted to intervene.

Mr Macdonald is quite right to highlight that there were divisions in our party. I take no pleasure in saying that I opposed the war and every day I believe that I am proved more right now than I was then. In our party, two of the greatest, most articulate and most active opponents were Tam Dalyell and George Galloway, both of whom would be appalled that the blood of Iraqi children and UK troops is being used in a constitutional debate.

I wish that this debate did not have to take place. I wish that we still had a vibrant coal industry with skilled engineers, geologists, face workers and all the necessary ancillary staff in work supplying coal as part of a balanced energy policy—but we do not. The reason why we do not is the deliberate policy of the Thatcher Government, which took revenge on the National Union of Mineworkers, and had as its ultimate aim the destruction of the trade union movement and organised labour. The 1984-85 strike was without doubt one of the biggest social, economic and political events of the second half of the previous century and its impact is still being felt across Scotland and the United Kingdom. Late last year, the Hillsborough inquiry reported and exposed the alleged corruption, lies and falsification of witness statements by South Yorkshire Police. It explored how officers are alleged to have perverted the course of justice to cover up their failings in relation to that tragic event. That inquiry was followed by a BBC Yorkshire “Inside Out” documentary on events at Orgreave in South Yorkshire, which was one of the main flashpoints during the strike. The documentary exposed how the police are again alleged to have duplicated statements, to have had statements dictated to them by senior officers, to have perverted the course of justice and to have been responsible for a host of other unacceptable practices in relation to arrests and the recording of evidence and witness statements, all amounting to misconduct in public office. Such was the seriousness of the allegations that South Yorkshire Police referred itself to the Independent Police Complaints Commission for investigation. We await the result of that investigation with interest. The revelations from Hillsborough and Orgreave motivated me to lodge the motion for today’s debate. Across the mining communities of the United Kingdom, people know about the politicisation of the police during the dispute, about the involvement of the security forces and about the snatch squads that were established to target individuals—usually influential trade union officials and activists—and they know that thousands of people were arrested on bogus or exaggerated charges. One of those people was a miner who worked at Polkemmet colliery, in Whitburn, who was on a picket line and a few rows back in the crowd. He was pushed over by the police, he fell and was dragged off the road, arrested, charged and sacked. Another miner was peacefully picketing at Hunterston power station when he was dragged from the crowd and charged with police assault. He is adamant that he did nothing wrong and has never committed a crime in his life. Another man—a strike leader at Bilston Glen—was targeted and picked out from a peaceful picket by a police snatch quad, again having committed no crime before or since. These are the words of a man who worked at Castlehill: “I was in a village with 4 others when the bus went past carrying” strikebreakers—he did not quite use that term. He went on: “A group of kids 50 yards down the road stoned the bus. The police returned and arrested all 5 of us—we had nothing to do with what happened. The next day a sixth man was also charged despite the fact that he was actually 3 miles away and in his bed at the time of the incident.” Time allows me to provide only those few examples of the 1,400 cases, but there are many more like that. Of course, it was not just a criminal record that those people received: more than 200 were sacked and lost their redundancy entitlement, and found it difficult to get work afterwards—no doubt because they had been blacklisted. Of course, they were the fortunate ones. Some men had nervous breakdowns and became ill both mentally and physically or died as a direct consequence of those life-shattering experiences, because of the crime of trying to defend their communities, their jobs and their right to work. Given what we now know about police activity in Yorkshire, I think that we have a moral duty to look at that evidence and to reflect on what happened here in Scotland. We have to ask: was it only South Yorkshire Police officers who, it appears, lied and fabricated evidence? Was it only South Yorkshire Police officers who, it appears, perverted the course of justice? Was it only South Yorkshire Police officers who duplicated statements that led to convictions? I find that difficult to accept. We need to establish the truth about whether the arrests and convictions were legitimate or miscarriages of justice. Since the launch of this campaign in December 2012, more than 900 people have emailed the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police demanding an inquiry. I know that the cabinet secretary was involved in the dispute and that he supported miners in Fife and elsewhere, and I congratulate him on that. He will therefore be aware of the allegations that have been made over the years since 1984. He will also have constituents in his own Edinburgh East constituency who were directly affected, having worked at Bilston Glen or Monktonhall. I therefore hope that he will reflect on the emerging evidence and use his personal knowledge. Although individuals may have to take their individual cases to the appropriate body, he could do as has been done in other cases in which police misconduct has been suspected—for example, the Shirley McKie or Chhokar cases—and set up an independent review. He has the power to do so. There is a deep feeling that the convictions are unsafe and that there must be such an inquiry. The cabinet secretary has a choice. The fact that he is not here today is absolutely dreadful, and will be noted in the mining communities across the country. He can use the powers of his office to establish an inquiry, or he can do nothing. However, we have to be clear that if he does nothing, innocent Scots will live the rest of their lives as victims of an appalling, politically motivated miscarriage of justice. We need an inquiry.

Does John Wilson support the call for an independent investigation into the convictions?

Will the member take an intervention?

The UK strike was highly politicised—as Jamie McGrigor will know as a member of the party that politicised it. The fact that it was a UK-wide strike leads me to the conclusion that the tactics that were deployed in Yorkshire were not unique to Yorkshire. That is what we need to find out.

We understand the routes that are available. There is no reason why the Scottish Government could not set up an inquiry similar to the Hillsborough inquiry; at the same time, people could pursue any complaint via the routes that the minister has explained.

Will the minister give way?

I just want to be clear. Is the minister saying that if complaints come forward—they are being accumulated as we speak—she may agree to have an inquiry?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what the annual cost is of cancelled court cases. (S4O-01899)

I have been approached by constituents who have been asked to attend court, either as jurors or witnesses, and who have taken days off work to do so only to be sent home for one reason or another. It is astonishing that the Scottish Government does not know how much that costs. According to the advice that I have, there have been 100,000 such cases in the past five years. Can the minister confirm that figure?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the reported decline in the number of college students. (S4T-00279)

Surely, even by the cabinet secretary’s definition, 120,000 fewer students cannot be explained away by citing volatility. Does he think that 120,000 fewer students are just another false concept?

The fact is that there was no increase in learning for the 120,000 students who are no longer in college. Does the cabinet secretary accept that women, adult returners and students with learning disabilities are disproportionately affected in the figure of 120,000?

As Richard Lyle said, the provision of food is, like the provision of fresh water, a fundamental issue for human survival. Water scarcity, political decision making, short-termism, global climatic changes in pollution and, of course, mankind’s stupidity and irrational behaviour have all impacted on our ability to feed not only ourselves, but our fellow human beings. Over the years, from the very dawn of civilisation until the present day, food security, food production and commodity trading have been major causes of social, economic and political debate and, often, unrest. In recent decades, we have experienced BSE, foot-and-mouth disease, bird flu, salmonella in eggs, E coli, listeria and so on. There have been concerns about the use of additives and bulking agents and there have been issues around country-of-origin status, halal status, the substitution of ingredients, school-meals quality, the welfare of animals, the conditions that are experienced by animals due to intensive rearing and, now, the horsemeat scandal. We all enjoyed the various equine gags on Twitter and Facebook and in the newspaper diary columns, but the reality is that the latest food crisis will certainly not be the last. In order to change the situation, we need to take on the vested interests that have for years dominated and directed global and domestic food policy. For decades, the EU has operated under the gross excesses of the common agricultural and fisheries policies, which have, historically, provided subsidies that encourage overproduction, which has resulted in food being stored and then dumped on the developing world; intensive farming, which encourages the use of fertilisers and pesticides; and a huge imbalance in EU spending. At home, the food production lobby is extremely strong, and attempts to deal with as simple an issue as misleading food labelling have resulted in aggressive campaigning and a huge lobbying operation by the multinationals. An attempt to bring in a simple traffic light system—which Richard Simpson spoke about—to alert people to the fat, salt and sugar content of food was opposed by the corporate giants such as Tesco. Richard Simpson said that they appear to have been dragged, kicking and screaming, towards movement on those issues. If that is the case, that is welcome. If we cannot get companies to agree on such a basic step, what chance do we have of dealing with some of the more fundamental challenges in our food-supply chain? Food production is an area that exposes some of the worst aspects of our economic system. It involves intensive farming to maximise yield, using factory-style methods and subcontracting of different elements of the production process and system in order to extend the supply chain, while cutting the profits of each sub-contractor at each stage. The minister will be familiar with that from his experience of the closure of Hall’s of Broxburn. Goods travel across countries and, sometimes, continents by road, rail and air for processing. At each stage, the business owners take every opportunity to cut costs by using cheaper meats, bulking agents, mechanical recovery, sweeteners, flavourings, preservatives and God knows what else, without any thought for the implications on sustainability, health or wellbeing, and with profit being the motive driving them every time. Domestically, we cannot get away from the fact that the cuts to local government mean that there are fewer environmental health officers and staff involved in enforcement. That is having a direct impact on food safety. Public confidence in our food is essential for producers and food businesses. It is clear that light-touch regulation simply does not work. The horsemeat scandal and the work of campaigners such as Martha Payne have highlighted issues around school meals—in particular, the importance of high-quality school meals at a time when an increasing number of families are relying on food banks. The importance of that cannot be overstated. School meals and hospital food should be valued as major elements of, respectively, a good education system and good healthcare. Our feeding our young people and the infirm with the cheapest foods says something about our values as a society. As we have heard, there are also some very good things going on in Scotland, but they tend to be at the higher, or premium, end of the market. We can all be proud of premium products such as Scottish seafood, prime beef, whisky and soft fruit, but that is not where our problems lie. The chances of someone who is trying to exist on £56.25 or £71 a week—on jobseekers allowance—experiencing langoustine, venison or premium malt whisky is just a fantasy. To be told by media luvvies to buy free-range eggs or farmers market beef is both ludicrous and patronising. We would all like to buy locally sourced good-quality foods, but that is not realistic for far too many of our constituents. For many of them, food is very much on the front line of the battle for survival at this time of austerity and welfare cuts, when the price of food has increased by 30 per cent over the past five years. The picture is not good for all our people, and the Scottish Government would do well to recognise that.

Since the member was that busy, when did he have time to invent the computer?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will carry out a review of arrests made during the 1984-85 miners’ strike. (S4O-01886)

Having been involved at the time, the cabinet secretary will be well aware of the fact that many of the convictions were very questionable. I know that the cabinet secretary is tired of marching, but will he take a few more steps and rejoin the campaign for justice by initiating a review of these cases to help to put right these historic wrongs?

Again, we hear Government ministers repeating their well-worn mantras about the SNP’s alleged great successes in the NHS. They regurgitate the lines about record levels of patient satisfaction and the old chestnut that we hear time and time again: they patronise NHS staff for their hard work and commitment, implying that any criticism of Government policy is, somehow, an attack on nurses, doctors and the hospital staff who work under intense pressure. The reality is that the concerns that we raise more often than not come from those staff, who are being worked into the ground trying to cope with a system that is increasingly under strain. As politicians, we should know what is happening in the NHS in our constituencies and regions. We have case loads that reflect the realities of the cuts to budgets, the reductions in staffing levels, the lack of resources and the falling morale. Is it just me who has that on my case load? I do not think so. I am sure that most members do. In my region, the waiting time issue has been the bad penny that just keeps on returning. Last year, the manipulation of waiting times and the use of the social unavailability codes was exposed at NHS Lothian and it pains me that my region is seen as the benchmark for bad performance in that area. That scandal was compounded by a culture of bullying and harassment, in which senior management bellowed decrees down the chain of command, not in the interests of patients and their care, but to pauchle the waiting list system and make it look as if imposed targets were being met. We know that ministers were alerted to that scandal, but they did nothing about it. No one has yet been held to account for their actions. Indeed, the chief executive—the head of the organisation—waltzed off into the sunset with a £375,000 retirement package. If a porter or canteen assistant was guilty of aggressive and long-term bullying, and they lied about a major element of their work when they reported to their superiors, they would be dismissed in an instant. It appears that there is one rule for the workers in the NHS and another for the bosses. Some things never change. Last week, it was revealed that waiting times in accident and emergency units were the worst for five years. They were so bad that Margaret Watt, chair of the Scotland Patients Association, was moved to remark: “The figures on waiting times in accident and emergency in Scotland are shocking.” Margaret Watt’s remarks reflect the real world. Across Scotland, only four NHS boards have met the target to have admitted, transferred or discharged 98 per cent of their patients within four hours of their entering an accident and emergency department. The national average for December was 90.3 per cent; in Lothian, the average was 86.2 per cent, which is a fall from the 92.6 per cent we saw in September. What do those figures mean for the people who lie behind them? For patients, the situation is intolerable. Sick children and elderly people have to wait anxiously in accident and emergency for hours on end as the staff are run ragged trying to cope. As Jackie Baillie said, Mr Neil tried to suggest that the long waiting times in accident and emergency that Mr McGarrity faced as he waited on a trolley in a corridor for more than eight hours were not a true reflection of the NHS. If the cabinet secretary would pay me the courtesy of listening, he would hear me say that that was Mr McGarrity’s experience of the NHS, as well as being the experience of 75 patients in Lothian who were stuck in accident and emergency departments for more than 12 hours in January. That is double the figure that we saw just one year ago. Why are waiting times worsening, and why do NHS boards feel the need to distort the figures? Because the NHS is under intense pressure. We have seen cuts to beds, nurses, midwives and support staff, and those who have been left behind are expected to do more for less. They have seen their case loads increase to almost unmanageable levels, and all the while their wages are frozen. The upshot is that staff in the NHS are already under strain, and NHS Lothian now has to do even more to put right the cases that were affected by the waiting time scandal. That is the reality, and no amount of ministerial bluster can deny it. Of course, the minister knows that, because NHS Lothian has had to pour £27 million into sorting out the waiting list scandal, which has resulted in a feast for the private sector. Two weeks ago, I attended a packed meeting of West Lothian community councils in Blackburn. The meeting was called to discuss their concerns about the NHS, and the message that came out of that meeting was absolutely clear: people are not prepared to accept what they see going on in the NHS day in and day out. The cabinet secretary should not take my word for it; he should speak to his colleagues Fiona Hyslop and Angela Constance, who will tell him about the angry comments to which they were subjected at that meeting. The people who were there had good reason to be angry. On top of the waiting lists fiasco, we have had the temporary closure of the children’s wards at St John’s hospital during the summer, and threats to services such as homoeopathy, community podiatry, and the hospital nursery, all of which are facing temporary or permanent closure. I appeal to the Government to stop the spin and bluster, and face up to the reality of what is happening in our communities. These are very serious issues.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was always under the impression that this was a debating chamber. Can you advise me whether that is still the case? [Interruption.]

Will the member take an intervention?

There was a 34 per cent cut in places for students with learning disabilities last year. What will the figure be this year?

I sincerely hope that, when Scottish Water works abroad, it does not engage with commercial opportunities to try to privatise the development of services in some countries. There is a move for that. Throughout the world, some big commercial opportunities are looking to exploit poor countries’ water provision.

Will the member give way?

When I challenged—oh, I have not put my card in.

I do not want to waste your time. I am sure that Maureen Watt will agree that a reason for people such as the Tories to be circling with their fangs dripping with blood is that they see Scottish Water as a potential cash cow, because it is so successful.

In the area between Kirknewton and Shotts, the combination of applications, consents and active sites means that we could have around 20 wind farms. I know that the minister is a reasonable man, so does he accept that a free-for-all resulting in such an overconcentration is undermining the very policy that he promotes?

Will the minister stick to his previous commitment to introduce a voucher system in education, about which he was so gushingly enthusiastic in “Grasping the Thistle”?

You’re losing your temper.

Will the member give way?

The debate has been narrowly drafted to be about only tuition fees, in a crude attempt to gain party-political advantage in an area that the public expect us to debate seriously. The debate should be about our education system in the round and whether we are prepared to invest in the potential of all our citizens, especially those who have been left out or left behind. I hoped that we would hear how the Government intends to support the education system as whole and end its current practice of supporting one part of the system while deliberately downgrading another, but I have been disappointed so far. The Government motion contains much with which I agree. Education should be about learning and should not be determined by someone’s ability to pay. It is vital to our society’s social, economic and environmental wellbeing and a vital element of not only our individual but our collective progress. Without skilled doctors, we collectively become sicker; without teachers, we collectively become less well educated; and without skilled craftsmen, our housing standards become poorer. I trust that the principle of each individual contributing to society’s collective wellbeing is generally accepted and is not seen as too controversial. That said, people should be able to progress their talents through education at whatever level they want and anyone with a talent for engineering, woodwork or music should be allowed to pursue it no matter their socioeconomic circumstances. However, that is not the situation at present. There might be no tuition fees for full-time university students but those who study part time have to pay, as do Open University students, postgraduate students, Scots studying elsewhere in the UK and part-time college students. The fact is that we have free tuition for some, but not for all. Of course, the some includes French, German and Greek nationals but not those from Wales, Northern Ireland or England. Although we were promised that the situation would be resolved, it has not been—I thank Mr Dornan for at least accepting the fact that we are milking students from the rest of the UK.

Ms Constance should be very careful about promoting some sort of positive record by her Government on colleges when its record is nothing short of disgraceful. The Scottish Government is being less than honest about how we pay for education and public services more generally. We hear ministers saying that they want to live in a land of world-class public services with free this and free that, with the repeated mantra that if only we had the full powers of an independent state all of this would be not only possible but reality. Of course, last week, John Swinney said that there would be no rises in personal taxation in an independent Scotland, which only confirmed that an SNP-led Scottish Government would maintain George Osborne’s cut to the highest rate of taxation. In an independent Scotland, millionaires will keep their massive tax cut and their sons and daughters will have no problem going to university. However, working-class families at the bottom of the income scale will continue to struggle—and that struggle will intensify if, on top of that, hundreds of millions of pounds are ripped out of the economy with a 10 per cent corporation tax rate. We are faced, then, with a Government promoting a Scotland of flawed and discredited trickle-down economics and the redistribution of wealth from the poor to the rich as a central plank not just of economic policy but of social policy. How do those policies square with not introducing tuition fees? The answer is that they do not and the cabinet secretary knows it. I admit that I chuckled when the cabinet secretary mentioned Nick Clegg’s portrait hanging in the hall of some lobbying organisation. It was a good comment. Of course, we cannot lay the same charge at the cabinet secretary himself, given that his own portrait is on display in his room for everyone who visits him to see. That should not be a surprise. At present, educational attainment in our schools and access to our universities are largely determined not by ability or potential but by social class, which results in education being effectively the preserve of the better-off. Let there be no room for confusion: this is not because young people in deprived communities are less able—it is because they are born poor. How are we to tackle that? Figures released yesterday by the campaign to end child poverty highlighted the shameful levels of child poverty in this country but although the main social policy areas that could change the lives of poor families—health, housing and education—are all within the Parliament’s remit, little progress has been made. What are the Government’s plans for transforming the lives of our poorest people? Our amendment seeks to put the issues of university funding and access beyond the normal party-political dogfight by calling for an independent commission into higher education funding. [Interruption.] I hear people chuckling, but why does that not surprise me?

No, thanks. Such a move would be mature politics and in the interest of all our people. However, I see from the reaction of the SNP back benchers that they do not go in for maturity.

Will the member take an intervention?

Tell us about flower arranging.

I ask Willie Coffey to reflect on his party’s position. It was going to dump the debt and pay a student grant. Will he be fair minded in his assessment of the failings of not only other Governments but his own?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Given what he said to Mr Brown, can Mr Swinney tell us whether he and the rest of the glee club on his back benches are hypocrites for cheering a £25 million cut over the next two years? [Interruption.]

The minister mentioned the workplace. During the past few months, we have seen exposed the human rights abuse of workers who have been blacklisted, which is a scandal that might still be occurring in Scotland. Will the minister support the Parliament conducting an inquiry into that issue?

A parliamentary answer that I received last week revealed that the Forth crossing contractors’ joint venture appeared on the list of names operated by the Consulting Association, which was running the blacklist. About 400 workers across Scotland, including 70 of my constituents, appeared on the blacklist. Will the minister support my call for a Scottish Parliament inquiry into this human rights abuse?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Time is up.

Will the member take an intervention?

Before Christmas, when Mr Russell had his disastrous spell, he tried humility for a few weeks. However, it would appear that, after Christmas, his new year resolution was to cast all that aside. For the past 18 months, Scotland’s colleges have been under unprecedented pressure. The teaching grant has been reduced and it will be reduced again this year; there have been staff losses of 1,400 in the past year; courses have been cut across the board; places for adults with learning disabilities have been cut by, at best, 34 per cent; and in some colleges all outreach work for that group has ceased entirely. Colleges are being forced into shotgun mergers and new tiers of bureaucracy are being established, with powers being further centralised in the hands of the minister. College unions have been passing motions of no confidence in the cabinet secretary; there have been demonstrations; and, in just over a year, if we count last year’s campaign and this year’s campaign, more than 127,000 emails have been sent to members of the Parliament by students protesting about the colleges policy. If what Willie Coffey said is correct—that everything is just fantastic—what are they all complaining about? Next week, the Parliament will vote on a budget that proposes yet another £34 million reduction in college finance. If this were a time of economic boom—

Mr Macintosh clearly explained our position on colleges last week. [Interruption.]

Mr Macintosh proposed that we would reverse every college cut. [Interruption.]

If this were a time of economic boom, with jobs aplenty and reducing demand for colleges, there would be some logic to the Government’s approach, but of course that is not the situation. Unemployment is disturbingly high and people are desperate to train or retrain and gain an education to help them move on in life. However, as we have heard, the Government’s deliberate policy on colleges is denying that opportunity to a growing number of our citizens. Despite the weight of evidence exposing the policy for the disaster that it is, its chief architect—the cabinet secretary—ploughs ahead regardless, with that toxic mix of arrogance, denial and self-delusion that we have all become so familiar with over the past year. We all know that there has been growing concern about the extent of waiting lists in Scotland’s colleges. That concern has come not from Mr Russell’s favourite bogeymen and women, whether it be Westminster or Labour councils. It has not even come from sound recorder-wielding college principals, or—to be more accurate—former college principals. No—that concern has come from young people, from the NUS, college unions, and business leaders, but also from Scotland’s Colleges, the very organisation that was trusted to bring together these institutions. In a study that Scotland’s Colleges—not Labour—carried out, more than 21,000 people were estimated to be on waiting lists. That is a Scotland’s Colleges figure—it is not ours. George Adam and Gordon MacDonald both said that three quarters of those who were identified in the Scotland’s Colleges report were not truly on a waiting list. Even if we accept that, it will still be the case that a quarter of them are on a waiting list. We seem to have consensus across the chamber that waiting lists are not a false concept and that in fact they exist. Even Mr Russell’s own audit accepts that waiting lists exist and, when we look at it, there are no quotation marks around waiting lists, as far as I can see. As with the budget, student finance, jobs and courses, the cabinet secretary could not face up to the reality of his own policy and instead sought solace in yet more creative accounting. As he did with curriculum for excellence, he ordered an audit. However, as we have heard, this in-depth and extensive audit looked not at all of Scotland’s colleges but at seven in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Lanarkshire. Do seven central belt colleges, each with another college in close proximity, and some with several, provide a fair representation of how the applications system and waiting lists have developed across Scotland? I think not. As Siobhan McMahon explained, is it any surprise that a Lanarkshire student might apply to Coatbridge and Cumbernauld or that an Edinburgh student might apply to a few different colleges in the city? Of course not. However, let me highlight my local situation at West Lothian College, where 94 per cent of applicants come from the county. There are no nearby options. What are the figures there? In 2012-13, 3,800 people applied for full-time courses but only 1,848 gained access. As for part-time students, there were 6,390 enrolments in 2007-08 but this year the figure is down by more than 50 per cent to 3,000. Of course, that situation will be repeated in similar colleges across Scotland, but such colleges were—surprise, surprise—omitted from the audit. The cabinet secretary’s audit took a different sample at a different time from that taken by Scotland’s Colleges in its much larger study; however, there is no explanation as to why those seven colleges were selected. The report is full of assertion rather than fact and, focusing on one college, claims that waiting lists are only 5 per cent of the original Scotland’s Colleges estimate. The truth is that this survey started with embarrassingly flawed methodology and inevitably ended up with flawed and distorted findings that were grasped and championed by the cabinet secretary because they fitted in with his fantasy view of the world. I am sorry but, while Mr Russell comforts himself with these figures, no one else out there in the real world believes a word of them—not Colleges Scotland, not college principals, not college staff or students and most certainly not the thousands of applicants who have been left without a place. When Mr Henry talked about false concepts and false constructs, I noticed the cabinet secretary nodding his head. I should caution Mr Russell, because the last time we saw such vigorous head gestures from him was when he was supporting his gaffer with the dodgy statistics at First Minister’s question time. As other members have mentioned, on 24 October I asked the cabinet secretary: “With no preamble and no prejudgment, can I ask a simple question? How many people are on college waiting lists? We are asking for a number.” The cabinet secretary replied: “The concept that Neil Findlay raises is a false concept and a false construct. There are no waiting lists of that nature.”—[Official Report, 24 October 2012; c 12504.] The “nature” that I was looking for was a number. Given that even his flawed audit repeatedly acknowledges the existence of waiting lists, a number must also exist. I think that it is right for the cabinet secretary to apologise not only to me but to Mr Bibby, Mr Smith, Anne McTaggart, James Kelly, Liz Smith and others for misleading Parliament once again, because he accused us all of falsehoods in relation to the existence of college waiting lists. I ask him again: do these lists exist? How many people are on them? Will he at some point give us a number? A few weeks ago, we were treated to the sight of the cabinet secretary—let me put this charitably—being interviewed by college students at Edinburgh College. I am sure that, as an enthusiastic information technology user, he applauded the initiative of the students who put the video on YouTube so that their fellow students could see and hear the cabinet secretary share the great news about his college policies. Those students told it like it is on places, courses, jobs and waiting lists, but the denial continues. You cannot hide for ever, Mr Russell.

We all know the situation at Westminster regarding regulation in this area. I hope that Fergus Ewing will address some of the issues that my colleague Kezia Dugdale raised, and the issues that Margo MacDonald and I raised about 14 months ago with John Swinney. Very little has been done with the powers that the Scottish Government has. That is the point that Kezia Dugdale was making.

When the cabinet secretary met the Scottish Court Service, did it raise with him cuts to the Procurator Fiscal Service and the closure of courts and the resultant lack of court time? If it did so, what was his response?

I wish that you had done that with some previous speakers, Presiding Officer. For so many of our people, the day-to-day reality is that life is not only tougher and more uncomfortable, but desperately grim, with little immediate prospect of improvement. In my region, jobs are being lost daily. Hall’s of Broxburn is the most alarming example but, this week, another 70 jobs were lost in West Lothian alone as a result of the closure of Blockbuster and HMV. The spectre of welfare reform—the most vindictive piece of legislation in decades—haunts our communities. It is no exaggeration to say that that will be the cause of people losing their homes and marriages and, for some tragically, their lives. Wages are being frozen or, at best, cut and pension contributions are rising with no benefit to those who pay them. The Scottish Government will say that none of that is to do with it.

Not at the moment. Of course, welfare reform is a Westminster responsibility and austerity is the policy that is being driven by the dark forces of the coalition Government in London. Perhaps this is an opportune time for Mr Rennie to ask his question.

All parties have a responsibility for the situation that we are in because we all tolerated the global financial system that brought us to our knees. None of us said a lot about it. Things can be done and there are political choices to be made. Unfortunately the Scottish Government is all too often making the wrong choices and all the while blaming the situation on someone else because that is part of its referendum game plan. For example, we have the public sector wage freeze. That is the Government’s policy choice, as is the council tax policy that is crippling essential local government services. We hear disgraceful comments made by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, blaming councils for cuts that are a direct consequence of the decisions that he is making in government. As far as the NHS is concerned, we know that there are job losses and staff reductions, pressure to meet targets because of the diminishing staff numbers—self-evident in the waiting times scandal—and a host of other complaints. We see a cherished institution under extreme pressure, but the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the First Minister repeat the line that the NHS is performing better than ever, patient satisfaction is at record levels, staff are happier and there are more of them. That just does not reflect the real world.

Not at the moment. Mike Mackenzie would not take any interventions, so he should sit down. What about housing? We have a housing crisis: sofa surfing is becoming the norm for young people; far too many children and families are homeless; people cannot access mortgages because they do not have a deposit; and people cannot access social housing because they do not have the points and the houses are not available. However, the minister tells us that the Government is building more houses than ever, that waiting lists and homelessness are down and that standards are rising. Again, that does not reflect the real world and the political choices that the Government is making—it cut the housing budget by £86 million in real terms. The Government could have chosen to tackle the housing crisis and, at the same time, created demand in the economy by putting additional money into housing, but it chose not to. What about education? The Government has cut funding in our college sector at the very time that we need colleges most. The cuts have led to cuts in jobs, courses and places. Labour’s political choice is to support our colleges, to provide our young people with the tools that they need to gain employment. As Mr Macintosh said, we would reinstate the entire funding cut to our colleges, by replacing the £34 million that has been taken from them.

I will not waste any further time in my speech on that because Mr Macintosh already did that. That would prevent redundancies and prevent the cuts to courses for women and people with learning disabilities. Let us not hear any of the tired, lazy lines from Government back benchers about Labour being negative or talking down Scotland. I have set out the reality for many of our fellow citizens—they want us to reflect that and not appear detached from the world that they live in. No amount of spin and bluster from ministers, sycophantic planted questions from back benchers or cheerleading speeches from the people behind the finance secretary will hide that. In addition to asking Mr Swinney to restore the colleges budget, we ask him to invest in housing, through the Barnett consequentials. As Mr Macintosh explained, that would kick-start construction and create jobs. We also ask for the reinstatement of moneys that were cut from the EGIP project, through borrowing against the regulated asset base to pay for projects such as the Dalmeny chord in my area, which would stimulate developments such as Winchburgh station in a core development area. Those are practical steps that we could take. Unemployment, colleges, construction, housing and transport are our political priorities and, I think, the people’s priorities. It is a shame that they are not the Government’s priorities.

Will the member take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to improve the educational attainment of pupils from the poorest backgrounds. (S4O-01681)

Recent school attainment results show a stark divide between the attainment of pupils in areas of multiple deprivation and those who are in more affluent areas. The cabinet secretary has described some of the wider issues, but will he tell us what practical steps will be taken day to day in schools to address the widening gulf?

Will that new phenomenon in the information technology world, the Mike Russell app, have a calculator figure so that the cabinet secretary can keep abreast of increases in college waiting lists and provide better figures for his boss this year than he did last year?

I never mentioned any figures.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary should check the Official Report because, in my question, I never quoted one figure. Perhaps he wishes to correct himself.

The cabinet secretary spoke earlier about the need for openness, and she now says that we can be ahead of the game. Would she support legislation to increase openness and transparency in lobbying, so that Scotland can be ahead of the game in that regard as well?

The coal industry has a huge historic legacy in Scotland and across the UK, as members have mentioned. It employed more than 1.4 million at its peak and 150,000 across the coalfields in Ayrshire, Lothian and Fife, as well as in many other areas in Scotland, as Elaine Murray mentioned. That went on until the industry was butchered by the Thatcher and Major Governments. We have to nail, once and for all, the garbage that Murdo Fraser comes out with that it was Arthur Scargill who somehow closed down the industry. If we take that logic a step further, presumably Scargill closed the car industry, heavy engineering and the steel industry. Of course he did not—the ideology that Mr Fraser worships closed down those industries.

Mr Fraser needs to stop taking the drugs. If he wants evidence of a megalomaniac, he need only look at his hero—or heroine, more like. However, I invite Mr Fraser to continue his thesis and debate in public. I invite him to come at any time to Addiewell, Fauldhouse or Dalkeith miners’ welfare clubs. We can get people along to listen to his views on the time in question; I think that we could sell ringside seats and sell out. Some would say that the coal industry is a thing of the past, but I disagree. Many members—most recently Helen Eadie—have referred to the fact that 75 per cent of Scotland’s coal is still in the ground. Most of that coal is extracted through surface-extraction methods. I have had major disagreements with the industry about that over the years, particularly when the industry seeks to extract coal on the doorstep of residential properties or when the benefits of extraction do not outweigh what it is doing to the community. However, good companies operate in such a way that people hardly notice that they are there. A major example of that in my area is the redevelopment of the former Polkemmet colliery site over the past five or six years, which has not caused any major problem in the community and which has cleaned up a large brownfield site. Coal must of course be part of a balanced energy policy, with gas and hydro. I am sceptical about nuclear, but we have it and cannot simply wish it away, so we must look at it in all our energy policy deliberations. However, I have major concerns about the potential impact of fracking on the environment. Members have referred to the UK Government’s carbon capture policy, which has been a massive shambles. We need to get the policy back on track. My friends at the National Union of Mineworkers tell me that the price of coal has dropped by 30 per cent because of gas from the US, which is now going down the fracking route, coming on to the market. Members have referred to ATH, so I will not go over that again. I have two further, related issues to raise. The Scottish Government is cutting the budget of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust by 67 per cent. The Tory Government in England is cutting its budget in that regard, too, but by only 12.5 per cent. However, £1 million is being taken out of the trust’s budget in Scotland by the Scottish Government, which must address that issue. I hope that Mr Ingram and his colleagues will address that. Finally, my colleague David Hamilton and I have been running a campaign to seek a review of the cases of those who were convicted during the 1984-85 miners’ strike. More than 650 people have contacted me about that and have emailed the Cabinet Secretary for Justice over the past few weeks. There is a real sense of injustice over the issue. I hope that I will be able to come back to it over the next few weeks and months until we get a result.

Last year, we had the report into bullying and the management culture at NHS Lothian, which was soon followed by the report into the waiting times scandal. Now, we have the revelation that NHS Lothian has been deliberately withholding information from Audit Scotland. When will the health minister intervene to sort out what is clearly a dysfunctional and secretive organisation?

I am aware that it is Thursday, but what does that matter? It is not awareness of the programme but whether people engage in it that matters.

I, too, welcome my new colleague Jayne Baxter. I enjoyed her speech very much and I look forward to working with her over the next few years. This is not good for her, but she sounds like my type of woman. This afternoon’s debate is not just about getting people a job; it is about much more than that. Employment is an important factor in making people, families and communities who and what they are. Unemployment is an ugly scar that blights and debilitates communities. Quite simply, it is a national scandal. We will not discuss anything more important this year. We have youth unemployment levels such as we have not witnessed since the 1980s. The youth unemployment rate in my village is 30 per cent—a level that has not been seen since the Thatcher Government butchered huge employers such as the National Coal Board and British Leyland. We are now in the middle of another closure of a big local employer—Hall’s of Broxburn—which is shedding 1,700 jobs. When the First Minister tries to deflect criticism, he usually likes to talk about the number of people who are in employment, rather than the number who are out of work. If we use his methodology, we can see that, although unemployment has dipped recently, so has the number who are in employment. Mary Scanlon referred to that. Fewer people are working, even though the official unemployment rate has declined. Another note of caution comes from the stark reality of what is going on in the real world. The labour force survey exposes the gravity of the situation. Since March 2007, the youth unemployment figure has increased from 51,000 to 87,000. That means 36,000 more young people are out of work under this Government. The claimant count shows that the number of 16 to 24-year-olds who are on jobseekers allowance has gone from 22,600 to 35,800. The number who had claimed benefits for more than six months was 3,700 in 2007 and is now 12,275, which is an almost fourfold increase. Even more worrying is that the number who had claimed for more than a year, which was 555 in 2007, was up to 7,050 by November. That is a twelvefold increase, yet Mr Brodie does not want to talk about statistics. Perhaps most worrying of all is that 12.2 per cent of all young people are still not in education, employment or training. The last school-leaver destination figures showed that more than 11 per cent of school leavers did not go on to any positive destination. The most recent school-leaver destination figures were supposed to be published in December, but we appear still to be waiting for them. I hope that the minister will respond to that in summing up. I wonder whether the figures will be published later this week, after the debate. Of course, for those who are fortunate enough to find work, underemployment is a major problem, about which members have spoken. Young people are much more likely to have the temporary jobs that economists have told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee are dead ends. The Scottish Trades Union Congress describes those jobs as “low wage and insecure with very little prospect of training or career progression.” Given the grim jobs scene, we should support efforts to tackle overall youth unemployment. However, I say to Government back benchers that a fundamental part of the job of Parliament and parliamentarians is to hold the Government to account and to ask questions about the success, or otherwise, of policy. It is our duty to ask whether interventions are creating long-term and sustainable jobs or whether they represent merely a variety of ways in which to shuffle the figures by creating what one professional in the field recently said some of the schemes promote—“holding corrals” for the unemployed.

I am sure that Mr Crawford took that position when he was in the Opposition and I am sure that he identified several times over every single penny that he would have spent—I do not think. At this time, we would expect our colleges to be key to the drive to get people back to work, but a deliberate Government policy has been to target and reduce college funding. We have seen 70,000 places for part-time students cut, 1,400 jobs lost and fewer courses available. How on earth is that a sensible policy? Members have mentioned the careers service, which we discussed a few weeks ago. We have heard staff, trade unions and independent academics highlight how the so-called modernisation will not improve but will hinder job prospects. How is that a sensible policy?

No. I am in my last minute. What of the Government’s much-championed modern apprenticeship scheme? On the face of it, who could disagree with it? However, we have introduced the scheme without having any way to measure whether it is effective. Skills Development Scotland has written to me and stated exactly that. The Government cannot tell us whether any of the people who go through the schemes remain in full-time employment afterwards. There are apprenticeships that last for three months and six months, and thousands more are completed within a year. Of course young people are right to take the opportunities, but rebadging vocational training and calling almost anything an apprenticeship diminishes the value of apprenticeships and leads young people on with false promises. What about the get ready for work programme? Only 20 per cent of those on it are moving into full-time employment, and there are activity agreements with which people get a few hours of advice. That is now classified as a positive destination, and that is simply wrong.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I know that I have come to the end of my time. I will leave things there. I look forward to the rest of the debate.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister say what the current rate of UK corporation tax is on oil and gas and how much revenue would be lost if a 10 per cent rate were applied?

Will the minister give way?

I cannot disagree with what the minister has said so far. I am sure that she will agree that the fact that many people in the world do not have access to water concerns people around the globe. There is also a concern that many transnational corporations see the provision of water and the control of that essential resource as a tremendous business opportunity in the developing world. I am sure that the minister will join me in trying to ensure that there is no exploitation of such countries when they are trying to provide clean water for their people.

I welcome what the member says, but the main point that I made was that, although we should go abroad and help countries to develop their infrastructure, we should not be complicit in any moves by private companies to exploit those countries by privatising their water systems.

Will Mr Stevenson advise us how the 40,000 people got to the conference?

Not me.

I welcome Dr Allan, who has just parachuted in from afar. Science plays a vital role in influencing all that we do as a society and a central part in supporting our economy, so, like the Government, I believe that this is an important debate. In our learning and human development, in the creation and application of new technologies and in our understanding of the world and, indeed, the universe around us, science helps us to explain both simple and extremely complex concepts as well as the practical solutions that are brought to bear on many of the world’s most serious problems. From the big bang, evolution and weather patterns to inventions, space travel and new technology, science is at the core of our understanding of life and our interactions with all aspects of it. Science is taught in our schools from the earliest years, and the new school curriculum lends itself to encouraging a cross-curricular approach to the study of science. I know that our teachers will rise to the occasion, as they always do, to deliver new and stimulating lessons not just in the traditional sciences of chemistry, biology and physics but in health and food technology, geography, music, science, art, information technology and all the other disciplines that go to make up the curriculum. Of course, it is through school learning that, throughout history, Scots have been inspired to become world leaders in the development of new scientific advances. Celebrated Scottish scientists and inventors have made a tremendous impact on the world and on humanity. Obvious examples include John Logie Baird, whose impact we could all say was truly revolutionary. Even a visionary such as he could hardly have conceived of the power and breadth of his work. Of course, I am absolutely certain that, at some point during his experiments, there was a sceptical Scottish laboratory assistant looking over his shoulder, saying, “I don’t know why you’re wasting your time on that thing; it’ll never catch on.” Others, such as James Young Simpson, changed medical science for ever. James “Paraffin” Young was a pioneer in the field of shale oil technology, which was referred to only a few minutes ago in the chamber, and, in recent years, Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell at the Roslin institute created the world’s most famous sheep, Dolly, who changed the face of science by becoming the first mammal to be successfully cloned. I am absolutely certain that there is a joke to be made at this point about politicians, but I will resist. Scotland has produced countless physicists, engineers, botanists, astronomers and mathematicians—I do not include myself in that list. The Scottish science hall of fame includes the following people in its list of our top 10 greatest scientists: Lord Kelvin, who is famous for the temperature scale and the development of the trans-Atlantic telegraph; James Hutton, a pioneering geologist; Logie Baird, whom I have mentioned; James Watt, who is famous for the steam engine; Robert Watson-Watt, who developed the use of radar; Alexander Graham Bell, who invented the telephone; Alexander Fleming, who discovered penicillin; Joseph Black, who discovered carbon dioxide; Maxwell—not Stewart, I hasten to add—whose achievements are too many to list; and John Napier, who invented logarithms and who I can now blame for my third-year misery in maths. There are, of course, countless others who are unknown to the wider world but who do important scientific work every day, including work within Government, which we recognise and which the cabinet secretary ably listed. There are some people who will soon be added to the Scottish science hall of fame. Given his speech in last week’s careers debate, I am sure that the next member will be that great Scottish inventor, Stewart Stevenson, along with his brother. We will hear more about that in the debate, I am sure. However, what is striking about that stellar list of scientists is the fact that there are no women on it. Indeed, there appear to be real issues with the recruitment and retention of women in science.

I thank Dr Murray for that question—I believe that she was a scientist herself. However, I was referring to the list of the top 10 members of the Scottish science hall of fame, in which there are no women. That is the fact of the situation. I refer you to that list, Presiding Officer. Earlier this year, the Royal Society of Edinburgh published a paper called “Tapping all our talents—women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics: a strategy for Scotland”. That paper says: “Scotland fails to realise the full potential of its research base, and will continue to do so if it systematically fails to cope with the debilitating loss of talent represented by the high attrition rate of highly-trained women from employment. Although our universities now graduate large numbers of women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), 73% of women graduates are lost from STEM compared with 48% of male graduates, with a corresponding loss of researchers. In academia, expensively trained women are lost in larger proportions than men at every step of the postgraduate ladder and are under-represented in top positions across the spectrum of business, public service and academia.” As well as being a loss to those individuals, who are missing out, that is also a loss to our economy, society and policy development. It is estimated that a doubling of women’s high-level skill contribution to the economy would be worth as much as £170 million a year to Scotland’s national income. That contribution is something that we need to harness, not lose. It is puzzling and frustrating that, at a time of recession, we still hear many of Scotland’s science and technology companies complaining that they cannot find people with the skills that they need when, at the same time, we are haemorrhaging women from the sector. There are of course factors that contribute to the fact that women do not pursue a long career in the sector. The most obvious factor is family commitments, but that is only part of the story. The Royal Society of Edinburgh points to cultural factors that relate to attitudes in the workplace, the organisation of science and technology, the difficulties in accessing career resources and, with such low levels of female participation, a lack of inspirational role models.

I will come on to that. The issue has a critical role to play because if we take only or largely a male perspective on policy, our policy process is much the worse. The apparent glass ceiling and the drain of female talent have to be tackled urgently. We should seriously consider the views and recommendations of the Royal Society, which asked the Scottish Government to take a lead and commit itself to a national strategy and action plan aimed at retaining and promoting women in STEM subjects. At the United Kingdom level, the Royal Society has asked for an extension to parental leave in recognition of the equal responsibility of mothers and fathers in parenting, and it has called on business and industry to address the issue of job design and introduce quality part-time employment at all levels. STEM advisory boards should develop gender equality strategies and funders of university and research should link funding to gender equality. As we are on the subject of science, it is appropriate to discuss the impact of constitutional change on our ability to retain our position as a world-class centre for science. Statistics show that, despite Scotland’s relatively small size, we manage constantly to punch above our weight in relation to the level of research funding that we are awarded. As my amendment says, despite Scotland’s population being just over 8 per cent of the UK’s total, we still managed to secure nearly 14 per cent of the funding.

Absolutely. We recognise that and hope that that will continue. However, these are legitimate questions to ask. A recent Universities Scotland briefing paper found that in 2009-10, Scottish universities competitively won £116 of research income per head of population, compared to £68 in England, £52 in Wales and £50 in Northern Ireland. Would Scotland, separated from the rest of the UK, manage to retain that level of funding? That is a legitimate question to ask, and it is one that we should ask because it all feeds into our policy development process.

As always, Dr Simpson adds weight to the debate. I am sure that I do not need to add anything further. Those doubts were raised by one of the UK’s most respected scientists, Professor Hugh Pennington, who argued that the key to the monumental success of British science has been the unimpeded two-way traffic of ideas, money and people across the border. If Scotland was to leave the UK, he views it as inevitable that Scottish research funding would take a hit, hurting universities and their ability to remain a major player. Fears about research funding in an independent Scotland were also raised by the University and College Union, which claimed that it was concerned that independence might lead to a decrease in research funding for Scotland. I agree that we must support and recognise the achievements of science and how it feeds into our public policy agenda, but let us acknowledge that there is much work still to be done and let us have an honest debate and analysis of how science in Scotland would be affected by future constitutional change. I move amendment S4M-05154.2, to insert at end: “; notes with concern that, although the number of women graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) subjects has increased in recent years, in Scotland only 27% of women graduates in STEM subjects work in the sector they graduated in compared with 52% of male graduates; understands that Scottish universities perform strongly in obtaining UK research funding and that, of the £4.4 billion of funding from research grants and contracts invested across the UK in 2010-11, Scotland received over £613 million, or 13.8%, of the UK total; acknowledges the comments of Professor Hugh Pennington that “if Scotland leaves the UK, its science will take a knock”, and considers that Scottish universities are stronger and better together in the UK.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

My experience of being a recipient of careers guidance at school was not particularly good, but that probably says more about my attitude as a surly, spotty youth than it does about the ability, or lack of it, of the careers staff involved—[Interruption.] I hear Mr Russell muttering about that.

I humbly apologise. Someone must have the same dulcet tones as Mr Russell. Help for young people with careers development is important. Our young people need to develop skills and make the right subject choices at school and the right choices for college and university, so that they can prepare for the increasingly fast-paced and volatile jobs market. Careers services are also critical to development in the wider economy, as is evident from the high levels of youth unemployment in Scotland. In my council area, which the minister knows well, the youth unemployment rate is a worrying 30 per cent. On the basis of the evidence that is before us, the minister’s self-satisfied motion, which seeks to celebrate reform, is misguided and does not reflect life in the real world. As I am sure that the Presiding Officer knows, I am always willing to applaud the Government when it does good things, and I would genuinely have preferred to be able to compliment the minister on implementation of effective reforms in the careers service. It is unfortunate that evidence is mounting that the so-called modernisation of the careers service is, like college regionalisation, driven by a cost-cutting agenda, which is leaving tens of thousands of young people with little or no real careers guidance. As SDS confirms in its “Corporate Strategy 2012/15”, “The Scottish Government’s Career Information Advice and Guidance Strategy ... places a particular emphasis on giving individuals the ability to manage their own career journeys by developing the relevant skills.” However, the ability to manage the career journey is being driven in one direction: away from people and human interaction and towards the web-based service, my world of work. There are serious misgivings about the effectiveness and impact of my world of work. Those concerns fall broadly into two camps: first, the number of young people who have registered for the service—a key point is that this is not the number who have actually used it; and, secondly, the effectiveness of the web-based service for those young people who actually log on and use it. In 2009, academic researchers Cathy Howieson and Sheila Semple were commissioned by SDS to look at web-based services. Their report concluded: “the value of career websites in supporting users’ career development remains untested. Very little is known about the impact of career websites on young people’s career-related knowledge and skills and whether such websites can deliver the gains that have been identified as accruing previously from CIAG”— that is, careers information, advice and guidance. The researchers went on to ask: “Do all young people have the technical abilities to use websites, are they able to deal with the volume and complexity of the information available?”

I am just coming to that point. The academics suggest that web-based services, while potentially a useful tool, should not replace the current face-to-face contact, which they found was “valued by pupils and also by teaching staff.” We agree with that. The researchers say that web-based services provide information, not advice—which is a critical distinction—and that young people, no matter their ability or background, need help in interpreting information and developing a career plan. Incidentally, the research that the minister referred to was embargoed by SDS because it did not like its conclusions. An SDS spreadsheet identifies that tens of thousands of young people across Scotland are no longer accessing any form of careers guidance. Drew Smith has referred to the figures for his area, but the national figure is that, up until 31 October, only 17 per cent of Scotland’s school pupils had registered with my world of work. In my local authority area, the registration rate is only 16 per cent. That is not the fault of councils because, irrespective of the political colour of the administration, the registration figures across Scotland are alarming: in Angus, the figure is 11 per cent; in Argyll and Bute, it is 19 per cent; in the Shetland Islands, it is 14 per cent; in Perth and Kinross, it is 17 per cent; in Dumfries and Galloway, it is 16 per cent; and in Highland, which has the highest registration rate, it is 37 per cent. Why are those numbers so low? Well, SDS has adopted a new traffic-light system, which categorises our young people as red, amber or green. That determines whether they will receive careers guidance or be left to manage their own career journey. It is estimated that 100,000 young people are in the green category, where pupils receive what the minister referred to as the “SDS universal offer”. That sounds very grand, but in practice it means half a school period—which could be delivered to a class or a group—on the CMS framework and another half period on my world of work. SDS counts those as two interventions per pupil. A session delivered to a year group of 200 pupils in a hall counts as 400 individual interventions and is recorded accordingly. Even with that creative accountancy, if only 17 per cent of pupils are registered, we can see clearly that tens of thousands are receiving little or no careers guidance at all.

Certainly.

Presiding Officer, I think that we have heard enough from the minister now.

My question is not about whether SDS will eventually get round to seeing all pupils. There are pupils in classes now who are getting no careers guidance at all. That is the real issue. I am also advised by people in education that many pupils are unassigned to any category, but that was denied by SDS senior management when they appeared before the Education and Culture Committee last week. Perhaps, in her closing speech, the minister could clarify the position. The Government’s approach seems to be underpinned by an unproven and untested assumption that the 100,000 young people categorised as green will use the my world of work website and may not want or need face-to-face guidance. However, the university drop-out rate of 9.4 per cent suggests that young people of all abilities need to be helped into making good careers choices. In the post-school setting, staff numbers and office opening hours are being reduced, drop-in services are being ended, an appointment-only system is being introduced and advisers are being stopped from carrying out home visits and taking clients to interviews in their cars. How will those actions help to make inroads into youth unemployment? That is all dressed up in the language of modernisation—a loaded word that is often applied to give the impression that it means progress. Unison, which represents SDS staff, believes that modernisation is a cover for “budget cuts rather than the drive to improve the service”. Those cuts have resulted in 200 front-line staff losing their jobs. I have no idea where the minister gets the idea that it has been an increase in staffing. Unison was so concerned at the changes and cutbacks that it conducted a survey of its members, as other speakers have said. The results are startling. Only last month, 89 per cent of the 400 staff who responded either disagreed or strongly disagreed with the assertion that “The new service delivery model will result in an enhanced service for the people of Scotland”. Morale is low, and staff feel deskilled and that their professional judgment is no longer required. Unison also identifies SDS as having a culture in which there is no room for any debate on the organisation’s direction. SDS has form on that. It does not appear to like to hear other people’s views. As I mentioned, it embargoed the previous research, despite the fact that it commissioned it. The academics who conducted the research are currently engaged in further research, but SDS has ordered its staff not to co-operate with that research. To be frank, that is astonishing and the minister simply must step in and not allow that to happen. Just because somebody brands something with the label “modernisation” does not mean that it is good or that it is better than what went before. The changes that are being made are untested and unproven. There is no independent research that states that the more clever somebody is, the less they need to see a careers adviser or the better they are at managing their own career. By the end of October, 83 per cent of secondary school pupils were unregistered. We are very worried about that. The Government should be worried too but its approach so far is complacent in the extreme. I move amendment S4M-05109.2, to leave out from first “agrees” to end and insert: “acknowledges that, at a time of high and rising unemployment, careers information, advice and guidance is increasingly important to young people in school and those seeking opportunities post-school; believes that web-based services should be viewed as useful information tools that complement and supplement the careers advice and guidance system rather than as a replacement; is concerned at what it understands are the very low levels of registration by school pupils on the web-based system, My World of Work, and believes that the red, amber and green method of categorising pupils is resulting in many receiving little or no careers guidance; notes the reduction of 20% in frontline staff and the decline in opening hours of careers offices; further notes the results of two recent careers staff surveys that have raised serious concerns about the new service model, and urges the Scottish Government to reconsider its careers strategy and to work with Skills Development Scotland, careers staff, trade unions, academics and other stakeholders to carry out a full and rigorous assessment of the services being provided.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member realise that only 11 or 12 per cent of young people in his constituency are registered?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given the member’s exciting career—I know that he has been a pilot and a water bailiff and invented the computer—is the answer that we should not give careers advice but just let people read about Winston Churchill and so on when they are five years old?

Surely the most important evidence is from the people who are delivering the front-line services to the young people that need them.

Will the minister take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you can help. The minister says that he does not have time to take an intervention. He has seven minutes, which is more than any back bencher has in any debate, and back benchers are expected to take interventions.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I hope that whoever is summing up for the Government will answer this question too. Leveson highlights the power of the press with regard to lobbying. Would Patrick Harvie welcome a statutory register of lobbyists?

In June, the First Minister advised me that the temporary closure of the children’s ward at St John’s hospital in Livingston was “unsatisfactory” and that steps were being taken to ensure that it did not happen again. Guess what, Presiding Officer: less than five months later, the 24/7 status of the ward is again under threat and there is genuine fear for its long-term future. Can we today get a cast-iron commitment that the First Minister will instruct the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to step in if there is a further downgrade?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how college reforms will impact on adults with learning difficulties. (S4O-01526)

Now that we know that significant cuts are occurring in courses for adults with learning difficulties, what is the Government doing—now, this year—to provide opportunities for young people who want to learn but are told that they are either too old or there is no place for them?

The cabinet secretary has powers to offer teachers the same protection as people in local government. Will he do that?

I refer to the table that was given with the statement. What additional finance will be provided to West Lothian Council to cope with the appalling situation following the closure of Hall’s of Broxburn?

Can the cabinet secretary cast his mind back and point to a year during the period when Labour was in power when we had such a crisis in our colleges?

I see that, as for the football team during a run of bad results, the chairman has turned up to give the dreaded vote of confidence to the manager. Surely it is only a matter of time before the cabinet secretary goes on gardening leave. For a multitude of reasons we are back debating Scotland’s colleges just a week after our last attempt. Yes, of course there is the small issue of fabricated figures, spin and the political dark arts—or, as Mr Russell’s fellow right-winger Alan Clark once famously said, being “economical with the actualité”—but I suggest that we are here for the more important reason that, across the Opposition parties, there is a concern for the college sector and the disaster that is unfolding in front of us. That disaster is being driven by the cabinet secretary and will get worse if it is allowed to proceed unchecked. Even on the Government benches, there must be some who, deep down in quiet times of reflection, know that the policy agenda being pursued by their Government is wrong and is having a detrimental impact on their constituents. I live in hope that someone somewhere on the Government benches will find the backbone to speak up for their area. Let me, as always, be charitable to the cabinet secretary—

No, sit down.

Presiding Officer, it is good to get them animated so early. I can see how some people could get confused with the college figures. The system is opaque and complex: money cut here; money transferred there; and money that used to go to the funding council given to SDS, only for the colleges to bid back into SDS for the same money that they once got directly. We have had in-year revisions and, at one stage, we had week-to-week revisions. That accountancy sleight of hand is not based, as the cabinet secretary has claimed, on his standing up for colleges and securing more funding; it is a blatant attempt to try to camouflage the reality of what is going on by creating a funding shambles that is difficult to follow or scrutinise effectively.

Mr McDonald, if we want to trade quotes from the EIS, just wait a minute, please. The funding shambles was confirmed by Professors Peat and Gallacher and former college chair Mr Buchanan when they appeared before the Education and Culture Committee. On that occasion, each was asked to give a figure for what their college budget was being cut by this year. Professor Peat said: “I will kick off by saying that I cannot, at this stage, give you a figure for what that cut is in absolute terms.” Professor Gallacher said: “I agree with Professor Peat. There are many complex issues involved. However, there is no doubt that, over the past number of years, the college sector has experienced a significant cut in its budget, which has undoubtedly had major implications for trying to maintain both the range and the quality of provision.” Paul Buchanan said: “Likewise, I am unable to give a figure, but there is definitely a downward trend, which appears to continue into next year as well.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 25 September 2012; c 1445.] The problem is that, instead of listening, the cabinet secretary dismisses anyone and everyone who just happens to see the world a little bit differently from him. Audit Scotland has made it clear that there will be a 24 per cent cut between 2011-12 and 2014-15; the University and College Union says that there is a £34 million cut; and Scotland’s Colleges says that there are huge waiting lists. The Scottish Parliament information centre has said: “Over the spending review period as a whole for 2012-13 to 2014-15, even without taking revisions into account, there is a clear reduction in further education funding.” Common Knowledge, or CKUK, identifies a 34 per cent cut in part-time places for students with learning disabilities. It tells me that no more outreach work is done at Reid Kerr College with that client group and that courses have been cut by 50 per cent. Clydebank College’s courses for adults with learning disabilities have been cut from 16 to 5, and there have been cuts in outreach at Cardonald College. I ask members to listen to two personal stories. Lesley, who is aged 25, is a young woman with learning difficulties. She applied for a cookery course—not a hobby course—in a Glasgow college, but she was refused a place because she was too old—25 years old and written off. Mark, aged 24, after two years at college, was ready to go on to his third year, but he was telephoned during the summer to be told that the course had been cut and that he would not be returning to college after the holidays. What has Mr Russell to say to Lesley and Mark? None of that is my evidence—it comes from people who work in the sector and understand what is going on. I believe that the four college trade unions at Angus College and Dundee College reflect the real views of the college sector when they say: “Continually we are told that the cuts in FE funding are as a result of restraints from Westminster—not true.”

I am coming to the end. “These are happening through choices made by the current Scottish Government and have a direct impact on the life chances of the Scottish population. We have no confidence with the current Education Secretary in his dealings with the FE sector.” I could not have put that better myself. Staff and students in Scotland’s colleges have lost confidence in the cabinet secretary and, more important, his policy. It is time for him to go.

Whatever happened to the concept of lifelong learning? Is it not the case that some students who go to college will never work because of circumstances? Some organisations that work with disabled people have told me that. What are we saying for those young people whose places are being cut?

Has the member spoken recently to the college unions at Jewel and Esk to find out their views on the Government’s handling of FE?

The cabinet secretary can pretend that he did not know that the figures were wrong, but on the radio this morning Mr Swinney told us that he knew that that was the case and yet did nothing to stop the First Minister misleading Parliament.

I am coming to my question. On 25 October, Mike Russell told the Education and Culture Committee that he had looked at the college budget figures “front-ways, back-ways, sideways and upside-down”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 25 October 2011; c 324.] Why did he not just look at them straightforwardly and honestly?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it protects the environment. (S4O-01481)

The minister will be aware that, in March, the Daily Record highlighted the issue of alleged toxic waste from the Edinburgh trams project being dumped in Pumpherston, in my region. Despite numerous phone calls, emails and meetings with SEPA and the minister’s predecessor, we are no further towards establishing whether the waste was dumped illegally or whether the contractor, Bilfinger Berger, will be prosecuted as a result. Eight months on, what is going on with this case? My constituents smell a rat.

This is a serious issue.

One option that is available to cancer patients—especially those who are in the latter stages of their illness—is homoeopathic drugs and medicine. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern about NHS Lothian’s proposals to close the homoeopathic clinic at St John’s hospital and to end homoeopathic services across the Lothians? If those proposals are implemented, they will certainly impact on patient choice, especially for people with cancer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The original question was about cancer drugs, and homoeopathic medicine can be part of cancer treatment. I fail to understand why my question was out of order.

Will the member give way?

The cabinet secretary talks about widening access. What is the situation for adult learners with learning difficulties who are trying to access college? How many courses have gone?

How does the member explain why 100,000 members of Robin Parker’s organisation contacted MSPs last year to complain about the Scottish Government’s policy on colleges?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sorry to interrupt Mike MacKenzie’s very interesting story, but my experience as a tradesman and as an apprentice was completely different from that. I had fantastic training and a fantastic education at West Lothian College. He may have one isolated case, but to depict it as if it was what happened all over the sector is just rubbish.

Hugh Henry eloquently described the value of Scotland’s colleges, and I know about that value because I have benefited greatly from a vocational and academic education in college. In light of a whole range of issues that have arisen, I and many other people involved in Scottish education have grave concerns. It is our duty to hold the Government to account for its actions or, indeed, lack of them. Across so many areas of the skills, learning and employment agenda, the Government’s policies appear—superficially—to be heading in the right direction. However, when they are exposed to even the most rudimentary scrutiny, they can be seen for the illusion that they are. Let us look at the smoke and mirrors we have witnessed with the modern apprenticeships programme, or the manipulation of positive outcomes data to include activity agreements, or the decline of the careers service. Ministers and their spin machine tell us that everything is going just splendidly. It is all a huge success, and anyone who dares to question any of it is being negative and—the old chestnut—talking Scotland down. Well, I say that we are standing up for Scotland’s young people and supporting Scottish education by advocating for those who raise their concerns with us because they fear to raise them with the Government—because, if they do, they will get the Russell treatment.

I have not got a clue what the member is referring to, but I am sure that we will come to talk about modern apprenticeships over the next couple of weeks. Some of the worst damage is occurring in the area of college provision. We need to be clear that this is an area of policy that has been drawn up, promoted, implemented and defended by the cabinet secretary for education and culture.

The policy of regionalisation does not have improvement at its core; it has cost cutting as its driving principle. The cabinet secretary claims that his policy will result in significant financial savings but he provides no evidence whatsoever to back his assertion. As Liz Smith said, he claims that there are no waiting lists, but Scotland’s colleges tell us that 21,000 are on waiting lists. He says that there are no budget cuts, but Audit Scotland tells us that there has been a 24 per cent cut over the spending review period. What was the cabinet secretary’s response? They are all wrong. We heard that today in his speech, but why should we be surprised?

Not at the moment. Do something uncharacteristic and listen, for a change. Why should we be surprised? The cabinet secretary has form in that area. Time and again, the Education and Culture Committee has heard witnesses give evidence, with the media providing supporting information, about 1,400 job losses across the sector in the past year; the loss of 30,000 places for women students; 70,000 fewer part-time places for adult learners and others; and, as Mr Bibby said, an overall cut of 34 per cent of places for young people who have learning difficulties.

Not at the moment; I have a lot to say. Of course, according to the cabinet secretary, all those figures are wrong. Perhaps I will now extend him the opportunity to apologise to the 30,000 women mentioned by Anne McTaggart and to the hundreds of students with learning difficulties who Mr Bibby mentioned. I am happy to give him the opportunity to apologise if he would like to do so.

I did not quite catch the apology there. Members will recall that last year, after an extensive campaign by students, college unions and the Labour Party, some extra cash was allocated to the college budget when the finance secretary announced an additional £15 million in the college transformation fund. To be fair, that fund has enabled transformation to occur in our colleges. Most notably, 1,400 lecturers and support staff have been transformed from full-time employees to people who are on the dole. College employees could well do without such career transformations. Mary Scanlon mentioned the 24 per cent budget cut, which means fewer lecturers, larger classes, cuts and closures in courses, and growing waiting lists. Despite the evidence, the cabinet secretary claims that there is nothing wrong. Like the Walter Mitty figure that he is, he dismisses what is happening in the real world and continues to think in his fantasy land that everyone is going along with him. The cabinet secretary could never be described as a modest man who is lacking in self-admiration, and I was surprised yesterday that, rather than welcome the opportunity to spread the word about all the good work that he is doing in colleges, he uncharacteristically sought to prevent others from hearing his sparkling oratory. So determined was he to keep his utterances quiet that he exploded in frustration at not having the powers to sack Mr Ramsay.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I was just getting to my punchline, but I will leave the cabinet secretary wounded without putting in the fatal blow.

Lucky you.

Will the minister give way?

I thank the Christian Aid tax justice campaign for doggedly maintaining a focus on the issue. Raymond Baker, the director of the organisation Global Financial Integrity, has called corporate tax avoidance “the ugliest chapter in global economic affairs since slavery.” That is a fairly big claim, so it is incumbent on us to examine it and what it means for Scotland, the United Kingdom and the wider world. The debate takes place against a background of unprecedented austerity across Europe. Today, general strikes are taking place in many countries. Tax justice simply cannot be separated from what is going on. In Britain, at the same time as our public services are being starved of funds, we have the biggest tax gap in our history, which is estimated to be £120 billion. That figure is made up of avoidance, evasion and unpaid taxation. The issue is not about small businessmen or sole traders; it is about some of the largest household names and companies such as Pfizer, Starbucks, Google, Facebook, Amazon and Vodafone, to name but a few. A conservative estimate is that those companies are dodging £35 billion every year in unpaid tax to the UK Exchequer. In recent budgets, the top rate of income tax has been lowered to 45 per cent and corporation tax rates have halved. The use of tax havens by multinational corporations has been officially sanctioned and even encouraged by tax law, while at the same time VAT has been raised to its highest-ever rate. Successive Governments throughout the western world have accepted the agenda or been complicit in supporting it. What is the result of all that? About $160 billion has been lost to developing countries through a range of increasingly dodgy practices, including the practice of transfer mispricing, which is when multinational companies export their goods from developing countries at lower than market prices, thereby reducing their book profits and therefore their tax liability. That deprives the poorest nations of desperately needed tax revenues for services. The goods are then sold on to a subsidiary that is based in a tax haven, which then sells on the goods at inflated prices and with the lower tax rate that is applied in the tax haven area. To put that $160 billion in context, it is three times the amount that is given globally each year in international aid. On top of that, £13 trillion—yes, trillion—has been squirreled away in tax havens beyond the reach of the authorities. That is a scandal of monumental proportions, yet we have allowed it to happen. Another scam involves companies in the industrialised world selling to developing countries at inflated prices to enable the seller to shift large amounts of capital abroad while reducing profit margins and thus tax liabilities. There are many further tricks in the companies’ armoury. Current international accountancy standards require countries to report only consolidated accounts on a global basis, which means that no one knows where taxable activities occur and/or where profits are declared. That makes it easy for companies to shift capital and pay tax—or not—wherever they choose. We need country-by-country reporting to establish exactly what is going on. I am one of those saddoes who watch the proceedings of the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee. On Monday, it took evidence from Starbucks and Amazon executives, and I urge everyone to watch the footage—it is a mixture of comedy and tragedy. Starbucks has been operating in the UK for 15 years and has a 35 per cent market share, yet it claims to have made a profit in only one of those years despite a turnover of £3 billion. How much tax has it paid? It has paid only £8 million in 15 years. Amazon—which, let us not forget, was welcomed to Scotland with open arms by the First Minister and was given a £10.8 million grant—is even worse, having paid no tax at all in the UK in the past three years. Amazon’s business model is one of brazen tax avoidance, poor-quality and insecure employment and predatory pricing that squeezes suppliers and affects the whole community. Is that a business model that we should be falling over ourselves to welcome into our country? The question is, how do we change things? There are global issues and there are local ones. We need a new global tax consensus that is based on fairness, transparency and accountability. In the meantime, there are things that we can do here in Scotland. We could follow the seven regions of France, including Paris, that have declared themselves tax haven-free zones and will not do business with companies that avoid their liabilities. We could follow Helsinki in refusing to award public contracts to corporate tax avoiders. Currently, the Scottish Government and local government engage with a range of companies that do not pay their way. We could introduce a set of legally binding procurement rules that subject companies that deliver and bid for public contracts to high ethical and environmental standards and anti-tax avoidance measures. That approach was supported by Scottish National Party members Mike Weir and Angus Robertson at Westminster, among 115 other MPs, and I commend them for it. The procurement bill is yet to be introduced and we can take action in Scotland now. I urge all members to look closely at that. I hope to hear how the Scottish Government intends to play its part in ending this global scandal and in ensuring that Scotland does not just sit back passively while its public services are deprived of the funds that they need. I thank Christian Aid for continuing with its campaign. The debate is moving in its direction, and I urge it to keep up the good work.

I have hardly disagreed with anything that Dave Thompson has said, and I am pleased that he has contributed to the debate. Does he agree with my point about the procurement bill and would he support clauses in that bill that ensure compliance in this country?

I appreciate the member raising that issue. I refer him to the evidence that was given to a House of Commons committee yesterday. I think that it was Amazon that stated that out of revenues of £200-odd million that it declared for the UK—these figures might be out—it had paid £1.8 million in tax.

Michael Meacher has reintroduced a private member’s bill on anti-avoidance measures in the House of Commons, which I am absolutely sure Caroline Lucas will support.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister has addressed a lot of overseas issues and I am thankful for that, but will he address some domestic issues? Does he regard it as morally or economically sensible of us to pay grants to multinational companies that come in to use our educated workforce, use our roads to transport their goods and all the rest of it but then pay no tax back to the system? Does that make sense?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point? I am sure that the Presiding Officer will be generous.

Given the desperate situation following the Hall’s closure, will the minister look again at EGIP and the cuts to it and reflect on the advantages that we would get from a new station at Winchburgh?

Will Aileen McLeod give way?

The member mentions tax. Where are the progressives in the SNP? Where are the progressives who are arguing against the regressive council tax freeze or a 10 per cent corporation tax cut? Where are they? I do not think that we could find a progressive on those benches if we used the Hubble telescope.

Will the member take an intervention?

This is an important debate because it is about people’s lives and community cohesion and sustainability. It goes to the heart of how we deal with one of the greatest concerns for any parent, relative or friend—namely how we assist those who are closest to us if they become ensnared in drugs and the world that serious drug use drags people into. As we heard, there are estimated to be 60,000 problem drug users in Scotland and almost 600 deaths occurred as a result of drugs last year. We should not forget that those deaths left families without a father, a son, a mother or a daughter. We can put that in perspective by looking around the chamber at decision time. It is the equivalent of five of us dying because of drugs or a combination of drugs and alcohol. For six years, I worked as a front-line housing officer. In that role, I saw the multiplicity of ways in which drugs destroy not just individuals but community wellbeing, whether it was the elderly neighbour living in fear, the resentment at dealers showing off their ostentatious lifestyles with no apparent jobs to sustain them, health concerns about people who were visibly in decline, the anger at housing allocation policies, inter-dealer finance or a simple thing such as the dread felt by parents who keep their children indoors because they fear them going out on to the streets. Those were the concerns that people relayed to me and the housing association and councils that I worked for. Let us be in no doubt that drug abuse is inextricably linked with poverty. The impact of drugs falls disproportionately, although not exclusively—as Margo MacDonald rightly said—on poorer working-class communities. It is they who suffer the most from the health impacts of drugs, but also from the associated crime, antisocial behaviour, violence, fear, loan sharking and the accompanying threats and intimidation. The Scottish Drugs Forum recognised the complex picture of drug abuse in 2007, when it stated: “there are strong links between poverty, deprivation, widening inequalities and problem drug use”. In 2000, a Scottish Parliament committee noted: “deprived communities, with poor housing, poor amenities and high levels of unemployment were the most seriously affected areas.” That should be no surprise to any of us. Deindustrialisation created the conditions for drugs to thrive. In the former mining communities such as the one where I live and in large city housing schemes, our people have suffered horrendously over the decades as drugs filled the gap that was once occupied by a job and the social discipline and positive influences that came with it. Today, as we see youth unemployment rising, benefits being cut and the impacts of austerity biting in those same communities, I fear that, rather than tackling deprivation, we might be creating the conditions that could lead to a new cycle of drug abuse. I echo the comments that the Scottish Drugs Forum made in 2006, when it said that it wanted “now and in the future to see deprivation given its full and proper place in all considerations of drug prevention policy, at both the local and strategic levels” and that we should not let it “slip from sight”. I fear that it may well be slipping from sight. The greatest alternative that we can offer to a life of involvement in drugs is hope. If we give people an education, the hope of a job and a caring, supportive community, they will have alternatives. The road to recovery policy is a holistic approach with, I think we would all agree, sound motivations. It is not by accident that it has enjoyed cross-party support. It has led to some good initiatives. Other members have mentioned the introduction of naloxone, which is seen as a model of good practice. There are calls for improvements to co-ordinated work, for example between child welfare organisations, mental health services and addiction services. Indeed, the Education and Culture Committee, on which I sit, is holding an inquiry into children and care, and we are looking at those very issues. The treatment picture seems to be mixed: waiting times for those seeking treatment appeared to be reducing, but there has also been a reduction in residential care treatment places, as has been mentioned. I believe that any harm-reduction strategies and abstinence approaches must be tailored to the patient, and I think that there is general agreement on that. All the treatments that are used and applied must go hand in hand with the fight against organised crime. In my local area there has been an innovative, multi-agency approach called operation focus, which is designed to eradicate organised crime. It uses gathered intelligence to act in one swoop to take dealers out of the community. The way it works is that houses are targeted and raided, with workmen on standby to follow up immediately and carry out repairs to the properties; they then sweep the streets and clean up the area, both physically and metaphorically. Police officers are on the streets in high-visibility patrols for the following couple of weeks. GPs and pharmacies are put on standby because supply has been taken off the streets, and schools are visited by police officers who reassure the pupils about what has just happened. In one school recently, the police officers left to a standing ovation from the young people at the assembly. This is a complex issue, but we are doing it justice today.

Given the role reversal that has happened today, I should thank Kezia Park—or is it John Dugdale?—for introducing the debate. I support the work of both members on the campaign. The living wage campaign is evidence that campaigns can start very small but grow until they are part of mainstream consciousness. I pay tribute to the activists in east London who started the campaign and have stuck with it all the way. They are the pioneers and visionaries; we are merely followers, but that is no bad thing. The campaign for a living wage is not radical or extreme. It does not ask the impossible. It is a campaign for fairness and justice that seeks dignity for all. If it is successful, the state will no longer have to subsidise rotten low pay. At its most basic level, the campaign will enable families to provide for themselves. I hope that everyone supports the campaign and—more important—takes action on the living wage. The campaign has gained widespread support, from charities, churches and all the major trade unions, such as Unite, Unison, the GMB, the Public and Commercial Services Union, RMT, ASLEF and the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians. We can be sure of one thing. Wherever there are campaigns for social justice, the UK’s trade unions will be there, agitating, organising, educating their members and encouraging them to help to bring about progressive change. Let no one say that trade unions are irrelevant; in these days of austerity they are more important than ever. Of course, the living wage is a central plank of the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s better way campaign, which offers a practical alternative to austerity. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I remember debates during the 1997 election campaign, when Labour promised to introduce a national minimum wage. I remember the scare stories about how the minimum wage would be a disaster for business, costing jobs and being bad for competitiveness. At the time, as Iain Gray said, security guards and cleaners were earning £1 or £1.50 an hour. If that is what people mean by competitiveness, they can keep it. I also remember that during the election campaign some people, including Cilla Black, Jim Davidson and Paul Daniels, said that they would leave the country if Labour won the election and introduced such policies. After Labour’s win, I wrote to them, to offer to run them to the airport if they wanted to keep their promise. It is unfortunate for us all that none of them took me up on my offer. We have come some way since the introduction of a £3.60 per hour minimum wage in 1998. The rate is now £6.19. Major employers, such as the GLA, Glasgow City Council and KPMG, as well as solicitors, plant hire companies and colleges, have signed up to the living wage. I pay tribute to those employers and encourage others to follow. We are not asking for the revolution—we might ask for that tomorrow. The living wage rate would deliver an annual salary of about £13,000. I hope that through the forthcoming procurement reform bill and John Park’s proposed living wage bill we can deliver genuine progress on the issue in Scotland and begin to lead the way. The living wage will not eradicate poverty and injustice, but it will deliver cash into the pockets of many of my constituents, who desperately need help. I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, but I want to live in a society in which people have access to skills and education and a good standard of living. I want to live in a society in which there is decency and equality. I hope that all members support the living wage and a better way.

What does the minister say to those in local government who have argued that it does not make sense to upgrade to the living wage because, if that was done, all that would happen is that low-paid people’s benefits would be removed?

Surely students should not have to contact the cabinet secretary to get their awards processed. Is his message that the blame for the debacle lies with students themselves?

I am not sure whether I am hearing this correctly. Are we going to encourage social landlords to get their properties quickly back into circulation by punishing them even further? Is that what the minister is saying? It is not a very good start for the minister.

With no preamble and no prejudgment, can I ask a simple question? How many people are on college waiting lists? We are asking for a number.

In relation to the school building programme, I know that the minister will be aware that there is currently no statutory guidance in Scotland setting out minimum acoustic standards in new-build schools. In England and Wales, such standards exist and are a prerequisite for Government funding. When will the Government introduce such standards to bring Scottish acoustic standards up to the level of those in England and Wales, thus ensuring that all Scottish pupils can access the curriculum in the same way as their English and Welsh counterparts?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what support it will provide to the West Lothian area following the announcement of the closure of the Hall’s meat processing plant. (S4T-00071)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and for his efforts on Hall’s. A decade ago, following the Motorola closure, the then Scottish Executive put around £10 million into West Lothian to support it through the trauma of that closure. Given the immense challenge and localised nature of the job losses at Hall’s, what scale of support is likely to be offered to help the county cope with this disaster?

I thank the cabinet secretary and ask simply that he also keeps regional list members informed of what is going on.

How will cutting the Edinburgh Glasgow improvement programme at the same time as increasing road building contribute to meeting climate change goals?

On the issue that the member just raised about policing the internet, was that not debated during the passage of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill?

Today we learn that the former NHS Lothian chief executive James Barbour has been given a £100,000 golden goodbye on top of a very generous package that was awarded when he left office following the waiting times and bullying scandals in Lothian. What action will the First Minister take to end the blatant milking of public money by highly paid professionals who leave office following scandal, or who retire and are then re-engaged?

Will Mr Brown take an intervention?

Is the magic pill that the member talks about the same one that is being given to prisoners in jail for their conjugal rights?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I, too, have been boosting the circulation of Mr Russell’s book. Last week, I purchased it with my own money from an online retailer. It was the best 16p I have ever spent.

5. To ask the Deputy First Minister what support the Scottish Government provides to colleges that merge. (S4F-00879)

Meanwhile, back in the real world, at this week’s meeting of the Education and Culture Committee, the further education trade unions and the leader of NUS Scotland, Robin Parker, said that economic recovery is being threatened by cuts to college budgets. Are they all wrong?

I welcome the green bus initiative. Any investment—no matter how big or small—in public transport is welcome. I also welcome the sentiments behind the investment, because if we are to meet our climate change targets, it is important that we invest in green technologies across all the policy headings and, in particular, in transport. Although there may not be a worldwide consensus on the need to cut CO2 emissions, a significant majority of sane and rational people—I see that Alex Johnstone is leaving the chamber; I do not know whether I should include him in that description—agree that it is one of the world’s greatest priorities. We need only look at recent weather patterns to see the impact. Only yesterday, we saw a new weather phenomenon called the Aberdeen foam—I previously thought that that was something that came from Kevin Stewart. To hear that 71 low-carbon buses have already been built and that more will come from this new investment is therefore a positive development, especially as it will result in a reduction in fuel use and emissions. I am pleased to see the attempt to stimulate the manufacturing sector that is involved, which will have some local impact on the economy while helping our efforts to deal with climate change. Alas, the Government should not be too self-congratulatory, and I should not give too much praise, because investment in transport is not what it could or should be. Despite subsidies, our bus operators are struggling. The budget that is allocated to concessionary travel on bus services has gradually reduced over the years.

I have looked at the figures, which decrease from £255 million in 2011-12 to £248 million, £242 million next year and £236 million in 2015.

I have taken my information from the Scottish Parliament information centre, so the member can argue with it. We should not forget that the investment in green buses comes against the backdrop of steady cuts to the overall buses budget. Within that, 20 per cent of the cut was to the bus service operators grant. Let us be clear that that is having a significant impact on local bus services. However, that cut tells only one part of the story. Bus operators are providing bus services at a time when fuel prices have risen dramatically and when oil companies are making record profits, but when their customers in our communities—our constituents—have in real terms much less money in their pockets. At my surgery on Monday night, I spoke to a constituent who has not had a wage rise in six years.

I am afraid that I do not support the SNP on anything. Local authorities that are starved of funds and are under pressure to implement the cuts that the Scottish Government has passed on are looking at saving money through retendering routes. That does not lead bus operators to compete on the basis of improved service quality. Instead, they win contracts because they pay staff less, have poor pension provision and have poorer working conditions. However, we need good-quality, reliable services that do not rely on a race to the bottom on terms and conditions to ensure that employers win contracts. The reality is that fares are up, routes have been withdrawn and jobs have been lost. As Iain Gray said, in my region earlier this year, it was announced that the Dalkeith First depot in Midlothian was to close and that operations in Musselburgh would be significantly downsized. Those changes could mean that up to 200 jobs are lost. Just last week, Unite the Union lobbied the Parliament on bus services and cuts to jobs and services. Locally, it has lobbied me on potential cuts at the Deans depot in Livingston, although First has just avoided having to make them to date. We should be under no illusions about why such changes are taking place. First’s managing director, Paul Thomas, has made clear why they have happened. Back in April, he said: “Over a number of years we have tried many marketing and pricing initiatives to change this, but the extra financial pressures put upon us by the current economic climate, high fuel prices and cuts in external funding mean that we simply have no option other than to discontinue the bulk of our operation in East Lothian and Midlothian.” Any green strategy must be predicated on an improved public transport system yet, only last week, we eventually got the transport minister to come kicking and screaming before Parliament to admit finally that the budget that he drew up for the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme would be cut by £350 million. That cut will not encourage people in the affected areas to use more sustainable transport. It will not encourage people on to trains or buses, green or otherwise; instead, car use will continue and emissions will rise. I welcome the green bus initiative, but that is tempered with a dose of reality. If we are to celebrate such plans, we must do so while understanding the wider context of the Government’s transport policy, which appears to prioritise the car over public, sustainable and affordable transport. I commend Iain Gray’s speech, which effectively summarised the state of play in the Scottish bus sector.

Will the member give way?

Mark McDonald talks about having two different positions. He would know about that because the SNP has two different positions; it wants to pretend that it can have both Scandinavian-type social services and Reaganomics taxation.

By reinstating some of the cash crudely hacked out of the colleges budget, the cabinet secretary has admitted that the policy direction has been wrong. When will he overrule the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, reinstate the rest and give hope to the 10,000 young people on college waiting lists?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Rule 13.9.1 of the standing orders states: “Any member may address a question on any matter concerning the Parliamentary corporation or the staff of the Parliament to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body.” Is there a mechanism within the standing orders that members can use to ask emergency questions of the corporate body? My point of order is pertinent given a situation that has been on-going since last week. I have been informed that people inside and outside the Parliament have tried several times, unsuccessfully, to sign petition PE1452, on the people’s charter. I understand that that is due to a technical problem with the information technology system. That is, unfortunately, not good enough. It is undermining people’s ability to engage with the Parliament. Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance on how we can raise such emergencies with the corporate body, because so far exploring all other avenues has failed to resolve the problem.

Will the minister take an intervention, or will he just keep talking?

In the past few days, I have been contacted by a large number of constituents from Winchburgh who are concerned that the new project there, which is to create several hundred jobs, will be scuppered because the railway station is no longer to be opened. Can the minister tell me when Winchburgh station will open?

When will it open?

When will it open?

If that is all such good news, where are the massed ranks of the SNP back benchers? I have noticed during the debate that we have Mr Hepburn, Mr Mason and Mr Thompson in the chamber, and we have Mr Finnie and Ms Urquhart, who are sitting in the middle looking as though their puppy has just been run over. Is it not clear that the NATO rebels have been told to come in and defend the indefensible? That is what is happening today.

I want to put on record my genuine thanks to the finance secretary and the Labour leader of West Lothian Council, John McGinty, for their joint efforts and their innovative plan to secure the whole site. In rejecting the proposal, it now seems clear that the biggest obstacle to saving the plant is the owners, Vion. What further encouragement will the finance secretary give to prospective parties with an interest in buying the site and to those who work there?

I listened carefully to the minister and wrote down what he said. He said: “We want the process to be more predictable and more proportionate.” Can he reassure me that he will not go down the route of the coalition Government at Westminster, which wants to introduce a planning free-for-all that is in danger of taking us back decades, if not centuries?

How much has gone to large multinationals in the same timescale?

Will the minister—

I commend Clare Adamson, not just for securing the debate, but for securing my favourite daily morning newspaper with an additional reader. To Mrs Scanlon I say that I am more than happy to ask the delivery people to double up on their rounds in the morning so that we can get a newspaper direct to her office—or, in the spirit of “better together”, I will pass on mine once I have finished with it. Scotland’s industrial heritage is vital. It allows us not only to recognise the contribution of people who are no longer with us or to educate present and future generations but to build on our past successes and develop the industry and jobs of the future. Iron, steel, shale, coal and shipbuilding were the very things that built our nation and areas such as Lanarkshire and my backyard, West Lothian. They made Scotland the global player that it became and employed huge numbers in the process. I will speak only briefly, but many of my constituents, especially in towns such as Fauldhouse and Whitburn and Bathgate, worked in Ravenscraig or are still working in Dalzell. Not far from my house there was a direct rail line that ran from Polkemmet colliery to Ravenscraig that was used to supply the furnace with fuel. The influence of the industry went beyond the boundaries of Lanarkshire. Those who still work in the industry tell me of a modern, high-tech industry competing globally with a quality product, of skilled workers with a supportive community in which the reach and influence of the industry, past and present, permeates every house, pub, bookie, school, shop and social club. Steel, like coal, is part of our national and local being and identity. The slogan for international workers memorial day is “Remember the dead, fight for the living”. That is not some dewy-eyed nostalgic phrase but a call to action. The initiative highlighted in Clare Adamson’s motion shows how these people are taking that call to action very seriously.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is remarkable that in a debate on the economy no one has mentioned the desperate situation at Hall’s of Broxburn, where 1,700 people will potentially lose their jobs. There are ramifications for the whole of Scotland. We cannot simply wish such things away or pretend that they have not happened. I hope that the minister will refer to the issue.

My question is in the same vein as Margaret Burgess’s. Over the summer, I was contacted again by concerned staff and students at the land-based colleges in the east of Scotland who feel that that merger is more akin to a takeover by the Scottish Agricultural College. Are their concerns justified?

I am afraid that the First Minister’s speech yesterday will have reinforced the belief among a growing number of people outside the chamber that politicians and those whom they represent live in different worlds. The reality of life in Scotland is not the nirvana that the First Minister attempts to portray. Contemporary Scotland is a pretty ugly and brutal place for people who are out of work with no savings or who are ill, disabled or vulnerable. It is a place where almost a million Scots live in relative poverty and 160,000 children live in absolute poverty. It is a place where 650,000 households are experiencing fuel poverty at the same time as the six big energy companies are making £15 billion in profit—and the situation is getting worse through Scottish Government inaction. Do not take my word for it; listen to Brenda Boardman, the person who coined the term “fuel poverty”. This week, she criticised the “feeble, inadequate and namby-pamby” approach of the Scottish Government in tackling increasing fuel poverty.

Not at the moment. Scotland is a place where, in our most deprived communities, people are living almost 19 years less than those in affluent areas. It is a place where, for those who are in employment, wages are cut or at best frozen, conditions are reduced and rights at work are threatened. It is a place where people are going without food, as Citizens Advice Scotland reported this week, and where we see the demand for food parcels dramatically rising. It is a scandal that we sit here, in this very comfortable building, on our very generous salaries, and there is no national outcry—no coming together or genuine collective effort—to bring people and parties together to concentrate our efforts on providing for the most basic needs of our people, especially through the provision of nutritious food.

If Mr Stewart is correct, why were those things not among the First Minister’s six big demands when he went to meet Cameron after the election? Why did he not demand the power for the Scottish Government to take action on poverty issues? What did he prioritise instead? Broadcasting, to get his mug on the telly more often.

Not at the moment—I could not bear it. If this Parliament does not act on this issue, it betrays the mandate that it was given when people supported its establishment in the first place. The words on the mace at the front of the chamber are no more than window dressing for tourists. That is Scotland’s real shame and not one word in the legislative programme will address it. In his speech, the First Minister made great claims about the economy and employment, but, in the real world, youth unemployment in towns and villages in my region is running at 30 per cent. Such levels have not been seen since the 1980s. Seventeen hundred workers—and many more in the supply and contractor chain—will be threatened with the dole if the Dutch multinational closes the Hall’s meat processing plant, and that is not to mention the knock-on impact on the agricultural industry. Nevertheless, I give credit to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, who has been very active on this front. Looking back at last year’s legislative programme, I remember being told that the Government’s top priority was to accelerate the recovery, boost jobs and promote economic security. It was claimed that capital investment had increased construction jobs by 11.6 per cent, compared with a 0.2 per cent drop across the rest of the UK. This year, Scottish construction jobs have fallen by 6.6 per cent, while there has been a 1.8 per cent growth in such jobs in England and Wales. Sole traders, small businessmen, joiners, painters and roofing contractors—many of whom I have previously worked with—tell me that they have never seen the construction industry so bad. This is the reality of the world out there. The First Minister tells us that he is creating demand by freezing council tax, but the hard facts are that 27,500 public sector jobs are being lost and a centrally imposed tax freeze is exacerbating service decline. What demand are those redundant workers who cannot spend money on food, clothing or services fulfilling? How does a strategy of mass public sector job loss square with the stated priority of providing economic security? Although we are told that the no-compulsory-redundancy policy will continue in the NHS and Scottish Government, nurses and civil servants are flying out the door. If the Government is so serious about no compulsory redundancies, it should let the chamber legislate for the policy.

With regard to procurement, Patrick Harvie raised the issue of tax avoidance and we need to come back to that during scrutiny of the procurement bill. Finally, I have to ask why it needs a Labour MSP to introduce a member’s bill on the living wage when the SNP Government knows that it can bring in the measure but, instead, chooses to hide behind EU directives.

Will the member give way?

To make a serious point, does the member accept that there is a real difference between an apprenticeship and vocational training?

In the same vein, I wonder whether Margo MacDonald has had a discussion with Mr Russell on the Government’s front bench, who thinks that we should have the ducat. Where I come from, that is where you keep your pigeons—but Mr Russell has a different view. I wonder what Margo MacDonald thinks of that as a currency.

Many of the themes that the member discusses and which have emerged in the debate fit in nicely with the people’s charter, which will soon come before the Parliament in a petition. I am not 100 per cent sure whether Mr Harvie has signed up to the charter, but I hope that he has, and I am sure that he would join me in encouraging other members to do so.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you provide some advice on the use of electronic devices in the chamber? I understand that during the past hour the First Minister has been multitasking and that he sent—invisibly—no fewer than 31 tweets during his statement. Will you advise on the protocol for using such devices in the chamber?

We know that Scotland’s colleges lost 40,000 places last year, and in Glasgow, 39,000 weighted student units of measurement—the equivalent of one full college—are being taken out of the system. How does that stack up with the commitment to maintain places?

Is that a yes or a no?

There is anger in West Lothian today about the news that the children’s ward at St John’s hospital is to close for three weeks in July because of a lack of junior doctors. Will the First Minister personally intervene so that we can resolve that appalling situation? Will he agree to meet me and representatives from West Lothian to discuss that vital matter?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At 9.45 this morning, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning made a statement on the reform of post-16 education. During his statement, he twice stated that members of the Education and Culture Committee had been sent a letter advising them of the appointments of individuals who would lead the college regionalisation process. That was not the case. On returning to my office, I checked my inbox to see that the letter had in fact been e-mailed to committee members at 9.47, after the cabinet secretary had begun his statement. The letter itself was embargoed until 28 July—yes, July. I do not blame the clerks for this. They were given the letter late by the cabinet secretary’s office. They then noticed the error and were unable to correct it in time; they were forced to issue the letter containing the incorrect information, because no time was left to amend it before the statement was made. I know that you place great importance on the rights of members and their ability to do their job properly, Presiding Officer. Can you assist members of the Education and Culture Committee in this matter, and in future ensure that correspondence that is referred to by ministers is released at the same time as statements?

Will you confirm how long members have to make a point of order? I would have thought that a member is allowed to make their full point and then you will make a judgment, rather than your making a judgment in the middle of their point.

Will the cabinet secretary invest as much of the fossil fuel money as possible in community and co-operative renewables projects rather than continuing to invest in large-scale projects? Those are often owned by foreign multinationals and venture capital firms whose profits flow out of the local economy—

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that there is investment in local community renewables projects in order to keep the money in the local economy?

Will the minister give way?

The minister’s party regularly points to Scandinavia and to the Norwegian and Finnish Governments. Are those Governments patronising, too?

Will the member take an intervention?

Last week, the Scottish Futures Trust won a clutch of awards for being the “Best Central/Regional Government PPP Promoter”. Is it not about time that we had some honesty from the minister and that he accepted what everyone else knows—that SFT schemes are just public-private partnership schemes under another name?

Last week I met my constituents Sharon Louise Duffy and Leanne Riley from Pumpherston. They have been campaigning against knife crime, following the murder of their friend and relative Jim Tierney. I hear what the cabinet secretary says about sentencing, but what will he say to my constituents, who believe that the new sentencing guidelines are regularly being ignored by the courts?

The minister mentioned that she is spending £70 million on modern apprenticeships. The Parliament has to be accountable for that money. How many of the people who complete apprenticeships remain in full-time employment?

What provision has been made in each of the NHS Lothian hospitals to take in emergency cases? How will that impact on patients who were due to enter hospital this week?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review local government taxation. (S4O-01102)

Does the minister accept that, with no prospect of a local government taxation change and a freeze on council tax, we will inevitably see a further decline in public services over the present Government’s term?

My colleague Mark Griffin and I could not believe our eyes a moment ago, when we saw that well-known redistributive socialist Mr Ewing, who is sitting to the left of the cabinet secretary, nodding away when the cabinet secretary mentioned progressive taxation. It is a bit far away up here at the back of the chamber, so perhaps our eyes were deceiving us. Does the cabinet secretary accept that creating tax competition and trickle-down economics is incompatible with the creation of sustainable jobs and quality public services?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive how it determines the validity of submissions and letters of support or objection when considering planning applications. (S4O-01066)

Is the minister aware that developers of the Harburnhead wind farm, which is near West Calder, have allegedly set themselves up as a pro-wind farm alliance, which is gathering positive signatures in the local shopping centre? Will the minister make it clear to developers that such misleading and dodgy practices undermine the planning process and that such practices will not be tolerated?

The report that was mentioned covers many issues that relate to working with young people with additional support needs and their parents. What work is being done with local authorities to ensure that individual education plans are accessible and practical working documents and not indecipherable documents that merely get stuck in filing cabinets?

Will the member give way?

I am disappointed that we did not hear Ms McKelvie’s interesting views on the subject of a future currency for Scotland. We have had the yen suggested before. I do not know what currency she is suggesting this week, but perhaps she will intervene and tell us. I am sure that members have experienced times in this Parliament when they do not really want to take part in a debate but feel compelled to do so because of the enormity or importance of the subject matter. For me, this is one of those debates, because this is not a debate about dry economics—although listening to the cabinet secretary’s speech I would not think so. This is a debate about people. It is a debate about communities and the tragic implications for them of decisions made by the political and economic elites in Europe.

I am a committed internationalist, but I am not committed to the version of internationalism pushed by the European Commission and by the European Central Bank. Over the past few years, the world economy has been edging towards economic disaster. Europe and the euro zone sit on the edge of a cliff. It looks very much as though a Greek default is inevitable and will result in either a push or a dive off the edge into free fall. We must ask ourselves how we got to this state of affairs. We can see from what has happened in Europe in the past 50 or 60 years that European institutions and Governments of the left and the right have created a political hegemony that has force-fed us the idea that European economic and political integration is desirable and inevitable and the idea that, if we do not sign up to their vision of the future, we are out of touch or some sort of crank. The emerging post-war narrative that peace in Europe would be built and maintained only by the creation of a Europe that was based on economic and monetary integration was like evolution—it was the natural order of things. French socialists, British Tories, Irish nationalists and German liberals worked together to promote the European dream and to push the view that there was no alternative. However, that vision was not at all of a social Europe. The treaty of Rome and the Maastricht treaty, which entrenched it, created the dream of a free single market where capital and labour could move unrestricted within a common currency zone, where the ECB’s neoliberal economics ruled, where the elected European Parliament was sidelined and where economic union would create the conditions for a political union with pan-European taxation policies and interest rates.

To solve issues, we must first analyse them. Let us not jump the gun on the situation in Ireland. For referendum after referendum, assumptions have been made about what would happen, and the project has stalled when the people have made a different decision. For working people throughout Europe, the dream has largely become a nightmare. They have been failed by their leaders and the corporate interests that have promoted the agenda and failed by those who have set the rules and then immediately ignored the rules that they have set—indeed, Germany was the first to break the borrowing rules. People have been failed by an economic and political club that used all the powers that were available to it to convince people that the economic powerhouse of Germany could somehow operate at the same level as Greece. People have been failed by economists, who will in the end walk away relatively unscathed while the rest of the population suffer unemployment and homelessness and lose their businesses. We now face the absolute irony of those who created the disaster dictating to the rest of us how we should get out of it. Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Italy and Spain are being asked to swallow the same poison that got them into the mess in the first place. We are told that the recipe for recovery is cuts to public spending, the slashing of the welfare state and privatisation. It saddens me to remember the image of the Greek Prime Minister being forced to go cap in hand to the EU to plead for a bailout, only to be told that he could get help only if he cut jobs, privatised services and slashed pensions—a programme that the markets demanded.

I am sorry, but I do not have a lot of time. When the Greek Prime Minister did as he was told, what happened? Unemployment increased, tax revenues reduced, homelessness increased and suicide rates soared. When he was forced to go back to the EU, what new medicine did the EU and the IMF prescribe? They told him to go back and cut further, privatise more and slash more deeply. Einstein said that insanity is doing the same thing again and again and expecting a different answer. I think that he had the IMF and the ECB in mind when he said that. European leaders are rightly among the first to speak out against the anti-democratic actions of Governments elsewhere in the world, but it is enough to make us weep when the elected Governments of proud nations such as Greece and Italy are forced to stand down and are replaced by unelected technocrats. Is it not ironic that, although Athens is the birthplace of democracy, Greece is now ruled by a Government for which not a single vote was cast? What are the lessons for us? First, I hope that the cabinet secretary will have the grace to recognise the wisdom of the decision of Gordon Brown, when he was chancellor, to remain outwith the euro zone, despite the appeals of his boss and others—I mean John Swinney’s boss and not Gordon Brown’s boss, although I probably mean Gordon Brown’s boss as well.

I am almost finished. Setting our own interest rates and fiscal policy allows the UK to have more control over its economy. There are many lessons for the SNP. You cannot have economic and social union while somehow sitting outwith a political union; there is a need for a pan-European growth strategy that is based on the needs of people, not the demands of markets; and austerity leads to depression. Finally, I say to Mr Swinney that creating a myth and trying to build a political hegemony around it that says that there is only one way forward—one way socially, economically and politically—is a very dangerous business. The First Minister should take heed.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I never argued against the need for us to work with our European partners. I argued against the fact that the whole drive has been about taking an economic approach—one type of economic approach—and that it has left people behind. That has been the problem with the European Union.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am glad that somebody is reading my pamphlet. That is a start. Maureen Watt is the sixth SNP member to speak in the debate. I ask her to give me a straight answer to a straight question. Is it still SNP policy to join the euro?

Merci, Presiding Officer. I can provide that to the official report if you require, but I do not think that I will worry the interpreters much more in my speech. Even though I, like tens of thousands of Scots, am able, when the occasion demands it, to drag up from the darkest depths of my memory some limited, pidgin French that I can use when on holiday in France to find the nearest bistro, brasserie, vineyard or football match—take your choice—Ianguages largely passed me by. That is a situation that affects all too many of us. I am afraid that my only language skills are in industrial language. I am not certified, but I reckon that I could be at PhD level in it. Scottish Labour supports the sentiments of what the Government is proposing. However, far be it from me to indulge in a sterile debate or a round of ministerial back slapping. We support the principles of extending language provision, but we see a number of areas that require further scrutiny. We will, of course, offer constructive advice where we see fit. As the minister and his team know, the Labour education team is always willing to offer help to the Government. I thank and commend the Scottish languages working group for a laudable and potentially important contribution to what is a vital debate about languages and language teaching in Scotland’s schools. On page six of the report, the group states: “Language learning is life enhancing. It opens the doors to possibilities and experiences which are not available to those who are restricted to the knowledge of one language ... Through learning new languages young people can become successful learners with opportunities relating to working and travelling abroad”. I think that we would all agree with those sentiments. How many times have many of us, while abroad on holiday, on business or for whatever reason, suffered in embarrassed silence due to our inability to communicate in the language of the country that we are visiting? That individual deficiency is bad enough, but the working group also estimates that our failure to teach languages in a comprehensive and universal fashion amounts to what one commentator said last week is a language tax that costs the Scottish economy £500 million. For economic, educational and cultural reasons, it is abundantly clear that we have to become more multilingual. The working group has made some positive recommendations. The 1+2 suggestion of having primary school children learn a language other than English from P1 and another by P5 is one that we support. As the minister said, it fits the model that exists across Europe. If implemented effectively, it has the potential to transform our ability to communicate, with the obvious knock-on benefits that that will have. However, we have some concerns and, to be fair, we are not the only ones. The working group itself stated that, in relation to current language teaching in primary schools, “there are concerns that some primary children do not have access to an additional language due to staffing, training or funding issues, or other perceived curricular priorities.” Anecdotal evidence suggests that, at present, language provision in primary schools is often ad hoc and inconsistent due to those pressures and others. Such issues are raised repeatedly, not just in relation to language provision but in other areas of the school curriculum. We need to look at the proposals against the background of the realities that schools today face. We have to remember that there are widespread and sustained cuts in the public sector, including in education. Since 2007, that has manifested itself in nearly 4,000 teaching posts being lost across Scotland. Many newly qualified teachers who perhaps have the necessary language skills cannot get work, and supply teaching is in crisis in some areas. The rector of a school in my area, for example, told me that their school had been down one modern language teacher for around six months, I think, and could not get supply cover. The number of foreign language assistants is down from 300 in 2005-06 to just 59 in 2011-12. The languages working group said that foreign language assistants “will have a key role to play in successful implementation of a 1+2 policy.” The minister did not mention language assistants. In summing up, will he confirm how work with the British Council and others will ensure that more foreign language assistants will be introduced back into our schools? What about the cost of and funding for the roll-out? The minister mentioned that, in 2008, £4 million was given to local authorities to support language provision. Funding has been rolled up into general local government settlements, but the working group stated: “if delivery of the 1+2 language policy is to be successful, further dedicated resources will be required.” How will those dedicated resources be provided? Funding of £4 million seems rather a small amount in light of our challenge. We need more information on that. The working group acknowledged the need to upskill teachers and for a commitment to extensive continuing professional development. It stated: “There will be significant organisational, resource and staffing issues from Primary 1 onwards ... There will need to be sufficient numbers of primary teachers, appropriately trained, confident and competent in language teaching.” Information on how that matter will be addressed was largely absent from the minister’s opening statement. From our discussions with the teaching profession, we know that it understands fully the need for a major training initiative to implement such a programme, but there is, of course, a big resource issue. What commitment is there to provide the funding for the teachers and training that will be needed for the national roll-out to be successful, should the pilots be so? Since the announcement was made, I have spoken to many teachers and a number of young people about their experiences of learning a language in primary and secondary school. The constant theme is exposure to languages too late and a lack of consistency from primary through to secondary school. I agree that we need to catch young people early in their education and that they need to be immersed in the language, not drip-fed. Currently, many pupils in secondary school end their language experience in second year. That is especially true of boys, who largely opt out of taking languages. As we already know, the number of pupils who take highers in the main languages is decreasing, and for languages such as German the decline is significant. If the proposals are to work, consideration will have to be given to how schools offer subjects and how they will manage an already crowded curriculum, which will become even more crowded when Scottish studies comes on stream. In his summing up, perhaps the minister can say how those issues will be addressed. We are concentrating on schools, but there are other missed opportunities for developing language skills in Scotland. Many people want to learn a language later in life, because of experiences in business or on holiday for example. My father-in-law is fluent in French and he began to learn it only 10 years ago. That was because of experiences that he had later in life. We should consider enabling people to learn throughout their lives through workplace learning, for example. Finally, will the minister clarify what plans the Government has for the pilot schemes? How will they be monitored and evaluated? When does the minister plan to publish details of them? I urge that, when he establishes the pilot areas, he makes them broad and representative. By that, I mean that they should take in urban and rural schools—as there are particular issues, in respect of supply teaching for example, for rural schools—primary and secondary schools, and schools in areas with very different socioeconomic indicators, not least because, as the working group stated, “the biggest educational challenge faced by legislators and educators alike is in raising educational attainment for children in areas of high social deprivation.” To conclude, I reiterate our broad support for the objectives of the policy. The points that we have raised have been raised in good faith, and we all want to see the policy succeed. I move amendment S4M-03004.1, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert: “acknowledges the decline in language course take-up in secondary schools; recognises that developing language skills from an early age is best supported by well-trained teachers and language assistants; notes that the numbers of both have reduced significantly since 2007, and calls on the Scottish Government to identify how any future roll-out of the proposed pilot projects would be funded to allow all young people to start learning a second language from primary 1.”

As the member will know, we are about to have the Eurovision song contest, so maybe his horizons will be expanded.

I acknowledge what Kezia Dugdale says. In my previous post, I had the great fortune to teach a Polish pupil who had just come into the country and who was a delight to teach. However, that boy was put into my class—an additional needs support class—along with a number of kids who had complex learning difficulties. He had no problem other than the language issue. That situation was due to a resourcing matter, which indicates the difficulties that teachers face day to day. The support for the Polish boy in the school and the support for me as a teacher was limited. Indeed, I was more terrified than he was at the prospect of having to teach him.

I am astonished by the revelation that members of the Scottish press corps were ignorant of foreign languages.

The minister referred to the Labour and Tory amendments, but does she not find it surprising that Alasdair Allan’s motion makes no reference to funding the roll-out of the programme?

I hope that the Deputy Presiding Officer will forgive me because I will have to leave the chamber when I have finished my speech to meet his boss at half past 5. I am referring to the Presiding Officer, not to Ruth Davidson. I will speak briefly about one specific point—which Jenny Marra made—about access to education for young people with hearing disabilities. It relates to the way in which new schools are constructed and the building standards that apply to their construction. Currently, there is no statutory guidance that sets out mandatory acoustic standards for new-build schools in Scotland. There are mandatory minimum standards in England and Wales and, crucially, compliance with those standards is a prerequisite for securing Government funding, which is how we could ensure that such standards happen. The National Deaf Children’s Society has carried out research that demonstrates that, for the 3,500 deaf children in Scotland, poor acoustics are a real barrier to their fully accessing the curriculum and education. However, it is not just a case of assisting those who have hearing difficulties—the issue goes wider than that because improved acoustic standards would help all pupils. I have worked in schools where the acoustics are very good and in others where they are not so good. Poor acoustics are a difficulty not just for pupils, but for teachers. I have had disappointing answers to recent parliamentary questions to the Government. On 2 May, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning advised me that the Government has no plans to introduce minimum acoustic standards for school buildings. That is extremely disappointing and I hope that the Government and the minister will have another think about that. Bringing in minimum standards would be a simple and cost-effective step. I will continue to campaign for that step to be taken because, as well as being simple and cost-effective, it is just one that we should take.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you can help me and other concerned members. Two weeks ago tomorrow, the appalling report into the management culture at NHS Lothian was passed to the cabinet secretary. She sat on the report for a week before releasing it last Friday morning, when MSPs were safely out of the way back in their constituencies. Since then, there has been no statement from the Government, and no opportunity for constituency and regional members to raise points. Yesterday in the Parliament, members had to endure a non-debate on a parenting strategy that does not exist. Why did the Government not use that time to allow questions or a debate on the dreadful situation at NHS Lothian? Why has it taken Opposition time and an Opposition motion to drag the cabinet secretary to the chamber to break her uncharacteristic silence? Presiding Officer, members are supposed to hold ministers to account on behalf of our constituents. Can you please help us to carry out our duties?

That is all very well, but the staff do not want the cabinet secretary’s thanks; they want a safe working environment in which they are respected and in which they can perform the caring role that they engage in every day. They do not want the cabinet secretary’s thanks; they want action.

Will the member give way?

I declare an interest, in that my wife is an NHS Lothian employee. Not only did the cabinet secretary not come to the chamber to make a statement on the report but, now that we have a debate, she has been in the chamber for only a few speeches. I have no idea where she is, and she might at least have had the courtesy to remain to listen to members’ speeches. I was shocked but not all that surprised by the findings of the report into the management culture at NHS Lothian, which exposed outrageous practices, threatening behaviour and the use of unacceptable language against staff, such as “If you don’t reach your targets you can collect your P45” and “those of you with mortgages and career aspirations had better be afraid”. Such words and tactics are those of playground bullies, not caring professionals. All this was prompted by the blatant manipulation of the waiting time figures. We have now uncovered what was going on, and it is clear that waiting times and the management culture are inextricably linked. In looking into the issues, we are entitled to ask when the Scottish Government was first alerted to the bullying culture at NHS Lothian. Were the actions those of a rotten few, or was there a toxic mix of unrealistic Government demands against a backdrop of staff and resource cuts? Why does such a culture exist and what is to be done about it? How has the intolerable pressure that is being placed on the remaining staff, who are striving to meet waiting time targets, impacted on patient care? We need answers to those questions and many more. I think that Sarah Boyack referred to the Investors in People report of November 2010, which started to expose some of the issues. It highlighted how “some senior managers bully us with constant targets targets targets shouting and relentless pressure” and said that leadership was “based significantly on the hierarchy and power and was often described as ‘command and control’.” Terms such as “bullying”, “blame culture” and “fear” were littered throughout the report. Why did no one at NHS Lothian or Government level do anything about that at the time? What did the chairman and the board do? Did they inform the Scottish Government? I am glad to see that the cabinet secretary has returned from her travels. Will she tell us when she knew about the problems at NHS Lothian? I will happily take an intervention from her if she wants to respond.

I am sure that we will discuss it further. Why did it take so long for the practices and the bullying culture to come to light? The practices were not carried out only by people who have now left the organisation. What will happen to the people who remain? What responsibility lies higher up, at Government level? I have many friends, relatives and constituents who work in NHS Lothian. They tell me about an NHS that is understaffed, in which staff are afraid to speak out, in which nurses cannot take a break during a 12 and a half hour shift and cannot get basic equipment, in which patients are boarded out to other wards several times during their stay, and in which morale is low and falling and the realities that staff face day in and day out are light years away from the spin and denials of ministers. The report talked about the suppression of bad news, through a do-not-write-it-down policy. Reports were given a gloss and a positive spin and used oblique language.

Okay—I will wind up, although I have much more to say. This vital issue will run and run, and I hope that we will have more time to discuss it, because four minutes is not enough.

Will the member take an intervention?

In this era of huge change in information technology, with digital books, online resources, web-based learning, audio books and digital film, the role of modern libraries is rapidly changing. I apologise to any librarians among us, but the genteel and somewhat staid image is a thing of the past. Libraries are now vibrant hubs providing a range of services. In my local authority area, we have developed a model of service provision in which the library and library staff are key to local service delivery. That partnership approach brings together health, police, sporting, council, advice and library services under one roof, increasing the skills of the staff and providing one contact point for all public services. The library hosts storytelling sessions, computer classes, genealogy courses, homework clubs and much more, as well as hosting local resources in book and online formats. As libraries change, the arrangements needed to manage and govern them must also change. The bill recognises that. The National Library of Scotland is an important public resource. It is obvious, when we walk through the door, that past and present trustees have carried out their duties well and in the best spirit of public service. It has been well managed and developed, hosting not only extensive book and paper collections but digital and film archives, websites and other new media materials. That area of its work is one that can and will develop further over time. The Education and Culture Committee’s visit to the National Library was an interesting and rewarding experience. We could sense the unique atmosphere of the place and the pride that the trustees and employees have in it. It is an example of a public service that our taxes pay for—a public service that could never be delivered by the market and one that we have to support, protect and adequately fund. Labour accepts that the governance of the National Library is in need of reform. We accept the insertion of the technical amendments proposed by the cabinet secretary and the insertion of the Gaelic name for legal, contractual reasons. We also accept that a governing body of 32—including, among others, Professor Anderson OBE MA PhD FBA FRSE, the Lord President of the Court of Session, the Lord Advocate, the First Minister, the dean of the Faculty of Advocates, the minister of the high kirk of St Giles in Edinburgh, the Crown Agent, the Lord Provosts of Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, and Marco Biagi—requires some reform, as it is rather unwieldy. We welcome section 2 of the bill, which clarifies the functions of the National Library and makes it clear that the library is a national reference and research library and a resource for Scotland’s research community. We welcome also that section 2 puts in statute that collections must be accessible to the public. That is the main function of any public library. We welcome sections 3 and 4, which cover acquisition, disposal, borrowing and lending, and sections 5 and 6, which relate to legal deposits and the role of the Faculty of Advocates. Those sections have made progress without any major contention, as has section 7 on grants and loans. On the other sections of the bill, largely relating to technicalities, we have no major concerns. The cabinet secretary has generally listened to the views expressed about the size of board and the need to reflect diversity in its appointments. That is welcome. Overall, the bill has gone through its parliamentary process fairly easily and without any great division. I put on record our thanks to the committee convener and the clerks, who have ably assisted us. We listened to the debate about section 8, on the ministerial power of direction, at stage 1, in the committee evidence sessions, and at stage 2. We were willing to give the cabinet secretary more time to come back with further changes and we regret that that has not happened. The minister accepted that a ministerial power of direction has never been applied to cultural bodies. When probed on that by Liam McArthur and others, the minister could not come up with any concrete examples of when a ministerial power of direction could be used. She also accepted that curatorial independence should not be compromised. It must be asked, therefore, why we would want to include a power that no one has ever used and for which the minister responsible sees no discernible use. There is undoubtedly a trend of centralisation in this Government, particularly in the way in which it deals with education and local government. Section 8 would appear to be another—albeit small—step in that direction. The bill is to be welcomed. It puts the governance of our National Library on a sound footing. Parties throughout the Parliament have actively co-operated on the bill and worked to improve it. I hope that, collectively, we have developed a valued national institution, making it more able to meet the demands of a modern service environment. Scottish Labour will support the bill when it comes to the vote tonight.

I am delighted to take part in the first debate on Cuba in the Scottish Parliament. Last night, the arts community came together to highlight the plight of five Cubans who have been incarcerated in US prisons on trumped-up charges, which, as members said, are an affront to international law and natural justice. It is ironic that the country that is the self-proclaimed leader of the free world and that claims to be at the forefront of the war on terror jailed people whose only crime was to try to prevent terrorism in their homeland. The US has perpetrated a 50-year-long hostile campaign against Cuba, because of one thing: Cuba offers an alternative route, which is based on equality, humanity and justice. I have witnessed at first hand the application of that philosophy. My first visit to Cuba was as a tourist; my second was as a participant in the annual Cuba cycle challenge, which is organised by the Cuba Solidarity Campaign. I will tell you something that you already know, Presiding Officer: I am not a natural athlete. Perhaps I am a natural darts and dominoes player, but that is about it. However, I got myself a bit fitter for the journey, and when we cycled the 200 miles through the country, we experienced its sights, sounds and culture. We attended the May day parade in Revolution Square and saw the pride that Cubans have in the achievements of the revolution. Apparently, a million people were there, but I think that every single person in the world was there. I have never seen so many people. We saw at first hand the emphasis that is placed on the provision of excellent healthcare facilities. At a polyclinic, we saw the full range of services provided locally that we can get in a hospital. People are referred there by their family doctor, who lives in the community that they serve. We also saw the large regional hospitals, which provide specialist services that cannot be provided locally. There are very short waiting times. The wait for major heart surgery, for example, is a maximum of four weeks. I wish that we could achieve such things. The focus on health undoubtedly produces real results. According to the World Health Organization, life expectancy in Cuba is 75 years for men and 80 years for women. Members should remember that that is in a developing country. Its infant mortality rates are better than those of the US and the UK, and that is achieved on a shoestring budget that is less than a tenth of the UK’s and a twentieth of the US’s budget. Simple, free access to general practitioners is the bedrock of the healthcare system, and there are 14,000 family doctors for the population of 11.2 million. That is a ratio of one family doctor to 785 people. If we include all the doctors in hospitals, colleges and other places, the ratio falls dramatically to one for every 175 people, which is an astonishing figure. Hugh Henry mentioned internationalism. We must recognise Cuba’s internationalism. Cuba does not export arms; it exports medicines, doctors, nurses and teachers. The operation miracle campaign has improved the sight of people throughout Latin America and beyond by removing their cataracts and healing other eye complaints. Hundreds of thousands of people have benefited from that campaign. When the catastrophic earthquake struck Haiti, Cubans were the first there. They provided field hospitals, vaccines, emergency shelters and foodstuffs. Cuba sent 6,000 community health professionals to Venezuela and Ecuador to establish clinics in the countryside and the favelas, where healthcare was previously non-existent. After hurricane Katrina, of course, the Government of Fidel and Raul offered medical assistance to the US Government to help with the disaster, but that offer was disgracefully refused by the bigots in the White House, who would rather have seen their people suffer than allow them to be healed by Cuban doctors and nurses. In education, despite the system being starved of resources because of the blockade, every child gets the same opportunity. Some 99.8 per cent of adults are literate. Higher education is free, and there is one teacher for every nine students in primary schools and one teacher for every 11 students in secondary schools. Perhaps that is a comment on our ambitions for a one to 20 ratio. We should remember that Cuba is not a wealthy country—indeed, quite the opposite is true. In the early 1990s, it lost almost 90 per cent of its trade with the collapse of the Soviet bloc. Did the Cubans see cuts in their health, education and other vital sectors at that time? The answer is no. They adapted and survived, and introduced many new initiatives and policies along the way, including the organic farming revolution. In conclusion, how can it be that such a country, which has been under all-out economic attack for 50 years, operates on a shoestring budget, and has had sanctions imposed and tightened time and again, its politicians vilified and numerous attempts on its life, continues to survive and lead? It does so because its priorities are very different from ours.

I hope that we can make progress on youth unemployment in Dundee and elsewhere. For some months, I have been trying to secure a meeting with the Minister for Youth Employment to gain support for a project in my region that would take 12 young people off the dole, but no meeting has been forthcoming. When organisations have a well-established training programme to tackle youth unemployment, surely it is incumbent on the minister to meet members to discuss such important issues.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive when the ICT in education programme board last met and what was discussed. (S4O-00924)

I know that the board will have been involved in advising on the procurement of the new glow system. Can the minister guarantee that the new system will be fully functioning and accessible by the September deadline? If it will not, what contingency is in place?

The Calman commission was established by the then Labour leader Wendy Alexander prior to the 2011 election, and the subsequent Scotland Bill that emerged from it was a genuine attempt, which will ultimately be successful, to increase the powers of this Parliament and further the devolutionary process. A consensus emerged among a number of parties in Scotland that this Parliament should have greater powers than it does now, which is a view that I believe reflects the wishes of the Scottish people. Others opted out of the Calman commission and did not support the Scotland Bill. They said that it did not go far enough. They believed that there were flaws in it that would, in their own words, force us to go down the route of progressive taxation—as if that is a bad thing. They believed that the bill would make us uncompetitive and less attractive to foreign investment. Those people belong to the Friedman school of economics and have a philosophy underpinned by a belief that progressive taxation will be a disaster for Scotland. They have a vision for Scotland of trickle-down economics with low personal taxation, even lower corporate taxes and a deregulated economy in which the likes of Trump, Souter and the rest dictate economic policy.

Not at the moment. I state openly that I hope that the Scotland Bill will enable a move forward to genuinely progressive taxation that seeks to redistribute the undoubted wealth held by a small but powerful minority in this country. I want taxation that supports the economy, develops public services and plays a civilising role by protecting the weak and vulnerable from the uncompromising nature of the market. However, that is not the view of Scotland that the SNP wants to see. Who could forget the dear leader, full of typical bravado, bouncing into Whitehall post-election with his list of six demands? Were they demands to tackle poverty, to end tax avoidance and to stop the draconian welfare cuts proposed by the coalition? No, of course they were not.

I will not take one now, because you are mentioned later in my speech, so you will probably want to come in then. The First Minister wanted powers over excise duty; powers over broadcasting, which is a particular fixation of Ms McAlpine; a seat at the EU table; the Crown estate; borrowing powers; and, of course, the power to lower corporation tax.

I do not think that you are in a very strong position to argue over what you want in the Scotland Bill, since you did not want it in the first place. Of course, the First Minister said that if he did not get these powers he would not support the Scotland Bill. The committee convener, Ms Fabiani, said that she would not support the bill because “the Bill does not go far enough and its provisions, if enacted, represent a significant risk to public finances in Scotland ... the Bill delivers a very limited amount of financial accountability”. Ms McAlpine said: “London will cut our grant—they won’t say how exactly—and replace the shortfall with a limited share of income tax. It’s a cash grab, pure and simple.” Were those genuine beliefs, or cynical posturing? If they were genuine beliefs, what has changed?

No, thank you. We should not be surprised by the SNP’s budget day backtrack—not just on this bill, but on everything else that it wanted to ditch. Saying one thing to give a false impression while all the time planning to do something else has been the party’s core constitutional tactic for decades. The Scottish Constitutional Convention, the creation of the Parliament and now the Scotland Bill are all examples of the SNP noisily opposing the process of devolving government and power and then jumping aboard the train once all the hard graft has been done. Where are all the fundamentalists these days? At one time, nationalists would have stuck firmly to their principles and opposed the bill, but not now. What is the view of Ms McAlpine, Ms Fabiani, Mr Doris, Mr Mason and Mr Gibson?

I will not give way at the moment. Those members vehemently opposed the Calman commission and the Scotland Bill. Do they have a view, or are we all gradualists now?

I give way to Ms Fabiani.

Yes, you did.

We know that negotiations have taken place. The First Minister has told his back benchers what the line is, and they will all fall into line tonight at 6 o’clock. Are we all gradualists now? Are SNP members going to sell out on everything that they ever believed in? Are they all more protective of their own positions—

Sit down.

Are SNP members more protective of their own positions than they are of their principles? What will the cybernats say about their sell-out? They are never usually reticent about attacking people in other parties. It is surely time for all the fundamentalists to unite and challenge the great leader—or do they, as I suspect, have the backbone of a jellyfish? Five and a half of the six demands that the First Minister made have been dumped. He has been completely outmanoeuvred by that nice man Mr Moore. The First Minister is a man of some talents, but I do not think that I am divulging any great state secret by saying that negotiation is not one of them. I offer him this: I have a few friends in the trade unions, and I am sure that they can get him on to a basic shop stewards negotiating course. It certainly looks like he needs it.

In conclusion, my view on the Scotland Bill and the debate on any element of constitutional change is that any model that is discussed must have at its core the desire and mechanisms to start to redress the unacceptable levels of poverty and inequality in this country.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I have enjoyed my time this afternoon.

The member is raising questions about the country’s finances. Can she point to strong evidence that a cut in corporation tax of the size that the Scottish Government is talking about will benefit the Scottish economy? Where is the evidence?

I wonder whether the member can help us. Will there be anyone on the SNP back benches who will stick to their principles and vote against the LCM, given that they said that the bill was a dog’s breakfast and a mess, or will they all turn up like sheep at 6.00 and press the wee button?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have very much learned something, because Mr Neil spoke of levels of ignorance. Maybe he wants to speak to the failed negotiator sitting next to him and the one sitting behind him, because the demand for the devolution of welfare was not one of the six demands. Perhaps Mr Neil needs to think about that.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met NHS Lothian and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00859)

Following the waiting times scandal at NHS Lothian, a number of Lothian members have been contacted by staff complaining about a culture of bullying, pressure from management and understaffing, which has impacted on patient care. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that we cannot ignore those issues. She has already told me that she will not conduct a fully independent and comprehensive review of NHS Lothian. What, then, will she do to look into those serious matters?

Nowhere in the minister’s statement is mention made of planning enforcement. Given that the failure of developers to adhere to planning conditions and the significant cuts to local government are issues that affect all areas of Scotland and all members, when will we see action to ensure that we have co-ordinated enforcement action that protects communities and ensures that developers play by the rules?

Will the member give way?

The minister says that he wants a more competitive Scotland. Does that mean that his vision is of a low-tax, deregulated Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Urgh.

No, it is just Mr McDonald I find tiresome.

Since the publication of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report into the waiting times scandal in NHS Lothian I have been approached by a number of patients and staff who have raised further concerns about management culture, governance and practices in NHS Lothian. Will the First Minister now instruct a comprehensive and independent review of the whole of NHS Lothian’s activities?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that we have witnessed a board that is unable or unwilling to challenge what has gone on and senior management who are either hopelessly incompetent or outrageously manipulative? At what stage does the cabinet secretary step in and say, “Enough is enough,” and clear the whole lot out so that we can start again with people the public have confidence in? If they are doing this on waiting lists, what might they be getting up to in other areas of their responsibility?

The Daily Record recently exposed that the Henry Gillies dump near Pumpherston in West Lothian has been taking in contaminated waste from the Edinburgh tram project, outside the limits of its planning permission. I have heard and seen compelling evidence of alleged illegal activity by the contractor, Bilfinger Berger, but I have found it difficult to get responses on the matter from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, West Lothian Council and other authorities. Will the minister agree to meet me and community representatives as a matter of urgency to discuss this serious issue?

How will the new guidance prevent a Klondike-like rush by developers in locations such as the north Pentlands? Will the minister ask SNH to host a workshop in the Parliament so that the guidance can be explained to simple souls like me?

I was going to whisper at the start of my speech, but that would have been a cheap and obvious libraries joke, and I would never indulge in such a thing. It is fair to say that, in the current climate of economic turmoil, rising unemployment and constitutional niceties, libraries are not the most high-profile subject. Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the importance of ensuring effective running and retention of our public libraries as a vital cog in the social fabric. Historically, libraries have played a major role in the self-improvement of many of our citizens. I welcome the bill and the fact that it does not threaten to close down library provision. It seeks to give the National Library of Scotland governance arrangements that are necessary for it to meet the needs and demands that are being placed upon it. Sadly, I am afraid that many communities across the UK are seeing libraries being closed or threatened with closure as cuts to local government and austerity policies bite ever harder. I know that we are here today to consider the National Library of Scotland and the proposed changes to its governance, but before doing so, I will expand briefly on the importance of libraries in general because they are vital tools in helping people to achieve and learn. The self-education of many working-class people has been facilitated through libraries, and reading promotes and encourages self-development. Libraries allow people, irrespective of their income, to borrow the same books and read the same material, and that is genuine equality of access. I was delighted to hear the cabinet secretary herself mention socialism. Libraries are, of course, an expression of municipal socialism in practice. The labour movement has always promoted education as being one of the greatest tools to foster social, economic, and personal change, and libraries have a key role to play in that. At this time of forced austerity and the on-going attack on public services, we must be ever vigilant and we must guard against the threat of library closures. Libraries are often seen as easy targets and are wrongly categorised as being somehow superfluous. Of course, they are not; they are an essential part of the community and part of a group of cherished public services that are a civilising force in our society. Of course, in this day and age, libraries are about more than just books; modern libraries are about exhibitions, displays, digital and film archives, web development, service collaboration, archiving and genealogy, as well as being a traditional source of reference and reading materials. Libraries can provide many of our young people with a sanctuary in which to study in quiet and with space, which might not be available in their family homes. The National Library of Scotland is one of Scotland’s most important and valued public resources. The cabinet secretary mentioned that it was established in 1925. It is right that we now consider its management and governance, and look for ways to ensure that it continues as an effective and respected Scottish institution. Past and present boards and trustees appear to have done a very good job, which is evident as soon as we walk through the doors of the National Library. When the committee visited, we were able to see the work that goes on there and to experience and taste the unique atmosphere of the place. However, the governance of the NLS is in need of reform—a point that was made in 2006 by the Labour-led Scottish Executive. To my mind, there is a compelling case for the NLS to streamline its governance. I have sat on many a board and committee in my time, so I can see how a board of 32 people might be somewhat unwieldy and could result in a logjam in the decision-making process, but I was surprised to hear the cabinet secretary say that there might be a change to the number of board members. At the committee, she expressed a preference for seven or possibly nine members. We are now being told that the number could be as high as 19.

That is helpful. Reform is also about meeting challenges and embracing wider societal and technological change, and it is clear that the NLS has been proactive in that regard. The “Thriving or surviving? National Library of Scotland in 2030” report and the subsequent “Connecting Knowledge” report have sought to devise new ways to embrace digitisation and to broaden learning through the use of technology. That proactive approach is very welcome. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement about the screen archive going to Glasgow. However, any change must be managed and any future changes should be made while protecting the NLS’s independence and unique status. Research projects or decisions related to the collections, or any decisions about them, must be completely free of political interference. The principle of curatorial independence, like that of academic freedom, is one that we should protect at all costs. That is why I have some concerns about the plans for ministerial direction. It is proposed that Scottish ministers may be given the power to give directions “of a general or specific nature”. The cabinet secretary addressed that issue in committee, but I hope that she will expand on it in her summing-up speech. I am sure that she does not want to micromanage the NLS—I do not think that she intends to stamp books and hand them out—but there are reservations about the proposals representing another yard down the road to centralisation of power. I am not saying that that is inevitable, but if a less reasonable person than the current cabinet secretary takes over her position in the future, that danger could become a reality. I acknowledge the cabinet secretary’s comment that the library’s independence will be respected, but it would be helpful if we could be given more clarity about the proposed ministerial direction. That would allow us to determine whether we need ministerial direction at all. One of the library’s key roles is to preserve and promote our national culture and heritage, as well as to promote cultural policy. I hope that it will continue to be an embracing and diverse cultural policy that respects and reflects all the influences on our great country, wherever they come from, and that we do not become overly parochial. There is a danger that the Government could seek to use its position in order to use cultural policy as a vehicle to promote its wider political agenda, rather than to serve the national interest. I would raise my concerns about the potential centralisation of control no matter who was in power, because, used wrongly, the proposals could represent a danger to the library that would dissuade donors, or even raise questions about its charitable status. Again, clarity on that would be helpful. We have questions about other parts of the bill. As I have mentioned, the value of libraries lies in their universal character and their status as a public good that is, and always should be, available for all. They are not and should never become commercial entities, so we want more information on the suggestions that the NLS could charge “for the provision of goods and services” and that it could raise and borrow money with ministerial approval. Will the cabinet secretary expand on what that means? Which services might be charged for? How will moneys be raised or borrowed, and how would that affect the services? After all, we know that loans have to be paid back. I wonder whether it is a coincidence that the Scottish Government has given the library the right to borrow at the same time as it is reducing its budget by 11 per cent. I am curious about the principle for allowing the library to create and own companies. We need clarity on what sorts of companies they would be and why they are needed. I hope that the proposal will not lead to the creeping commercialisation of the library. Any such move would call into question the broad principle and ethos that libraries, and the NLS in particular, are open and accessible to all people, no matter their means.

Parts of the bill are to be welcomed, but others raise questions about the role of libraries in general and the specific nature of the NLS. I raise those issues in a genuine spirit of co-operation and in the hope that we can collectively improve the bill and help to develop a national institution that is fit for the times.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I am sure that Stewart Maxwell recalls that the general secretary of the EIS, who gave evidence to the committee, reflected such concerns.

Will the member give way?

A very serious concern is raised if when someone raises an issue, the cabinet secretary has to try to allay their fears and say that there will be some sort of protection if they approach someone in authority—their boss or whoever.

I make it clear that curriculum for excellence was a Labour initiative, which should—and I am sure will—deliver benefits for our young people, as Hugh Henry said. It will give schools and teachers greater professional autonomy to develop exciting and innovative lessons, using a variety of new and traditional teaching methods that are tailored to meet the needs of individual pupils. It will also give pupils greater flexibility and control over their learning, so that they can study the topics that most interest them. All that is welcome and will build on the excellent work that goes on in our schools. I know about that work, because I have worked in primary and secondary schools across the central belt, many of which are grappling with the new curriculum. I hope that we will get to the desired stage at which we will judge our schools and pupils not on crude measures of the number of highers that are achieved but on how secure and confident young people are in the broad education that they receive. However, the reality is that in secondary schools exams are, and are likely to remain, a major part of the currency. That is what is partly feeding into teachers’ concern. It is regrettable that Mr Maxwell accused Labour of claiming that there is a big bang approach. If he reads the Official Report of the Education and Culture Committee, which he chairs, he will find that it was the general secretary of the EIS who said that. Stewart Maxwell rose— I will allow Mr Maxwell to intervene, so that he can apologise to Labour members.

It is teachers who are saying that, not Labour members. I enjoyed—as I think all members did—Dennis Robertson’s cabaret turn in defence of the cabinet secretary’s obvious and well-known humility. We should not have needed this debate. We should have been celebrating moving into the final implementation and exam phase of curriculum for excellence, almost a decade after introduction. Instead, there is growing concern, confusion and anxiety among parents, teachers and the wider school community. Those feelings have not been forced on people as a result of some dastardly plan that has been cooked up by the Labour Party, teaching unions or militant parents. There is no conspiracy to undermine the very curriculum that Labour is proud to have kicked off. The motion reiterates our support for the new curriculum. However, there are many ifs and buts and there is much contradiction. Schools were initially told that they must introduce the new exams in 2014, except for single departments in “exceptional circumstances”. We then had the East Renfrewshire case, to which Liz Smith and Neil Bibby referred. The best-performing education authority in the country decided to defer implementation for a year. The head of the authority’s education department said that he had applied a three-stage test before he made his decision. He consulted parents, who agreed. He consulted teachers and heads, who agreed. He then took the decision, based on the best interests of his pupils. Those seem to me to be sound, education-based reasons for advocating a delay.

We have demonstrated that Mr Maxwell has a selective memory, so I think that he might have forgotten that he was consulted.

No, sorry—I want to move on. Stewart Maxwell rose— I have already allowed the member to intervene, so I ask him to please sit down.

Mr Bibby referred to the models in schools. We were told that schools had to move to a three plus three model of education and that those that did not would be “supported out of that position.” There are schools up and down the country that are not implementing the three plus three model. I have had numerous representations from people across Scotland, with some telling me that pupils will select subjects in S2, while others tell me that pupils will do so in S3. In some schools in my area, subjects are being chosen in S2, while in others a few miles away that is happening in S3, even though the schools are in the same authority area. Such cases are not, as has been claimed, isolated to East Renfrewshire.

No, I have to make some progress. The recent SSTA survey estimated that in 45 per cent of schools pupils are still selecting subjects in S2—in other words, those schools are ignoring the advice that has been given. It is not difficult to see why parents are confused and worried. How many examinable subjects will pupils select? Members can pick any number they want between five and nine. Again, the position varies from school to school. Liam McArthur mentioned the fact that Bill Maxwell, who is the head of Education Scotland, and the cabinet secretary said that there would be a deep audit of schools to gauge their readiness for the new exam. Although that is welcome—if late—I hope that they will also take account of the survey that many members have mentioned that was carried out by the EIS, which represents teachers at the chalkface. They include those whom Mr Henry referred to, who spoke out loudly, and those who were on Radio Scotland last week, who told the cabinet secretary about their concerns. The survey received 2,700 responses, which is the biggest response that the union has ever had. In it, teachers said loud and clear, “We are not ready.” Seventy per cent of respondents said that they were “barely confident” in their department’s readiness for curriculum for excellence. An astonishing 80 per cent said that the Government’s support was “unsatisfactory”. That is extremely serious.

There are many questions to be asked about a great many things. Unfortunately, we have not had the answers to them this morning. I will raise the issues that the survey has raised when I meet Larry Flanagan, the general secretary of my union, this afternoon. I look forward to that meeting. If support is to be given to help those who are not ready, how can Education Scotland provide it, given that such a large number of teachers are “barely confident” in their readiness for curriculum for excellence? In addition, I have real worries about what will be offered and how it will be offered. How will teachers be given the freedom and confidence to say without fear or managerial pressure that they, their department or their school needs help? Can the cabinet secretary—if he will listen for a second—guarantee that any teacher, department or headteacher who does not feel ready will be fully supported; that if they feel pressure from management, a system is in place that will protect them; and that the issues that they raise will be addressed? Can he make sure that any support that is offered goes directly to those who need it and is not filtered through, and potentially diluted by, their local authority? We should remember that curriculum for excellence is being implemented against the backdrop of education cuts, decreasing opportunities for young teachers and a pensions dispute. It seems to me that teachers, new and old alike, are having to contend with various concerns all at once. Such conditions do not seem to be the best starting point for the new direction in Scottish education. I hope that the cabinet secretary and everyone who is working in Scotland’s education system can have confidence in the new curriculum. It represents a great opportunity for our young people and we all want it to succeed, but we cannot and must not gamble with our future. If delay is the safety net, so be it. It is better to delay than to rush ahead and risk the future wellbeing of our young people. The cabinet secretary must listen to Scotland’s teachers and parents. It is rather sad that, today, he and his back benchers have repeatedly brought party politics into the debate.

The cabinet secretary uses the word “if”; however, problems are emerging just now. In my local authority, West Lothian Council, the failure rate for short-term supply has peaked at an astonishing 94 per cent. What help can the cabinet secretary give the local authority to ensure that the pupils in our schools have supply cover?

It is because Mr Kelly was there.

This has been a bit of a living-wage week for me. My daughter was doing her final submission for her higher English, and the essay was on the living wage, so I have been on the subject for the whole week. We will not get ourselves out of the desperate economic situation that we find ourselves in by leaving it to the market—the very market that got us into the current mess in the first place. We can do it only by investing to create sustainable, long-term and permanent jobs that are well paid and get people out of poverty, whether we call it in-work poverty or working poverty. The living wage of £7.20 will not achieve that on its own, but it will be a step in the right direction. I commend the work of the Poverty Alliance, the STUC and the major churches and charities that have been campaigning for the introduction of the living wage for some time. Indeed, I believe that the latest report of the Church of Scotland, which is based on evidence that was given to its poverty commission, should be essential reading for everyone in the Parliament. If anyone does not have a copy, John Wilson or I will be able to provide them with one. It presents a picture of a very different economy from the one that we have now—one that is based on social justice, dignity and the idea that the economy should serve people, not the markets. It advocates a living wage alongside taxation reform, to make the system fair and redistributive, a Robin Hood tax on speculation on financial transactions and regulation of the financial sector. If those proposals were introduced, they would create a society and an economy that most of us in the chamber could be proud of. We need legislation to bring in the living wage. We should not allow there to be any ambiguity by talking about a de facto living wage or whatever. We know that we can do it. Glasgow City Council has done it, and I think that the Greater London Authority led the way. I believe that the British Olympic Authority has introduced it as well. The living wage is a key part of the STUC’s better way campaign. As always, trade unions and working people are at the forefront of any fight against social and economic injustice. It is their work on behalf of the low paid, the exploited and, in particular, minorities and women that will, I believe, lead to the living wage being legislated for. The question is whether we do it now or whether we have to wait for some time in the future. John Wilson is absolutely correct to say that the living wage should not be introduced alone, because we have to have the proper employment rights to go along with it. That is another key argument in the better way campaign. We should never forget—although Margaret Mitchell might have—that, before we had the national minimum wage, we had cleaners, security guards and carers working for as little as £1.50 or £1 an hour. That was a scandalous situation. In fact, it was Dickensian. I believe that it is only a short distance from that to sending children up chimneys. Our sense of fairness and justice demands a living wage, so I think that we should make it happen quickly.

Will the minister give way?

Go on.

Does the member agree that the involvement of any Scottish commercial company or university in a developing country must take place for humanitarian reasons and the right reasons, not just to seek another business opportunity?

Will the member give way?

My colleague, Claudia Beamish, said that I would speak on the green skills agenda. I am sorry to have to disappoint her on this occasion, but I am sure that I will get the opportunity to enthral members on that subject in the near future. Climate change and environmental justice, and the development of policies in those areas, is of vital interest locally, nationally and internationally. I welcome the debate because it is a reminder to us all that there is a wider world out there that goes way beyond the narrow confines of this Parliament. It goes beyond national boundaries and shows us that, whether they are fishermen in the Western Isles or pastoral farmers in the Sudan, human beings across the world have shared interests and common concerns, and we need co-operative solutions for them. The concept of climate justice—or, more appropriately, climate injustice—is not difficult to comprehend. By adhering to a flawed and often brutally uncompromising economic system, the west has grown wealthy at the expense of people in the developing world by exploiting their human and natural resources to satisfy our demand for material goods. The impacts of our actions will not be felt some time in the distant future when even the youngest of us—such as me—will be long gone. They are being felt here and now. According to Oxfam, almost 300,000 deaths a year are caused by the effects of climate change. The bulk of those deaths do not occur in the United States, Europe, or Scotland, but in the poorer countries of the developing world: 50 of the world’s poorest countries are said to have contributed less than 1 per cent of global emissions, but bear nine tenths of the social and economic consequences. Those with the least responsibility for causing climate change are the ones who suffer the most from its consequences. That, of course, is not climate justice but climate injustice on an industrial scale. Climate change has its deniers. Right-wing commentators and neo-con think tanks that are funded by the likes of Exxon and Mobil spew out their propaganda just as readily as their sponsors spew out emissions. Increased incidence of drought and water scarcity, floods, violent weather patterns, desertification and food insecurity have not been dreamed up by left-wing conspiracy theorists; they are happening across the globe here and now. Scotland is not immune from the impact. We have witnessed more unpredictable weather patterns, warmer winters, and wetter summers, and we can see that our infrastructure struggles to cope. Just as climate change affects the less developed countries around the world, when a big developer wants to exploit minerals and land resources in Scotland, it is the poorer communities that are often targeted, whether it be for a landfill site, incinerator, or open-cast coal mining. The absence of any third-party right of appeal in this country’s planning system is a clear injustice that must be addressed if we are serious about promoting environmental justice at home. Successive Scottish Governments have carefully considered climate change and how to adapt to and mitigate its effects. The Government’s climate change targets are laudable, but it is one thing to set targets and another to implement them. Let us take renewables. I have said this before and I will say it again: our approach to renewables represents a missed opportunity. Had we sought to take control of our own renewables industry, we could have had the financial benefits stay in Scotland. We could have developed a substantive domestic green economy, with much of the accrued surpluses being reinvested in tackling fuel poverty and in developing further renewable technology.

It might be, and we can debate that matter when it comes up. Instead of seeking that control, we have allowed our wind resources to be handed over to foreign multinationals and venture capital firms based in France, Spain, Italy, Holland and Denmark—an approach that does not resonate with the declaration that we are “a model of international best practice”. At some point, we will all have to face up to the questions whether to build more or fewer roads, to cut or increase cycling and walking budgets, and to promote or reduce expenditure on public transport. That is genuinely not a partisan point. The World Development Movement argues that we in the west have accrued an adaptation debt because of our contribution to climate change internationally. It is calculated that our share of that debt is £22 billion over 40 years. I am not arguing that we immediately write a cheque to settle that, but it is morally right that we develop policies that try to repair some of the damage that we have inflicted. We should provide expertise and capability to assist countries in the developing world. I hope that the minister will refer to that in his summing up. As a member of the cross-party group on Cuba, I think that we could look at how that small country offers—free of any profit motive—its expertise in, for example, health, education and organic farming to other countries. At a time when the global capitalist system is in crisis, it depresses me no end to hear Mr McGrigor tell us that free trade would be the salvation of the world. Scotland has been a world player in so many fields in past centuries, and I hope that over the next ones we will be seen as pioneers whose actions have environmental justice as a core philosophy, unhindered by balance sheets, corporate greed and further exploitation.

The minister is going through the members who contributed to the debate. Jamie Hepburn described how the financial transactions tax could help on the issue of climate change. Can the minister explain why the two SNP MEPs did not support the tax in Europe?

I am sure that the member is old enough to recall the CBI making similar comments when we stopped sending children up chimneys to sweep them.

Why is it that the Scottish Government can dictate to local authorities on the council tax, but not on the living wage?

I am glad that the member thinks that North Lanarkshire Council employees make a great contribution. Will he, therefore, criticise his colleague Alex Neil, who slated North Lanarkshire Council workers only a few weeks ago?

How will the loss of 100 more staff at Skills Development Scotland that was announced this week improve the learner journey through education into work?

Will the cabinet secretary therefore now abandon his plans to cut corporation tax?

I wonder whether the first part of Mr Brodie’s speech could be summed up as “talking down Britain”, to coin a phrase. This is probably the most important debate that this Parliament will have in this session. Forget the referendum—if only—this Parliament’s priority has to be jobs and getting our people back to work. The rising rates of unemployment represent the clearest evidence that austerity is not working, and l accept fully that the actions of Mr Brown’s much-loved Tory-led Westminster Government are a major factor in that. On the back of the global economic crisis, it is that Government’s policies, with their massive cuts in expenditure, their attacks on the public sector and the poor, and their failure to intervene and stimulate the economy that have contributed to the disastrous situation we are in. What we need to do now is create demand in the economy through sustainable jobs that give people confidence and stability in their lives, which in turn allows them to plan and to build a future. That is the foundation we need to create a stable and growing economy and community, and we will never create that with a low tax, low public expenditure, deregulated approach. Increasing unemployment is affecting all our people. Young people are seeing their ambitions and life chances thwarted, and for many older workers this feels like a return to the “Boys from the Blackstuff” era of the 1980s. The reality is that unemployment is causing misery for tens of thousands of Scots. In my local authority area of West Lothian, 440 more people have joined the dole queue in the past month. Youth unemployment stands at an incredible 30 per cent, and the long-term rate has quadrupled over the past three years. In January, we had a claimant count of 148,000 across Scotland, but only 19,000 vacancies existed, and at the same time Skills Development Scotland—the careers service—has been cutting front-line careers services and jobs. That simply does not make sense. Nevertheless, there is much that we can do here and now with the powers that this Parliament already has. In Scotland, Labour for some time called for a youth employment minister, and we welcomed the appointment of Angela Constance, but some worrying messages are coming out of her office. Two things in particular cause me great concern. First, the minister has stated several times that it is not the Government’s job to create jobs. That is an astonishing statement from a party that claims to be social democrat in outlook. The Government can, and indeed must, create jobs, and it can do so by having an industrial policy that supports manufacturing and prepares businesses for future work, giving them an early indication of contracts, having local contract events to promote work for local employers, and assisting with investment in research and development. Such a policy does not overconcentrate on prestige projects but delivers small to medium-sized local projects that sustain employment; it also has community benefit clauses that build jobs and skills development into contracts. The second issue that causes me concern is the work experience programme, in which the Department for Work and Pensions and major employers collaborate to get young people to work for benefit only. I was very disappointed, to put it mildly, to read that the Minister for Youth Employment was said to be “relaxed” about the DWP’s plans and programmes.

That is almost laughable. It was an SNP minister—no one else—who said that she is relaxed about the DWP programme and people working for nothing. That programme is exploitation of the worst kind—using the economic crisis to allow highly profitable companies such as Tesco to exploit young people. It is morally objectionable and I am glad that many companies are withdrawing from the programme after people took direct action against them. I have a particular interest in construction, having worked in the industry for a number of years. The 30 per cent cut to the housing budget has been accompanied by construction firms such as WJ Harte of Bothwell, which employed 500 local people, going out of business. Companies in Northern Ireland, taking advantage of a lower training levy, have won Scottish contracts while Scottish firms tendering in Northern Ireland are forced to pay not just the Scottish levy but the Irish levy. I am advocating not a cut or an end to the Scottish training levy, but rather that the Government works to ensure a level playing field. I am pleased that some initial progress has been made in the building engineering services national agreement dispute in the electrical sector—I have been campaigning on that for the past year—but we are a long way from finalising an end to that dispute and we cannot afford for it to go on much longer. Construction is very much a family-orientated business. Like me, many young people follow their father or another relative into a particular trade. As the industry goes into decline, a skills gap emerges. That has a knock-on effect on colleges, which withdraw courses, many of which are not reinstated after the recession is over.

Will do. The colleges situation overall is very difficult to fathom. Jobs and the economy have to be a priority for the Government. When the Government takes positive actions, we will support it. However, on too many fronts, Government spin does not reflect the reality of what is happening out there in the real world.

So far, the member’s speech has been very interesting. However, his own Government’s proposal is not to tinker, making a change of 1 per cent or 2 per cent either way; it is to cut the rate to below the rate in Ireland.

Supply teachers would like a job first, before they do any CPD. Given the uncertainty and confusion about the new curriculum, and given the absence of comment on tasks and flexibility of hours in his statement, will the cabinet secretary give teachers some idea of his thinking on those important issues? Maybe it is the man flu, but he is never usually so backward in giving his opinion.

The minister may be aware that I wrote to her in early December about a training project in my area that had to close through lack of funding. When will I get a reply from the minister and a meeting?

On jobs and housing, the Alliance of Sector Skills Councils is a key organisation for developing skills and providing vocational qualifications. Is Kevin Stewart aware that it has had its funding withdrawn by the Scottish Government? A team of six that focused on Scotland is now based in London and deals with the whole UK instead of focusing on Scotland. Would he say that that is his party standing up for Scotland?

If the member is right, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has deliberately misled students over the past few months in saying that they had a fair settlement and that everything was okay. Will the member ask the cabinet secretary to apologise to all those students?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Carry on.

Will Roderick Campbell give way?

Michael McMahon, Liz Smith and Anne McTaggart set out well the terrific work that colleges do and the need for the services that colleges provide. I am a product of West Lothian College, where, like Michael McMahon, I was taught craft skills when I was an apprentice and where I studied at night school to gain the qualifications that I needed to go to university. Later, I undertook leisure classes at the college. We need colleges at all times and especially at times of significant and rising unemployment, as Gavin Brown said. Yet here we are, discussing serious and disproportionate cuts to the colleges budget that will have far-reaching consequences for institutions’ ability to deliver the courses of which we have been speaking so highly. It is completely illogical to cut college funding at such a time. We have been told time and again that it will be impossible to maintain courses and places. I thought that the Government would pull the consequentials rabbit out of the hat and ensure that colleges got additional funding. I honestly thought that the Government had got the message. We know that the cabinet secretary likes nothing more than the sound of his own voice, but I thought that he would have heard very clearly the voices of the 70,000 students who have contacted members of this Parliament, and the voice of the NUS, beside whose representatives he was glad to be photographed signing the NUS pledge before the election.

No chance. I have four minutes. It appears that the cabinet secretary has not heard those voices. His ears are closed. Let us be clear: he has taken a deliberate political choice on the matter and he cannot blame anyone else. The cabinet secretary has made much of his £15 million transformation fund, but what is the money for? It is not a transformation fund; it is a redundancy fund. It is a sacking fund and a job-losses fund. The only thing that will be transformed is people’s status; they will go from being employed to being unemployed. That is the cabinet secretary’s transformation fund. Despite cuts of 8.5 per cent or 10 per cent—depending on the figures that we look at—we are told that colleges have been instructed to maintain student numbers at 96 per cent and that SDS will make up the 4 per cent shortfall. Presiding Officer, I do not know whether you are an economist or a mathematician; perhaps you can help me out. It strikes me that a college that loses 18.5 per cent of its teaching grant over two years will find it somewhat difficult to retain courses, places and staff. Liam McArthur exposed the issue well. It is appalling that college principals still do not know what their budgets will be for next year, even though it is February. They were promised the news in December. Perhaps someone will tell us today when they will get the news of their budget allocations. In November the cabinet secretary attended a seminar at Dunblane Hydro. As a result of a freedom of information request we received information about what was said. These are comments from the people whom the cabinet secretary charges with delivering the changes: “The reform program is not being pursued on the basis of evidence. There seems to be no concrete evidence that a regional model will deliver better results. This invites the view that the reforms are about saving money alone”. “The pace of the reform is far too quick.” “Considering cuts to funding, Government has unreasonable expectations of the sector.” The cabinet secretary tries to kid us on that it will all be fine. We know that that simply does not stack up.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention on that point?

Given the volume of contact that members have had with people on the issue, does Mr Fraser not find it astonishing that in a debate as emotive as this we have not heard a single utterance of criticism from any SNP back bencher? Is that not astonishing?

I am pleased that the report has taken account of the views of staff, students and stakeholders at West Lothian College. There is almost unanimous support in the community for the college to be recognised as a region on its own. When will the cabinet secretary make a final decision on West Lothian College and what factors will he take into account in making that decision?

Will the member give way?

What I find distasteful is that the cabinet secretary and his colleagues signed a pledge pre-election to protect college places and improve student support, then cut £11 million from the student support budget after the election. The problem for him—

Nobody believes the cabinet secretary’s figures. Is the NUS lying when it says that there is an £11 million cut?

I regularly sit at the back of the chamber and sometimes I cannot quite hear what is said at the front. Will the cabinet secretary clarify whether her party signed the 1989 claim of right? I did not quite catch it.

When I consider the motion before us, words almost fail me, because the motion that the SNP has lodged and the political knockabout surrounding it are historical revisionism at its very worst. At the SNP conference, the First Minister said: “The SNP Government has confirmed the Claim of Right will be taken to Holyrood to allow parties to ‘rededicate’ themselves to its sentiments about Scottish sovereignty.” I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, but I am a wee bit confused, as the dictionary definition of the word “dedicate” is: “To commit (oneself) to a particular course of thought or action.” Therefore, for someone to rededicate themselves or their party to something, they must have dedicated themselves to it in the first place.

Mr Hepburn will just have to wait, because I will come on to those matters. There would be no problem with my friend and colleague Johann Lamont carrying out the act of rededication because, as chair of the Scottish Labour Party in 1988-89, she signed the claim of right on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, which, of course, was the party that went on to deliver devolution for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The fact that the SNP did not begs the question—

I am willing to listen to Mr Brodie on the issue because, given that he was a Liberal Democrat at the time, his party leader would have signed the claim of right for him. At least the member is consistent in that regard. It is not possible for a party to rededicate itself to something that it did not sign in the first place. From the early days of its formation and the time of James Keir Hardie right up until when Donald Dewar became First Minister and, indeed, to this day, the Labour Party has always been the party of devolution. Labour supported the Constitutional Convention, delivered this Parliament with the backing of civic Scotland and the support of the Scottish people, and sought to strengthen it through the Calman commission. Labour will engage fully in any debate on further powers. Our approach, unlike the historical sulking, spoiled-brat attitude of the nationalists, has remained consistent over a long period of time, as has our mission of social justice.

No, thank you—I do not have time. The SNP is all things to all people. On one hand, SNP members speak as social democrats—indeed, only two nights ago, Mr Salmond proclaimed that Scotland could become a beacon of social progress—but, on the other, they have a leader who wants to slash corporation tax, who wants Scotland to have a low tax base and a light-touch, deregulated economy and who, infamously, enthused about Thatcher’s economic policies. Let us not take any lectures from the most cynical opportunists in the chamber. When Labour, the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and numerous individual trade unions, businesses, civic Scotland, charitable organisations and churches were signing up to the claim of right, the SNP was sitting outside, holding hands with those well-known progressives, Michael Forsyth, Malcolm Rifkind, Bill Walker and the late Sir Nicholas Fairbairn. At this time of year, the phrase “a parcel of rogues” springs to mind. The people who dedicated themselves to the claim of right and went on to vote for the Scottish Parliament did so because they wanted protection from the dark forces of conservatism should the Conservative Party ever be returned to power. They wanted a bulwark against the inevitable attacks that they would experience under a Tory Government. In David Torrance’s book, the First Minister himself is quoted as saying, prior to the establishment of this Parliament: “If we had a Scottish assembly operating in Scotland today, even the type proposed by Labour the political situation would be a great deal brighter ... the institution of a Scottish Parliament could have provided the bulwark Scotland needs against Tory economic policies”. Well, here we are again, under attack from the Conservatives. Is this Parliament acting as a bulwark? Is it standing up for Scotland on the real issues? In many instances, the SNP Government is accepting and replicating the cuts and is using them as part of its strategy for independence. The Parliament could be acting as a bulwark. It could be arguing for an alternative, but it is not.

No, I have no time. This morning, Labour held debates on the vital issues of kinship care and bus services. However, the Parliament is often rightly criticised for being irrelevant to the lives of ordinary people and, this afternoon, I whole-heartedly agree with that criticism. While people in Scotland lose their jobs at a rate of 200 a day, college students fear for their ability to secure a course or a bursary, supply teaching is in crisis, nursing numbers are cut, child poverty is spiralling and the social housing budget is cut by a third, what are we discussing? Whether or not to reaffirm something that the governing party did not sign up to in the first place. I want us to move on to serious debate about serious issues. That is what we are paid to do in the Parliament. Let us get back to that and stop this opportunistic nonsense.

Jamie Hepburn’s theory was going along fine, but what about 1997? Labour did exceptionally well and we introduced devolution after that election. Mr Hepburn’s theory falls to pieces.

My issue with what the member is arguing is that simplistic arguments such as, “It would all be better if we were independent,” take out of the whole equation arguments about class, which is the bigger issue in the debate about our future.

Now that the 1 o’clock gun has been fired to start yet another constitutional consultation process, will the First Minister take time to reflect on how he wants that process to proceed? Does he agree that close aides, party members and supporters on all sides should promote informed debate that is devoid of abuse and personal attacks on individuals who may hold a different view?

The member mentioned fairness. One of the arguments promoted by those who supported STV was that it would be fairer. In my local authority, Labour is the largest group with 14 members, but it does not control the council. With 14 members, Labour has only two seats on the executive committee, yet the Scottish National Party with 13 members takes eight seats. Would the member support changes to legislation to bring us in line with England, where there is fair representation on council bodies?

Answer the question.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am wondering to which part of the motion the member is referring as he gives a party-political broadcast.

I was interested in the member’s reference to councillors being underpaid. Does he therefore disagree with the minister’s decision not to do anything on councillors’ pay?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government supports the aims of the National Union of Students Scotland campaign, our future, our fight. (S4F-00399)

I am sure that the 60,000 students who have e-mailed members throughout Parliament, protesting at the disproportionately high cuts to college places, local access, teaching quality and—especially—student support will be very interested in the First Minister’s response. Senior managers, principals and trade unions have raised similar concerns. Will the First Minister show leadership and accept that at a time of extremely high youth unemployment, it will be impossible to maintain student numbers while colleges are subjected to a £36 million cut in teaching grant and an £11 million cut in student support?

I am not finished yet.

Oh, come on!

I have no comment to make on any of the issues relating to Aberdeen, but is there a contradiction between what Kevin Stewart says about building roads and extending airports and what he says about sustainability?

I think that the project to which Jenny Marra refers was originally run by the Venezuelan Government. Is that not an excellent example of a socialist Government in action?

I think that the member should seriously consider what she is saying. Given what opinion polls suggest is the view of the vast majority of the Scottish people, is she suggesting that they are not patriotic and do not love their country? If she is, that is an utter disgrace.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to prevent an overconcentration of wind farms in particular areas. (S4O-00539)

On Monday I visited the southern border of West Lothian. The council planning officer who accompanied me showed me three operational sites, another with consent and yet another four that are in the planning system. Will the minister visit that area with me to see how the current free-for-all is losing wind farms all credibility in the communities that are affected by overconcentration?

Many issues have been raised in the debate. Liam McArthur and Murdo Fraser were correct when they said that raising concerns does not mean that we are talking down education; it means that we are representing the concerns that have been expressed by parents, pupils and teachers. Let me burst with positivity first so as not to disappoint Mr Russell—at least for a few brief moments. Fantastic things are going on in Scotland in education. Over the past eight years I have worked with some magnificent people and parents in primary and secondary schools, but they have serious concerns that cannot be wished or blustered away. The commitment to ensure that all 16 to 19-year-olds have a place in education or training is commendable, but there are serious concerns about that agenda, not least because we are witnessing reform in the midst of unprecedented and disproportionately large cuts to the college sector, which were highlighted ably by Liz Smith, Kezia Dugdale and, despite what Mr Russell said, Margaret McDougall. As Hugh Henry highlighted, the minister’s focus is on 16 to 19-year-olds, but 20 to 24-year-olds have as much need as their younger friends. Youth unemployment, which is rising, is measured by employment among 20 to 24-year-olds. Why are we prioritising only 16 to 19-year-olds when it is clear that there are major problems up to 24 and well beyond? During a time of unemployment and redundancies, college education often provides a platform for retraining and access to higher education for adults returning to education or looking to change career direction. Will those needy groups be among the casualties of Mr Russell’s cuts? On students with additional needs, college principals to whom I have spoken have questioned the adequacy of equality impact assessments in considering those protected groups. We are now in January. Colleges are planning courses and designing their prospectus, yet they still have had no confirmation of the funding levels to be allocated for next year. When will the minister provide that information?

The Government has not given the colleges their figures, and the minister knows it.

Can the minister tell West Lothian College, which is in my area, exactly what its budget will be for next year? No, he cannot, and he knows that he cannot. Why did the minister not mention in his speech the thousands of e-mails that members across the chamber have received from members of the NUS and students across Scotland? That is one of the biggest campaigns in this country on any issue, yet in an education debate the minister did not even mention it. The curriculum for excellence was broadly welcomed when the idea was developed by the previous Labour-led Executive. Liz Smith, Colin Beattie and many other members referred to it in their speeches. However, there are serious concerns and confusion about how it is being taken forward. The Educational Institute of Scotland is clear that the introduction of CFE “could hardly be less promising” in the current context of mounting pressure on its members, with teaching assistants cut, teaching numbers down, larger class sizes, pay and conditions under attack, and the crisis in supply teaching. Again, I am surprised that the education minister has not mentioned the crisis in supply teaching. Ronnie Smith said recently: “The pace of change must be linked to the capacity of the system to cope with it.” The EIS has been calling for some time for a one-year delay in the implementation of curriculum for excellence and, given the concerns and parental worry and confusion about exams, the Government should consider that. It is not a revelation to say that good education needs good-quality, well-trained and motivated staff. Christina McKelvie, Graeme Pearson and others mentioned the quality of teaching that they have observed. I am sure that, when the cabinet secretary reflects on the matter, in all honesty, he will accept that the handling of teacher numbers and related matters has been rather poor. The Scottish Government must make youth unemployment one of its top priorities. I hope that the appointment of a dedicated minister, which Labour called for immediately after the election, will make a difference. Time will tell. The contradiction of wanting to deal with youth unemployment while savaging college budgets defies logic—a number of members mentioned that. In recent years, we have witnessed the development of many programmes for young people, such as more choices, more chances, targeted pathways to apprenticeships, get ready for work, and many more. It is essential that the money spent on those courses delivers jobs, a future and hope for the young people involved. How many young people on the courses find themselves shuffled from one course to another, their hopes raised only for nothing to emerge at the other end? In the words of one professional in the skills sector, “many of these schemes appear to be used as holding corrals for the young unemployed.” We constantly hear about 25,000 modern apprenticeships being created each year, but how many of those are new employees and how many on targeted pathway courses have gone into full apprenticeships? I am advised that it is very few. Does the minister also accept that, by lowering the qualification for apprenticeships from level 3 to level 2, we have seen an illusory inflation in the figures? Marco Biagi mentioned careers advisers. We have seen major changes at Skills Development Scotland. A deliberate strategy of moving away from front-line face-to-face careers guidance to a web-based service has thrown up concerns among careers practitioners. Indeed, a recent survey of front-line staff at SDS showed that more than 90 per cent have little faith in the Scottish Government’s approach to careers guidance. Hugh Henry, Christina McKelvie and others spoke about improving the learning outcomes of young people, and how the process starts from birth. I agree. The best way in which to improve people’s life chances is by providing their families and communities with good homes, a decent income and improved confidence and self-esteem. When the Scottish Government takes actions to deliver those, it will have our full support. However, when it fails, we will hold it to account.

Will the member give way?

I thank Margaret Burgess for lodging the motion and securing this very important debate. I also apologise as I will have to leave soon after making this contribution. From the first week of entering the Parliament, I have been working with Margo MacDonald, who, unfortunately, cannot make it to the debate, on the very issue that we are debating. Margo and her staff have been focusing on the cost of pay day loans, and developing ideas with Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre to see whether the Parliament can curb the scandalous and exploitative practices of pay day loans companies. To develop our understanding of the issue, I took Ms MacDonald to the annual general meeting of the West Lothian credit union forum, where we heard at first hand about the activities and practices of the legalised robbers who run the likes of Provident, Greenwood, Wonga and the rest. We also heard about the pressing need of the credit unions to take on those rogue companies, and what would allow them to do that. The credit unions asked for our help to improve their great work, which often takes place in our most needy communities. Following on from that, in December I presented a list of proposals to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth at a meeting in his office, and I look forward to his reply early in the new year. In my brief contribution, I will discuss pay day loans and loans companies, the work of credit unions and the help that the Scottish Government could and should provide. However, before doing so, I feel that we need to mention briefly the elephant in the room: the reason why people end up using pay day loans companies in the first place. In the present climate of constitutional debate, we should not forget Scotland’s real shame, which is poverty and social inequality. Earlier this week, the campaign to end child poverty showed that nearly half of Scottish local authorities now have wards in which more than 30 per cent of children live in poverty. In a modern, high-tech, wealthy country, that is a national embarrassment. It is in that environment that the pay day lenders thrive. It is poverty that means that 46 per cent of all pay day loans are issued to people who earn less than £15,500 a year, and which allows companies such as the Loan Store to operate a system that charges £1,500 in interest for a £500 loan over 12 months with the original balance still outstanding at the end. It is poverty that has Wonga carrying out direct advertising to students on very low incomes to try to lure them into its clutches. Of course, there is a clear alternative to pay day loans companies. Credit unions, as we all know, do a fantastic job and all parties and the Scottish Government have stated their support for them, but they need practical help now. Many are constantly facing an uphill struggle to overcome barriers to progress. Credit unions, especially the smaller ones, are toiling to keep financially afloat, and there are issues about preferred creditor status, corporation tax and use of reserves. We need to help them to get people through the doors—that would be the best help that we could give them—and they need greater visibility.

Yes, I will do. In seeking better visibility for credit unions, we think that they should work with post offices and local authorities—and even high street businesses, which could use their social responsibility policies to accommodate credit unions. We need to place credit unions at the heart of any anti-poverty strategy, and we should be helping to advertise them so that they become a normal place where people borrow and save. If there is no money in the budget for such a campaign, there should, as ABCUL suggests, be a levy on the high-cost lenders—some of which Margaret Burgess mentioned—that are operating on our high streets. There is much more that I could say, but I think that there is broad consensus on the matter, and I hope that we can move forward on it early in the new year.

In my experience of working in schools, the people who often had the closest relationship with children—particularly looked-after children—were support assistants and school support staff. I am trying not to make a partisan point, but we must be careful because if we cut those staff, the knock-on effect on looked-after children will be most significant.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, at a time of high unemployment, we need good-quality front-line careers advice? Does he share my concern that Skills Development Scotland is yet again cutting front-line staff and recruiting more senior managers?

Will the member give way?

Will Chic Brodie give way?

Page 50 of the report says: “The council tax freeze will continue to benefit those” on middle incomes “and make little difference to poorer or richer households.” There is probably a consensus on that across parties and across the Parliament. Is it now time for all of us in the Parliament to address that vital issue collectively?

The minister was present at the members’ business debate on wind farms two weeks ago. He will have noticed the significant level of public and cross-party interest in the issue. Will he commit to a debate on this important issue in Government time early in the new year?

Mr Neil will know that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has requested that very information from him on four separate occasions but we still await it. Why will he not release the information to the committee when asked to do so?

At first glance, the infrastructure investment plan, which was published last week, is a very worthy document. The principle of setting down long-term plans for investment in key infrastructure projects chimes with my political and economic philosophy. I firmly believe that, in a mixed economy, when the private sector is in decline and the country is experiencing recession, the state should step in and inject cash into the economy to create growth and jobs. There are many projects across the country that desperately need such investment, and we cannot afford to leave things to the failing market. The role of any Opposition is to hold the Government to account and, by God, we most certainly have to do that with this plan, because the truth is that it is a pretty dodgy document. If we look behind the smoke and mirrors, we find that funding still has to be identified for more than 50 per cent of the projects that are in the pipeline. Some projects are so far into the future that Doctor Who would have difficulty locating them. It is hardly speculative to suggest that many of the projects are extremely unlikely ever to see the light of day. Let us take high-speed rail, which was much trumpeted in Mr Neil’s hard-hat, high-vis-vest press launch last week. According to the plan, although the project’s capital value has yet to be identified and finance and delivery remain “To be defined”, the timetable is apparently okay. So if someone books a ticket for the 8.45 to Manchester on 1 January 2033, it appears that they will arrive at their destination on time, because that is when the document says that the project will be finished. I think that “Thomas the Tank Engine” is more believable than that fairytale. In short, the plan is low on detail but high on spin. It claims a headline figure of £60 billion of investment but, in reality, the capital value of the projects concerned is half that figure. In addition, the Government claims credit for maintenance investment that would have happened anyway. At Scottish Water, for example, investment was already being driven by the quality and standards process, 85 per cent of which is paid for by customer charges. Indeed, the Government has halved its loan funding to that organisation. It is estimated that 156,000 people are on the social housing waiting list, and there is a need for around 10,000 new houses per annum to meet demand. As Lewis Macdonald said, this week six major housing organisations, including Shelter, the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians, and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, pointed out that “Funding for affordable housing is proposed to be one of the biggest losers in the draft Scottish budget”. Will the cabinet secretary please be straight with us and acknowledge that they are correct in that assessment and that that budget has also been halved? When he winds up, will he commit himself to arguing in the Cabinet for any available new funds and the £57 million of Barnett consequentials that are to be released as a result of the English council tax freeze to be invested in social housing? It is one of Scotland’s most pressing issues. What of the college sector? The plan promotes learning, skills and wellbeing and recognises that “our people are our greatest asset, and that a skilled, educated and creative workforce is essential to creating a more ... resilient economy”, but how on earth can we do that when college budgets are being cut by 20 per cent? I grant that some capital investment is taking place, but new buildings are of little use without a broad range of courses and quality teaching going on inside them. In my region, there are many local infrastructure projects that desperately need funding, but I cannot find any reference to them in the plan. Will the Avon gorge link between West Lothian and Falkirk be financed through the plan? The cabinet secretary visited Armadale a few weeks ago to see the new station development, but the absence of a new school is holding back that project. Will that be funded through the plan? What of the motorway junction at Winchburgh? Will it be funded to allow the core development area there to proceed?

I thank Mr MacKenzie, but assure him that I need no invitation to have a go at the Tories. All that I ask when any plan for capital spend is presented is that people be told the truth. The preamble to the infrastructure plan states on page 4: “As a result of” the Government’s “actions we can now look back on a recession which was shorter and shallower than the rest of the UK.” That news will come as a surprise to the 204,000 Scots who are on the dole, with 25,000 added to the unemployment statistics since July alone. Scotland now has a higher unemployment rate than the rest of the UK. I ask the Government to stop the spin, stop presenting previous announcements as new projects and stop giving people false hope. That is what the infrastructure plan does. I wanted to support the plan, but it has left me with a feeling that it is just a cynical ploy, another tactic and more spin on the road to the referendum.

Will the member take an intervention from me?

Come on.

Will the minister give way?

Does John Finnie accept that the bill’s title is loaded with value judgments about what one group of people deems to be offensive to another group of people?

Will the member give way?

20. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met NUS Scotland and what was discussed. (S4O-00478)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the NUS campaign our future, our fight. Does he accept that senior management, student leaders, students and the workforce in Scotland’s colleges are speaking with one voice and telling him that his approach to the future of colleges is wrong? Will he show some uncharacteristic humility and at least acknowledge that?

Last year, my local authority in West Lothian boasted about having the best budget settlement in Scotland but still had to cut its budget by £16 million. If we are to have a council tax freeze, will the cabinet secretary at least break with past practice and fully fund it?

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on bringing the motion to the chamber for debate. In Parliament, we often talk figures when we are making our contributions. To use research jargon, we often discuss quantitative rather than qualitative accounts. I want to make my contribution from a qualitative perspective, and I will do that by talking about what it is like to live with MS from the point of view of one sufferer. My constituent, John, is one of the 10,000 individuals in Scotland who suffer from MS. He was a fairly normal young man. He enjoyed playing football and golf, he worked hard, and he liked a night out. He was a skilled engineer. Indeed, he was apprentice of the year at the factory in which he worked. When John started feeling extreme fatigue, he put it down to hard work, long hours and playing sport. He then started to feel a loss of dexterity and feeling in his hand and an inability to bend his legs. At the age of 31, he knew that something was wrong. After several bouts of tests, John was called to his local GP and told not that he had MS, but that he had symptoms that were compatible with MS. That seems to be the way that patients are told. More shockingly for him, he was told, “Get on with it.” He told me that that news and the following discussion should have been in the hands of his neurologist and not his GP, because his GP could not really answer many of the questions that came up. Perhaps a counsellor should also have been on hand to deal with what is, for many people, shattering news. The news was, of course, devastating for John’s young family, his friends and his extended family, but worse was to come because, soon afterwards, he was sacked unfairly by his employer because of his disability. Eventually, he won a tribunal case for unfair dismissal but, because he had not been in employment for a certain length of time, he was not reinstated. John tells me that, at the outset, he was treated fine, medically. He was admitted to hospital straight away for a week of intravenous steroids. As time went on, he had to battle to get beta interferon, which was held up as the great hope, at the time. He had to wait for it because it was referred to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence process. It was hard enough for John to cope at that time, without him also having to go through the battle for medication. John advises me that certain changes would help sufferers. The first is improved support services. He feels that some sufferers who lack family support or the ability to work through the system are being left behind. Self-support is fine for those who have the ability to do that. Another suggestion concerns MS nurses. There are only two MS nurses for the whole of the NHS Lothian region, but they are based in the Western General in Edinburgh. For many reasons—most notably cost, logistics and fatigue—that is unsatisfactory, especially for sufferers who live 30 miles away in West Lothian. On Tuesday, the MS Society told me that a sufferer is likely to access only one appointment with that service a year. John also raises the cost of mobility items, such as high ramps, wheelchairs and hand controls for mobility cars. They are very expensive, and many people have to pick up the cost themselves. The daunting prospect of welfare reform on the horizon is relevant in that regard, too. There has been inadequate tracking of sufferers, although I know that the MS Society is now undertaking a mapping exercise, which is a step forward. We need to keep the profile of MS high on the agenda. As the illness is a peculiarly Scottish or northern one, we have to be at the forefront of co-ordinating activity to find a cure, which might mean working with other Governments, the pharmaceutical industry and other stakeholders. Obviously, that will require resources.

I am encouraged by that. We will wait to see what comes out of that process. I hope that Mary Scanlon is lobbying her party hard to ensure that the welfare reforms are as easy as possible on people with such conditions. Patients need to be better informed of new developments and given basic practical help and advice. I should declare an interest in the debate—a close, personal interest—because John is my brother. Seventeen years after his diagnosis, he still works full time—not in engineering but in a local authority call centre. He gets on with life and tells me that, despite his illness—or, possibly, because of it—he feels that he is now twice the person he was prior to it.

Will the minister give way?

The member mentioned people’s income. Given that last week he was put up on “Newsnight Scotland” as the strike breaker in chief, will he give the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth some advice on public sector pay?

One area in which the Scottish Government has flexibility is public sector pay. The cabinet secretary did not mention public sector pay, but it is mentioned in the autumn statement. Does Mr Hepburn support the Osborne line or will he appeal to the cabinet secretary to move much further on public sector pay?

Rubbish.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I always enjoy listening to Mr Adam. When he speaks, he usually gives us a wee anecdote from his very interesting life. Last time, we heard about his mother-in-law’s comments on the Supreme Court. I thought that, today, we might have got his dog’s views on youth unemployment, or something like that. Come on—we need an anecdote, George.

SELECT, the electrical employers organisation, and Unite, the union, are speaking with one voice about the provocative and intimidatory actions of rogue employers in the sector, led by Balfour Beatty. Will the First Minister take an urgent personal interest in that matter, so that we can avoid a crisis this winter in the already struggling construction industry?

Given that energy provision is critical to local, national and international development, I am very pleased to be able to introduce what is a much-needed debate. Amid concerns about climate change and global warming, it is vital to develop renewable energy. However, as much as it is right to increase renewable energy capacity, it is also right to discuss serious concerns about how that increased capacity has developed in practice. My motion expresses two main concerns about the development of our renewable capacity: first, the overconcentration of wind farms in certain areas, which runs alongside the lack of engagement with, and involvement of, communities; and secondly the ownership of wind farm projects and the risk of losing the potential to create jobs and opportunities. The Scottish Government set itself a very ambitious target of producing 100 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020. On the face of it, that target is laudable and, if it were to be achieved, it would make Scotland a world leader in the field. However, it is my view—and the view of a growing number of people in Scotland—that that lofty ambition could be scuppered by some fundamental flaws in policy and practice. One of Scotland’s most significant onshore projects, the large Iberdrola Renewables Black Law wind farm, is located in my council ward. Originally, the application got through the planning system without a single objection from my community; people recognised the need to support renewables and saw the wind farm as a positive development. However, what happened after that permission was granted should serve as a warning to us all. After that first application, the area has become a prime target for developers that are motivated not by environmental concerns but by pound notes. Close to the grid and to demand, not a tourist spot—indeed, it is relatively rural—and with what the developers wrongly viewed as a passive and compliant community, the area ticked many investment boxes and the first application was quickly followed by two applications for extensions and a raft of applications from other developers on nearby sites. Today, there are 15 applications for more than 250 turbines running the length of the county border from North Lanarkshire through West Lothian to the north Pentlands and Edinburgh’s south-westerly fringe. Despite what the guidance says, the cumulative impact on the landscape appears not to be a priority consideration. Instead, what is happening is unco-ordinated, unplanned and incoherent and resembles the prospecting days of the American gold rush, with landowners hawking their land for rental and developers seeing shiny treasure in the form of subsidies from renewables obligation certificates and feed-in tariffs. Local authorities with little expertise in wind energy have been swamped by application after application, but have no co-ordinated regional or national spatial plan identifying preferred areas; indeed, some do not have even a local spatial plan. Crucially, there is no test of landscape capacity on which to base an assessment. The current guidance is weak and has not been applied rigorously enough. Scottish Natural Heritage’s landscape character assessment and landscape capacity guidance states: “The cumulative effect of inappropriately sited multiple wind farm development could ... create the perception of a landscape dominated by wind farms”. That is exactly what is happening now. National spatial planning and a capacity test would give communities some protection from overconcentration and the industry some confidence about where to invest. Both the community and the industry want this approach. The 2010 good practice wind project was set up to develop good practice in reconciling the objectives of renewable energy with wider environmental objectives and promoting communities’ active involvement in planning and implementation. That seems to me to be a recognition that communities have not been genuinely involved. How are our communities being affected? My experience over the past 10 years suggests that the current laissez-faire approach is ostracising people. People who were previously evangelical about the benefits of wind energy have become organised, vocal and ardent opponents of further development. If that one issue—overconcentration in certain locations—is not addressed urgently and sensitively, opposition to the Scottish Government’s drive for more land-based wind energy generation will increase, the whole strategy will unravel and the public will turn against it. If the minister takes nothing else from today’s debate, I ask him please to listen to communities on that specific issue. There are serious questions in relation to equality-of-arms issues and environmental justice. I do not have time to go into those in detail, but they are significant issues. Ownership and funding require discussion. The development of wind farms is dominated by multinationals and venture capital firms that see Scotland’s wind as their latest commodity, and will do whatever it takes, including trampling over the concerns of communities, to take advantage of the significant profits that are open to them. Those companies often set up small localised companies as a front for their projects or as a conduit to secure planning permission before buying up the consented site. Community benefit schemes exist, but the sums involved are a drop in the ocean compared to the money that is being made by the French, Italian, Spanish and Danish giants that dominate the scene. A robust community benefit strategy could result in cash, as well as electricity, being generated for communities and public services. The £70 million national renewables infrastructure plan gives cash to promote private sector investment in renewables. In effect, it is another subsidy. Contrast that with the paltry £5.35 million in loans—not grants—that is being provided for community and co-operative renewables schemes. I believe that that massive imbalance is a real missed opportunity. If communities were in control or in genuine partnership, they would be more involved and would have more ownership of projects. There are serious concerns about the current renewables policy; we need only look to the public gallery to see that. I am sure that all the people are here not to listen to my sparkling rhetoric, but because they are concerned about their communities. We need a policy that places communities at the heart of the renewables drive, with a national spatial plan that avoids overconcentration and results in the local host communities enjoying the benefits. I thank the members who supported my motion—those of my party and Margo MacDonald, Mary Scanlon, Alex Fergusson and Jim Hume.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

When I met Mr Ewing earlier in the year, I pleaded with him for a national spatial plan for wind farms. He told me that local authorities are responsible for drawing up local spatial plans. Many do not have one and many others are in the process of developing one. The situation is a shambles. I ask him please to take the temperature of the chamber today, to have regard to the numbers of people who have come along to the debate and to have a full-scale review of the whole shooting match.

Will the minister give way?

I am glad that the member has mentioned the award given to the First Minister. Given that he was nominated for it by one of his own ministers, Fergus Ewing, will Mr Wheelhouse and the rest of the chamber unite with me in nominating Mr Ewing for the brown nose of the year award?

I do not mean to have a personal dig at Bob Doris, but could he advise me whether he supports his party’s current policy that the Queen would be the head of state in an independent Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Mr Swinney for mentioning the new Conservative leader. Given the nature of this debate, is he aware that not long ago the new Conservative leader was apparently a placard-wielding striker at the BBC?

First of all, I thank the Tory party for lodging a very important motion that gives us the opportunity to debate something that we probably do not debate enough these days: our political ideology and philosophy. Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, the pioneers of the labour and trade union movement agitated and campaigned for the collective and public provision of services through friendly societies, municipalities and co-operatives. Such an approach, which was taken in direct response to the market’s failure to provide and the resulting poverty, squalor and ill health in which many were left, culminated in the creation of the national health service, the welfare state, council housing programmes and many of the services that are available now. Our services were developed out of that realisation and the desire for a fairer, better community, in which all our people, irrespective of wealth or status, would be looked after from cradle to grave. That is something that the market could not and will never deliver. Public services are the glue that binds our society together. They act as a civilising force. They bring us into the world, cure us when we are sick, provide us with shelter and social welfare, educate us—well, they educate some of us—and look after us in old age. How we support public services—whether we support them—what resources we provide for them and the extent of our commitment to maintaining and improving them are determined by our political philosophy. Given the current attack on public services by the Tories and the job losses caused by the SNP, we have some indication of how the UK and Scottish Administrations see our public services. We see attacks on workers’ terms and conditions, a blitz on local authority jobs, police support staff cut, nursing posts lost and wages frozen in real terms as inflation rises. We see Osborne and Cameron use the global economic crisis as a cover for their ideological assault on the public provision of services. In doing so, they peddle myth after myth. Let us have a wee look at the current situation with pensions. It was not public sector workers or their pension funds that caused the economic crisis; that was down to the bankers.

I have four minutes—not a chance. It was down to the greed of the bankers and their accomplices.

I hear Mr McLetchie blame the Labour Party. I am sure that it was not the Labour Party that caused the crisis in Iceland, Ireland, Spain, Greece, Portugal and Italy, or maybe he has better information.

We know who it was. It was down to the irresponsibility of the bankers and Mr McLetchie’s friends, not the teachers, cleaners and hospital staff who are legitimately defending their jobs and pensions. The rise in pension contributions is not going to pay for pensions; it is going directly to the Treasury. Another myth is that public sector pensions are gold plated, but nothing could be further from the truth. The average is £7,800 per year and, for a woman working in local government, it is £2,800—hardly gold plated. It is also said that, as a nation, we are getting older and we cannot afford our pensions. Wrong again: by 2060, it is predicted that pensions will represent only 1.4 per cent of gross domestic product, down from 1.9 per cent today. Of course, if we tackled the tax avoiders and evaders and introduced a Robin Hood tax on speculation, there would be no need for any of this at all. As I said earlier, it is about our philosophy and what type of society we wish to see. We all know the type of society the Tories wish to see—a cheap-labour, divided and deskilled society and a society flogged off to the highest bidder. We should be investing in our public services. My colleagues and I will be supporting our public sector workers on St Andrew’s day. There is still time for the rest of the parties to join us. They will be welcome.

On a separate point of order, Presiding Officer.

This is wrong.

Social enterprises have a major role to play in community regeneration. The town centre in Whitburn, in my region, has suffered three major fires and the closure of the Royal British Legion. Will the cabinet secretary visit Whitburn with me and local stakeholders, including representatives from social enterprises, to discuss how the Scottish Government can help to rebuild a proud town?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The cabinet secretary has just talked about labour. In her motion she recognises that creating high-quality buildings and places requires skilled construction workers. Is she aware that the eight major electrical companies in Scotland are seeking to withdraw from national agreements, which would deskill the industry and cut wages by 35 per cent? Will she meet me and a deputation from Unite the union to discuss that situation, because it is a critical issue for the construction industry in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive—

Certainly.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what impact the 20 per cent real-terms reduction in college funding will have over the next four years. (S4O-00309)

Job losses, cuts in student places and funding slashed—it is quite clear that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning sees the college sector very much as the poor and getting poorer relation. What does the cabinet secretary say to students at West Lothian College, in my region, who will be denied a place in August because places have been cut, courses closed and lecturers made redundant?

Dream on.

Will the minister take an intervention?

John Finnie has mentioned the guidance. The Justice Committee convener and the minister referred to it, too. How will it be relayed to fans? Surely we will not stand at Parkhead and Ibrox handing out to football fans guidance from the Lord Advocate? How will we articulate to fans what is and what is not an offence?

Religion, sectarianism and bigotry are a political minefield, and I have no doubt that all the speeches in the debate will be scrutinised carefully by observers. However, I have to take part because it would be a dereliction of my duty not to. I cannot sit back passively and watch as the bill proceeds, because of its potential to criminalise many impressionable, inexperienced, mostly young men in my region and my country. The bill is my first experience of seeing legislation progress through the Parliament. I have to say that it has not been pretty to watch. It appears to be a knee-jerk reaction in response to events at one football match. That is not to say that sectarianism is not a blight on our society—of course it still is—or that we should not seek ways to tackle that blight. Of course we should, but is the bill, with its narrow focus on football, the correct way to go? Before the summer recess, the minister told us that the bill simply had to be passed before the beginning of the football season or there would be serious problems ahead. We were told that those who did not support it were soft on bigotry and playing into the hands of those who spout prejudice. For many members from all parties who have a lifelong commitment to equality and have fought against class, gender and racial discrimination all their lives—whether Mr McLetchie in the law, Mr Harvie in the third sector or many of the trade unionists in the Labour Party—that is nothing short of an insult. All through the debate in June, SNP member after member slavishly tucked in behind the minister only for the First Minister to leave them high and dry at the last minute when he saw the mess that he was in. I guarantee that, if the Labour Party was ever foolish enough to try to introduce such a proposal, Labour members would have the courage and the integrity to speak up.

Certainly.

We will come on to that. Christine Grahame nearly criticised the First Minister earlier in the process but did not quite do so. Did we see the behaviour that I described from anyone in the SNP? No. Its members gave the minister unquestioning support, despite the bill’s obvious flaws. I remind SNP back benchers that they are here to represent their constituents and to hold the Executive to account as much as we are. They are here to make good legislation and not to be sycophantic cheerleaders for the Government, no matter how badly conceived any proposal is. Following his election victory, the First Minister said that the SNP did not have a monopoly on good ideas and that it would govern by consent, so why are elected members from all Opposition parties who raise legitimate concerns about the bill’s practicalities derided and dismissed, whereas leaders of the Catholic church—for the record, that is my church—who raised similar concerns were treated to caramel logs and Tunnock’s teacakes at Bute house? I congratulate religious and civic leaders on their role in helping us to force the Government to give the bill more time, but talk of governing by consensus rings hollow when all the issues that other parties have raised have been dismissed as opposition for opposition’s sake.

No, I want to crack on, as I do not have much time. We should address sectarianism in society. The McConnell Administration did very good work on that; Nil by Mouth, Young Scot and youth groups also do great work. Our schools up and down the country work collaboratively with neighbouring schools. We will tackle sectarianism substantively through education and cultural change and not by extending class prejudice and demonising working-class football supporters. That is what is happening—the bill is an attempt by middle-class commentators to impose their view of the world on a group of people whom they deem to be boisterous, crude, aggressive and distasteful. Classing all football supporters as bigots seems to be fair game. That is an insulting form of prejudice. Why should legislation set offensive behaviour solely in the context of football? If people are offended and are in a state of alarm or fear through another’s actions, do we not have legislation to cover that already? The bill will increase problems and encourage football fans with ulterior motives to accuse rival fans of committing an as yet undefined offence. The punishments are clearly disproportionate, and freedom of expression issues arise, too. Members who are old enough might remember the classic “Not the Nine O’Clock News” sketch from the 1980s in which a racist police officer is berated by his boss for his overzealous record of arresting a man who turns out to be black. The list of hundreds of heinous offences included the charges of walking on the cracks in the pavement and loitering with intent to use a pedestrian crossing.

In the same vein, we were treated to the comedy talents of the minister, who advised the committee of the new offences of singing the national anthem and making the sign of the cross in an aggressive manner. This is like some tinpot dictatorship where the national anthem could be outlawed and carrying out a symbolic Christian act could have someone in the pokey.

When the law is beyond satire, the law is an ass.

Does the member seriously think that anyone going to a match will go online to check what constitutes an offence?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to develop social, economic and cultural links with Cuba. (S4O-00280)

The minister will be aware of the excellent work of the cross-party group on Cuba and the accord that the United Kingdom and Cuban Governments signed in July. The accord represents an important step towards respecting Cuban sovereignty and—dare I say it?—Cuban independence, and it will allow exploration of opportunities for bilateral engagement in areas of mutual interest including trade, climate change, science, health and education. Will the minister agree to meet the cross-party group to discuss how we can develop Scottish relations with that great socialist state?

Some credit unions have told me of their desire to look at investing in social housing the finances that they hold on behalf of their members. I understand that Financial Services Authority rules prevent that. I appreciate that governance of the FSA is reserved to Westminster, but will Mr Neil raise the issue with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth so that the next time Mr Swinney has a cup of tea with Mr Osborne they can have a chat about it?

Did the member record the programme? Maybe he could give the recording to George Adam’s auntie, so that she can have a look.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will maintain levels of patient care in the face of staff reductions across the national health service. (S4O-00248)

NHS Lothian has confirmed to me that it lost 734 posts in 2010-11 and that it will lose a similar number in 2011-12, with half of those being nurses. That comes at a time when complaints about understaffed wards are increasing, the Royal College of Nursing has complained about stress levels among staff and the Edinburgh royal infirmary is yet again under criticism for problems with cleanliness. Does the cabinet secretary seriously expect the public to believe that front-line patient care will remain unaffected when more than 700 nursing posts have gone?

Energy conservation is one element. Another element is renewables. Photovoltaic panels and other household renewables are a way of alleviating fuel poverty, but the problem is that the people most in need are those who can least afford the up-front payments to install the kit. Third sector organisations and councils are in a perfect position to do that. Will there be any money from the Government for such activity?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Mark McDonald has come to that conclusion. However, I cannot help but observe—and, this time, welcome—the rank hypocrisy in the SNP. Why has the SNP decided to oppose the legislative consent motion only when Jackie Baillie has lodged an amendment?

I assume that Mr McLetchie will argue that the benefits system has to encourage people back into work. As we reach 3 million unemployed, can he advise us where these jobs might be found?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Have you had time to reflect on the point of order that I raised with you two weeks ago in respect of the length of time that it takes the First Minister to answer questions? Can you update Parliament on your reflections?

Like Mr Gibson, I was a modern studies teacher, but I also taught in primary schools until the election. In those schools, I saw a vast range of subjects and cross-curricular topics being taught that were linked very much to our culture and communities, whether the subject was art, religious education, information and communications technology or whatever. Does the member agree that it would be wiser to examine what is already going on in schools rather than lumping something else into an already rammed curriculum? I say that as someone who took Scottish studies as part of his degree.

Can the member give us an example?

Will Marco Biagi give way?

Is Marco Biagi seriously saying that that was the most positive contribution of Jack McConnell’s time as First Minister? I hope that Marco Biagi recalls the McCrone agreement, which gave us a settlement in our schools for many years. Surely he is not so bitter that that is the only comment that he can make.

According to the budget yesterday, all that has been invested by the Government is a £5 million loan fund. Is it sufficient?

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will forgive me if I have to leave in the middle of my speech, but I took a nosebleed when I came into the chamber—no George Osborne jokes, please. Most of us recognise the seriousness of climate change and the urgency with which we must act. We want our children and grandchildren to live happily without fear of environmental decline. I appreciate the work of Scottish Governments past and present and the previous UK Labour Government in recognising and then setting in place the foundations to take forward the greening of our society and economy. However, as with all policies, green or otherwise, how we achieve things and the devil in the detail matter as much as the lofty ambitions that are set out in Government publications, such as those that we saw yesterday. After the spending review announcement, I would like the minister to give some clarifications. Just how much has been allocated to renewables? The Government says that it will provide £200 million over the next three years to support the sector, but what is that money to do, who is it for and who can access it? I hope that the minister will clarify those points in summing up. I have two main issues to raise. First, I want a green economy, but we must ensure that the benefits and burdens of creating a low-carbon economy are shared across Scotland and that we have real fairness and equality, not a facade of fairness, equality and distribution. Secondly, I would like to raise concerns about community inclusion or, to be more accurate, community exclusion, which is resulting in communities across Scotland that were once pro renewables becoming vocal opponents, particularly of onshore wind energy schemes. Up and down the country, more and more people are left feeling that their concerns have been ignored by local government and national Government and that the interests of big business are being prioritised over those of communities. The draft budget emphasises the levering of private investment into the renewables sector. The private sector will have a significant role to play. However, when referring to the Crown estate yesterday, Mr Swinney said that he wished to see the Scottish Parliament “take on responsibility for the Crown estate, so that the resources that are generated in Scotland can stay in Scotland for the benefit of our communities”.—[Official Report, 21 September 2011; c 1919.] I hope that he will take that approach with renewables, too. Mr Swinney has allocated £70 million to a national renewables infrastructure plan. Is that part of the £200 million or is it additional money? It is apparently designed to attract the private sector. Again, where is the detail? How does he intend to achieve that and, fundamentally, is that approach the right one? Over the next few decades, hundreds of millions—probably even billions—of pounds will be made from renewables, yet we subsidise multinationals and private equity firms to make those millions. The profits are often sent off to the boardrooms of Europe—Madrid, Amsterdam or wherever—while offering relatively few crumbs in community benefit to local people. In relation to onshore wind, press reports this week informed us: “Two thirds of wind turbines in Britain are owned by foreign firms—netting them millions of pounds in taxpayer-funded subsidies.” When I look at the ownership of wind farms in Scotland, I do not quite see, as Mr Swinney would say, resources being “generated in Scotland” staying “in Scotland for the benefit of our communities”. There is a commitment to increase community renewables to a target of 500MW by 2020. That is admirable but, with the emphasis on seeking private sector investment for major schemes rather than local, public schemes, how exactly is that to be achieved? With the right political choices, there could be huge opportunities for household, co-operative, local authority and public estate schemes. Pursuing community, publicly owned schemes would help to provide revenue streams for cash-strapped local authorities, housing associations and social enterprises in the third sector and for the national health service. In fact, the possibilities are endless. We could and should assist social enterprises and public sector organisations into the energy and renewables sector. In photovoltaics, for example, they could provide the equipment, the tenant or resident would get the cheap electricity, and the excess cash generated through the feed-in tariff would fund further development or indeed other activities. We have a chance to share the benefits of renewables throughout Scotland, but I fear that we may be witnessing a missed opportunity. As far as public estates are concerned, there are renewables opportunities in the forestry estate and the estate of Scottish Water. “Building a Hydro Nation” sets out a grand vision for Scottish Water to develop a renewables capacity, yet only yesterday in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee we heard Scottish Water tell us that it does not have the funds to do that. In fact, we saw in the budget a cut to Scottish Water’s promised loans to deliver just its core activities. On onshore wind, I make a genuine appeal to Scottish ministers. The overconcentration of multiple wind farm applications in specific geographical locations is causing great concern. From the border between Lanarkshire and West Lothian through to Edinburgh, there are approximately 15 different wind energy developments, with more than 300 turbines planned. In some localities, such as Harburn, residents feel under siege. The people I am talking about are not nimbys. They are good people, who will take their fair share of anything, but they feel that there is a genuine unfairness with the current approach, which resembles a free-for-all. I met the minister last week on that very issue. I have spoken to members of all parties and know that many of them share my concern. We urgently need a national spatial plan that prevents the overconcentration of wind farms and spreads the burden and the benefit. I ask members who feel that the issue may not affect them to look at Scottish Natural Heritage’s website and its wind farm map for Scotland, because this is coming to an area near them. I support a low-carbon economy, but there are a great deal of difficulties that we have to overcome.

As someone who supports the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s there is a better way campaign and is a signatory to the people’s charter, Jamie Hepburn surely cannot support the Government’s decision to have another public sector pay freeze or the lack of any move to extend the living wage across the public sector. I hope that he will make representations to the cabinet secretary in that respect.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister meet Kezia Dugdale and me to discuss the plight of contracted staff in this very building, a number of whom are being paid below the living wage and whose terms and conditions leave a lot to be desired?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Can Mr Gibson point to any firm hard evidence that the strategy being proposed works—

Give way!

Will the member give way?

On the point about consensus in this regard, does the member agree that the coming together of an organisation that represents thousands of businesses up and down the country, another organisation that represents tens of thousands of workers throughout the country, senior accountancy firms and organisations and a host of third sector organisations would be deemed a consensus, or would the member regard a consensus as being two or three super-rich individuals?

I do not intend to speak for long today, because there are many people here who know a great deal more than I do about the events on the Clyde 40 years ago and, indeed, know many of the people involved personally. I have been here to listen and to be educated more than to contribute, but I would say that there are events in our history—the history of our country and of our great labour movement—that excite, inspire, educate and motivate observers, scholars and future generations of political activists. Whether they be George Square in 1919, Havana in 1959, the miners in the 1970s and 1980s or the UCS in the 1971, such events shape us—our people, communities and society. They leave an indelible mark on people, way beyond those directly involved. I know that my friends Alistair Mackie of the Scottish Daily News and Jimmy Swan, who led the workers at British Leyland, took inspiration from the UCS trade unions, and both of them became great labour movement leaders in their own right. The labour movement is the greatest agent of social and economic change that there is. During the UCS period, socialists from across the political spectrum of the left came together, the political and industrial wings of the movement putting aside ideological positions to unite in a simple demand for the right to work. At this time, when our class is, once again, being subjected to an ideological assault by a Government that does not give a damn about working people, their families or their communities, we should learn the lessons from 40 years ago. Another great trade union leader, Michael McGahey, said that we need to be a movement, not a monument. The UCS showed that in action, and the time is right once again for that approach from the labour movement.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It is good to hear about that project; I, too, have been involved in community wind projects in my area. Will Mr Dornan offer some advice to SNP members who promote low-carbon industries but then, in their constituencies, are vocal opponents of onshore wind?

Until a few months ago, I taught in schools in Scotland. The member should visit some schools in Scotland so that he can learn about the vast array of Scottish topics that are covered at primary and secondary level. He needs to get out more.

I welcome some of the legislative programme that was announced yesterday, and agree that we desperately need to create real job opportunities for our young people. I will watch with interest to see how the Government intends to protect higher education and develop apprenticeships and training. As a teacher, I support the continuation of the EMA and I support the bill on the rights of children and young people. I am also thrilled to bits that we have an emerging grand coalition on hedges. However, I have concerns about much of the supporting document that outlines the programme for 2011-12. I have read it, and it seems to be vague and full of ambiguity. The First Minister, some of his council leaders and his health secretary keep claiming that there will be no compulsory redundancies in the public sector. His education secretary tried that approach in the college sector only to be forced to admit soon after the election that he could not deliver it. We all know people who are being or have been made redundant. If a person’s job as a nurse, housing officer or classroom assistant, say, is deemed by their employer to be surplus to requirements, but they do not want to leave and the only option for them is be ushered out of the door with a severance package with no option of remaining in the job, that is a compulsory redundancy situation in anybody’s book. Hundreds of jobs have already gone in my local authority in West Lothian. Some 400 nurses are to go in NHS Lothian, and jobs are going in police support, the fire service and, indeed, throughout the public sector. If the First Minister is genuine about a no compulsory redundancies policy across the public sector, let this Parliament legislate for it. While he is at it, he could introduce legislation on a living wage for the public sector. Let it be written into contracts given to the private sector, too. We should start in this very building. It is a disgrace that some of the contracted staff who work here every day, such as contract cleaning staff, are being paid below the living wage and do not get any more than statutory sick pay when they are off ill. We do not need new powers to do that; we just need to make the right political choice.

I am sure that we will debate that when the Scotland Bill comes before us. Poverty is mentioned of course, but reading the programme I do not get any sense of how the Scottish Government intends to tackle what is without doubt Scotland’s greatest shame. On capital investment, only two of 23 major transport projects are to be taken forward, with most of the money being blown on the Forth crossing. I have not seen any proposals to detail how the much-demanded additional borrowing powers might be used. Where is the commitment to developing progressive local taxation? If the council tax is to be frozen, let us freeze it for those on the lowest incomes but introduce a progressive element with those at the top paying more. That would give councils such as Edinburgh’s SNP-Lib Dem coalition no excuse—

Sit down. It would give it no excuse for its billion-pound privatisation sell-off. I hear repeated time and again that renewables will “reindustrialise Scotland”—a soundbite if ever I have heard one. Who is to benefit from the renewables schemes that are being developed? A national renewables fund soliciting private sector investment in renewables might be laudable, but I think that we are missing a trick. There may be environmental benefit, but what is the social benefit? We need profits to be retained and reinvested in our country, not repatriated to boardrooms in Madrid, Paris and Bonn. The First Minister wants increased borrowing powers for this Parliament. I support that wish, but he also wants to use those powers to cut corporation tax. Yesterday, he spoke of voodoo economics. I am not sure whether they practise voodoo in Ireland, but I personally prefer Germanic common sense, where corporation tax levels allow investment in jobs and the economy rather than allow the catastrophe that has befallen our brothers and sisters across the Irish Sea. If the finance secretary was beating a path to the Treasury to demand powers to tackle tax evasion and to collect the billions that go uncollected, I would cheer him to the echo, but no—he wants powers that will suck hundreds of millions out of the economy while he crosses his fingers behind his back and gambles with our future. What about the proposals for Scottish Water? Apparently, legislative proposals for water will ensure that “Scottish Water is structured to enable it to deliver its full potential.” I really hope that the Government does not mean by that that a change of ownership will result. A public interest company is just another form of privatisation, and Scottish people will see that. We hear that the programme comes against a background of savage Tory cuts. I agree, but it is not good enough to replicate some of the Tories’ policies and then blame them for all that is bad while trying to take credit for anything that is deemed to be good. The Scottish Government already has many powers at its disposal. If it is genuine about consensus, let us build a social democratic consensus against the decline of our public services and in favour of strong, thriving communities.

Will the member give way?

If that logic were to be continued, the cuts that are being imposed here are savage SNP cuts.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—[Interruption.]

Presiding Officer, when you were elected, you—[Interruption.]

I think that it is okay now. It is the new system. When you were elected, Presiding Officer, you advised that you would seek to give more time to back benchers at First Minister’s question time and many of us support you in that. However, will you urgently look again at the issue? Over the past while, the First Minister has continued to make lengthy speeches in reply to questions, giving fewer and fewer back benchers the opportunity to ask them. We support you in your desire in this respect but will you please look at the matter again?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I say to Ms Grahame and others that Alison McInnes’s comments could be debated if we were given more time to discuss the bill.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive how many compulsory redundancies are estimated and how many full-time equivalent student places in the further education sector will be reduced, as a result of reductions in funding by the Scottish funding council. (S4O-00059)

The dictionary definition of “compulsory” is “required; mandatory or obligatory”. The definition of “voluntary” is: “brought about or undertaken by one’s own accord or by free choice”. Eighteen academic staff at West Lothian College are to lose their jobs. I have spoken to several of them who do not want to leave their posts but have to do so, because the course that they teach has been withdrawn and there is no job left. Are they subject to compulsory or voluntary redundancy?

I am very pro-renewables, but does the cabinet secretary accept that the lack of a strategic plan for the siting of wind farms is resulting in a Klondike-like rush by developers to site wind farms in some locations, which is producing an overconcentration of wind farms in some areas, such as the Harburn area of West Lothian? That overconcentration is causing people who were pro-renewables to become anti-renewables. Will the cabinet secretary comment on that?

I must declare an interest. I have been involved with the subject of the debate and in the there is a better way campaign for some months in my home area of West Lothian. There are two reasons for my involvement in the campaign: I am sickened by the cuts agenda and the consequences for our people and society, and I believe that there is an alternative to the mad, careless and callous rush to acceptance of neo-liberal orthodoxy. The cuts that we are witnessing are as unprecedented as they are unnecessary. Many economists around the globe categorically reject the argument that the cuts were needed to soothe market conditions, and the evidence clearly shows that there was no prospect of the UK’s credit rating being downgraded. The internationally recognised economist and professor of economics and political science at the University of California, Berkeley, Barry Eichengreen, was right when he said that the current breed of cuts-obsessed politicians are “simply intent on cutting ... for ideological reasons”. Clegg’s and Cameron’s Cabinet of millionaires does not have a clue about what it is like to live on less than the living wage or to have to choose between spending money on food or kids’ clothes. It makes me want to puke when I hear Osborne and his Bullingdon club chums lecturing us about the big society. We know that volunteers in projects in Blackburn, Addiewell, Pilton, Mayfield and Leith are working themselves to the bone to protect people from the worst of Osborne’s cuts. Those who caused the crisis in the first place are conveniently forgotten in all of this. The bankers and speculators are not punished, and they continue to cash their fat bonus cheques. The cuts are punishing those who had nothing to do with the crash. It was not public sector workers who speculated on derivatives or caused the crash through irresponsible lending; it was the city geniuses, who we apparently cannot live without and are, as we all know, about to embark on the money-making merry-go-round once again. My support for the there is a better way campaign was not born simply of a principled objection to the cuts; it also comes from a belief that there is an alternative and better way to deal with the deficit and to build and create a better society. We should be tackling the massive levels of tax avoidance and evasion. Even Mr Gavin Brown’s party has estimated that it brings losses of £40 billion a year. If that party says that there are losses of £40 billion, we can be guaranteed that the figure is many times more than that. If we tackled tax avoidance and evasion, we could maintain and even expand our public services while we reduced the deficit. I say to Mr Brown that, instead of appointing a notorious tax avoider—Philip Green—to advise the Government on how best to slash public spending, perhaps the Government should be collecting the £285 million that he and his wife owe the public purse. He is just one example.

I absolutely accept that that should have happened, but let us see Mr Brown lobbying in his party for that to happen now, and calling for Mr Green to be removed from his Government advisory position. Tackling tax avoidance and evasion is not part of the Con-Dem agenda, and it does not seem to be part of the Scottish National Party’s agenda, either. Rather than shouting about cuts to corporation tax, the First Minister should be arguing with Osborne and Cameron to tackle the tax evaders. Furthermore, how about the First Minister pushing a progressive taxation agenda? Imagine the type of society that we could have if the country’s wealth was shared around a bit more equitably. We should be investing in our people and our society. That is not only morally correct; it makes economic sense. As my colleague Elaine Smith said, with around six times the deficit equivalent after the second world war, we created the welfare state and the NHS, nationalised key industries and created full employment. We invested in our people then, and we should do it again now. We should, for instance, be pushing for a living wage across the public sector and for all subcontracted workers in that sector, and we should stimulate the construction industry with the anticipated borrowing powers.

I had more to say, but I will finish. I hope that the Parliament will engage with the STUC and trade unions with a view to seeing which areas of the there is a better way campaign we can progress in the Parliament with the powers that we already have. I ask the minister to address those points in summing up, and I thank Elaine Smith for bringing this debate to the Parliament.

Will the member give way?

I am sure that those members will be arguing within their political parties for the people’s charter and for some of the policies in it to go into their campaigns. I doubt whether we can say that about Mr Brown.

Will the minister consider taking the case for a living wage in local government to his Cabinet colleagues? A living wage could be achieved in local government if the Government pursued it. He might say that the issue is for local government, but the council tax freeze was such an issue and it was imposed by central Government. Why not impose a living wage on local government?

The Scottish Government is not responsible for the council tax bill. The councils are responsible for the council tax bill, but the Scottish Government has decided to impose a freeze on them whether they like it or not. I repeat the point: if Mr Ewing is willing to impose a freeze on council tax, is he willing to pursue a living wage in local government? Mr Ewing needs to answer that point, because the principle is the same as it is for the council tax freeze.

One way not to boost teaching is by attacking teachers’ terms and conditions. What would the member say to my former teaching colleagues and the fantastic young newly elected—I am sorry; newly qualified teachers who cannot get jobs? Some of them cannot get on supply lists, while those who have been lucky enough to get on supply lists have been told that they must take a cut in salary for the first five days of any contract. Is it any wonder that they are threatening strike action?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Thank you. West Lothian Council advises me that its contingency plans include seeking placements for residents with other local authorities, suspending respite places, moving placements from care homes to housing with care, ceasing hospital discharge purchases, and using hospital beds for care home patients. The chief executive has advised me that those actions would not achieve the number of places that will be required. What other options are being looked at?

Perhaps the people in Strathkelvin and Bearsden buy food for their older people in M and S, but where I come from many certainly do not.

3. To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has for corporation tax rates. (S4F-00025)

Twenty three years ago, a cocky, newly elected member of Parliament for Banff and Buchan intervened on the then Tory chancellor, Nigel Lawson, during his budget speech when he announced a cut to 25 per cent in the rate of corporation tax. Alex Salmond was suspended from the House of Commons for shouting: “This is an obscenity. The chancellor cannot do this ... This budget is an obscenity.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 15 May 1988; Vol 129, c 1008.] Why was corporation tax of 25 per cent an obscenity then, but the First Minister’s proposal for a cut in corporation tax is a great idea now? Will he tell the Deputy Prime Minister about his conversion to Con-Dem fiscal ideology when he has a cup of tea with him later this afternoon?

Is one of the fluctuations to which the member refers the huge fluctuation in corporation tax that may follow, should the SNP get corporation tax powers? Is she suggesting that borrowing powers should take the place of corporation tax losses?

I put on record my commitment to the principle that the Parliament should have borrowing powers. The big question is not so much whether we should have those powers as what we should do with them. Presiding Officer, I am sure that you, like me, are experiencing déjà vu. Once upon a time, the SNP opted out of the Scottish Constitutional Convention. Then, when it saw the way the wind was blowing, it jumped on board the devolutionary train and claimed to be the champion of a Scottish Parliament. Fast-forwarding two decades, we witness the SNP, having once again opted out of the Calman commission and dismissing it as a waste of time, now popping up as the great champion of the commission’s product: the Scotland Bill. A clear pattern emerges. The SNP and the First Minister act like petulant children, refusing to play with anyone else, and then they realise that the game is actually quite good and not only try to join it but try to claim that it was their idea in the first place and try to change the rules. However, I am not one to hold grudges; as a God-fearing man, I will always welcome a repentant sinner back to the fold. Let us hope that, after two major constitutional opt-outs, the SNP has learned from its mistakes. The main question in the debate is not whether we have borrowing powers but what we are borrowing for. If we are borrowing to pay for infrastructure projects, including, for example, repairing our crumbling roads, and new transport and housing projects that will employ large numbers of people, count me in; if it is to create real apprenticeships in construction and civil engineering, count me in; and if it is to be used in projects to pay people a decent wage, count me in. My support is based not only on the need to create a better and fairer society but on evidence that progressive taxation and Government investment help to boost demand and strengthen the economy. We have seen that in Norway, Germany and other countries; indeed, the UK stimulus package in November 2008 helped to reduce the deficit as a percentage of GDP and in real cash terms. The First Minister recently met the Tory big beasts; today, he meets the Lib Dem kitten. However, I suspect that he made or will make no effort to challenge either on the corporation tax evaders who, depending on who we listen to, pilfer between £40 billion and £120 billion per annum. Those are incredible figures. If that money were recouped, as it should be, and if there were a parallel increase in taxation for individuals and corporations able to pay more, what would be the impact on our economy and society? Prioritising tackling tax avoidance and evasion would stimulate the economy as we would be able to borrow more, invest that money in our communities and pay it back through increased tax receipts. However, the SNP is now talking about cutting corporation tax. Instead of tackling the tax avoiders, it wants to cut tax revenues even further.

If the member waits to hear the rest of my speech, we might debate the point later. We need Mr Swinney to clarify whether the SNP will borrow to make up the revenue that will be lost from cutting corporation tax, given that there is no evidence that such a move will stimulate the economy. I want no part of any move to secure borrowing powers based on that scenario. In last week’s economy debate, I set out a number of policies that I believe can take Scotland forward. In the spirit of consensus that he regularly speaks of, I make Mr Swinney an offer. As he knows, the conduct of the banks and our financial institutions over the past few years has wiped out centuries of hard-won reputation; certainly in my community their standing is still at rock bottom. How can we help them help themselves? The principles of the Robin Hood tax on financial speculation are well established and promoted by most of the major charities, non-government organisations and trade unions and by others; indeed, today, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund contacted all members about it. I believe that such a move would command a majority in the Parliament; after all, we are talking about a 5p charge on every £1,000 of speculation. Let me test Mr Swinney’s commitment to a fair society, consensus and—

I have no more time. Let me test Mr Swinney’s commitment to a fair society, consensus and his much-talked-about desire for a parliamentary love-in by asking that he convene a meeting of the Scottish banks and institutions to which my colleagues and I would be invited and at which we could ask them to make a voluntary contribution—in other words, make financial reparations that are morally, socially and economically the right thing to do. Let us make it an all-party affair. We can run a bus. I am sure that Mr Harvie, Mr Rennie and Ms MacDonald will come and, as we go, we can wave to Mr McLetchie out of the bus window. It would be a great opportunity for our banks to show humility and international leadership. How’s about it, Mr Swinney?

Will the member cast her mind over issues other than the price of alcohol? What, for example, is her response to local authorities such as my own that have cut a fifth of their budgets for alcohol diversionary projects for young people?

Like many new members, I begin by saying that it is a great honour and privilege to serve in our national Parliament, representing such a vibrant and diverse region as the Lothians, which—from the warmth and solidarity of the people in the ex-mining communities of West Lothian and Midlothian to the beauty and splendour of Edinburgh—is a fantastic place to live and work. Like the First Minister, I come from West Lothian, and I follow in the footsteps of some very notable Labour people who have represented my party at a national level: Mary Mulligan, who represented the Linlithgow constituency with great dignity and humility for 12 years; George Foulkes, my predecessor as a Lothians MSP; and two political giants of the Westminster scene, Robin Cook and my great friend and mentor, Tam Dalyell, a man for whom the phrase “independent minded”—not “independence minded”, I hasten to add—was invented. I am an unwavering supporter of our public services. Over the past 18 years of my life, as a housing official, a teacher and a councillor, I have witnessed the vital role that good public services play in maintaining and developing a civilised and caring society. Today, the public services that we know and treasure, and which we often take for granted, are in imminent danger as a result of the bankers’ recklessness and greed. Spending cuts are attacking living standards, leaving our most vulnerable people at risk, causing widespread unemployment and damaging educational opportunities. I know that I do not look it, but I am old enough to remember the impact of the last Tory Westminster Government. In my home area of West Lothian, following the closure of Polkemmet pit and British Leyland, there were places where unemployment reached 26 per cent—what a shocking and scandalous waste of human talent. Communities were victimised and torn apart as the Tories took revenge on the National Union of Mineworkers and closed steel plants, car factories and the bulk of our manufacturing sector. Twenty-five years later, our young people are in the firing line again. They are being denied access to training, apprenticeships and real jobs. West Lothian currently languishes near the bottom end of the national scale in providing positive destinations for our school leavers. We have to do better—we have to give people hope. That will happen, but it can do so only if we invest in our communities, our public services and those young people. Earlier this year, I joined a million people in London at the Trades Union Congress march against the coalition’s cuts. With my colleagues in the West Lothian TUC, I have been active in driving forward the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s there is a better way campaign. I fully intend to continue that campaign inside and outside Parliament. [Interruption.] I suggest to the Scottish Government that if it genuinely wants to work in the interests of the Scottish people and create a consensus around a sound future for our economy and social justice in our society, it should take a lead from that campaign. [Interruption.] For example, we should stop bleeding the public sector. It is public servants, teachers, nurses, classroom assistants and refuse collectors who deliver the essential public services that make our society a decent one. How can the Scottish Government defend public services when it is committed to a five-year council tax freeze with no prospect of reform of that tax on the horizon? I was amused by Mr Swinney’s phrase “the success of the Scottish Futures Trust” —not really words that should be in the same sentence. We should introduce a living wage of £7.15 per hour, not just in the Scottish Government but in local government, just as Glasgow City Council has done, and we should be evangelical about convincing the private sector to do similar. We should highlight Scottish companies that are involved in the global scandal of corporate tax evasion. We should support the proposal for a Robin Hood tax on useless speculation and we should promote regulation for the public good. We should have a genuine national investment bank that is able to support job creation and not here-today-gone-tomorrow chancers. We should promote workers’ rights and trade union reforms and stop union derecognition such as that which is happening in the higher education sector. We need to make social and economic equality an objective of government and have independent monitoring of progress towards that aim. We should invest in the green economy—not just renewables but all the other opportunities that are presented by that agenda—and we should have a high wage commission to consider excessive pay and the big bonus culture that has destroyed the reputation of our once-respected financial institutions. The debate is called “Taking Scotland Forward”. I, for one, sign up to that sentiment 100 per cent. I am a socialist, and no one can be a socialist and a pessimist. Therefore, I am optimistic that we can take Scotland forward. However, that will not happen with an agenda that cuts our valued public services and accepts privatisation—the public bad, private good argument—and does nothing to address poverty pay, poor working conditions and the lack of opportunities for our young people. To take Scotland forward, the Parliament must defend our vitally important public services.

Will the member give way?

Will the member clarify the rate of corporation tax that she envisages? In Ireland it is 12.5 per cent, in Greece 20 per cent and in Germany 33 per cent. Which economy is stronger?

Before taking the oath, I state that I believe that the people of Scotland should be citizens, not subjects and that I hold firmly that my allegiance should first and foremost be to them. However, I recognise that to serve my constituents in the Parliament I must meet the legal requirement of taking the oath and will therefore do so.