When will passengers in central Scotland benefit from those journey-time reductions and service improvements? The minister has repeatedly stated that phase 2 will go ahead, but his business case states that ministers will not take a decision until a later date.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what consultation it has had with trade unions since the publication of the ScotRail franchise draft invitation to tender. (S4O-02865)

Will the minister tell me why the Scottish Government felt that it was appropriate to ban the wearing of trade union badges and ties in the new ScotRail franchise, given the long tradition of that on our railways? Why were officials upholding that ban on trade union insignia up until a last-minute U-turn?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether the Lord Advocate provided advice on the legal competence of the white paper on independence. (S4O-02811)

Among others, Paul Beaumont, professor of European law at the University of Aberdeen, Niamh Nic Shuibhne, professor of European law at the University of Edinburgh, Professor Susan Shaw and Ján Figel, a former deputy prime minister of Slovakia and European Commission education commissioner, have questioned the Scottish Government’s assertion that an independent Scotland would be able to charge tuition fees to students from the rest of the UK. Given the exceptional nature of the debate, will the Lord Advocate disclose whether legal advice exists on that topic and what that legal advice is to allow members of the public to assess with confidence what they are voting for in September?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the final debate on the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill. I take the opportunity, as I did in the preliminary stage debate, to thank the witnesses for taking the time to submit evidence in writing and in person; the committee clerks for pulling together lists of potential witnesses, compiling and distributing written submissions and giving legal advice on different aspects of the proposal; the committee’s convener for the smooth running of committee meetings and the consensual approach to the proposal; and the promoter for accommodating the guided tour of the Burrell collection and being flexible with some of the committee’s requests. The Burrell collection is a large collection of art and artefacts, although people do not grasp and appreciate just how large it is until they visit the art stores underneath the displays and see the sheer volume of items that are not on display. Sir William Burrell gifted the collection to the Corporation of the City of Glasgow in 1944, and items were added to the collection by the Sir William Burrell Trust, which was established by Sir William’s will, when he died in 1958. The Burrell collection is housed in a custom-designed building in Pollok country park. As a result of a poorly designed roof, members of staff are constantly moving exhibits to protect them from water damage. Large exhibition spaces are closed to the public, which restricts the space that is available for displaying items, and the tarpaulins that have been arranged into giant green funnels to direct water into wheelie bins do not add to the atmosphere of a gallery that houses magnificent and priceless works of art. Water continues to leak through the roof because the source of the leak—or, probably, multiple sources—cannot be identified. After the water has penetrated the roof, it is absorbed by the layer of insulation that sits underneath until that is saturated, and water then leaks out at random points throughout the building, threatening items in the collection. That means that staff are always on the look out for new sources of water running along ceiling beams or down walls, rather than speaking to members of the public to offer advice about interpretation of the pieces of art that are on display. Many experts have stated that the water could cause disastrous damage to fragile artworks but, similarly, the repeated moving of exhibitions and pieces of art because of the water also creates increased risks of wear and tear. Another issue is control of humidity, air pressure and air temperature for the collection, which are critical in preservation of works of art. That is made much more difficult when a layer of wet insulation sits on the roof. I can understand that from an engineering perspective. The key question is whether we as a Parliament feel that it is appropriate for us to approve of altering the will of someone who is no longer here. That is not about borrowing or lending, because Sir William Burrell made it clear that he approved of borrowing and lending in the United Kingdom, The alteration is about the power to borrow and lend overseas. There is a precedent from other trusts, which gave evidence that they had disregarded some benefactors’ wishes for what they described as “practical” reasons. Refurbishment of the Burrell collection’s building falls firmly into the category of practical reasons. It has been speculated that, because of his considerable shipping expertise, Sir William Burrell was uncomfortable with his treasured items travelling by boat, because any number of items could be lost in a sea disaster. It is impossible to know why he made the stipulation in his will, but insurers and transporters stated that art transport has—understandably—changed dramatically since his time. Today, the biggest risks when transporting pieces of art arise when they are packed and unpacked—that point has been touched on—so lending and borrowing in the UK carry similar risk to lending overseas. A risk is also presented when pieces of art are taken down from wall displays and moved to different locations because of water ingress in the collection building. There is a balance to be struck in considering whether items might be safer in foreign museums, which would allow for the refurbishment that will mean that items could be brought back. As I have said, it is impossible to second-guess the motives for the stipulation in the will. However, given the requirement to carry out works in the collection building, I ask Parliament to support the bill at decision time.

I very much welcome the opportunity to speak about armed forces veterans and the vital support services and charities that operate in Scotland and throughout the UK. From the outset I acknowledge, as the Government’s motion does, the debt of gratitude that Scotland owes to those who have served in defence of freedom and I put on the record that we on this side of the chamber continue to support our armed forces personnel and veterans. We will therefore support the Government’s motion at decision time and we welcome the announcement of a veterans’ commissioner. I note the minister’s comments on the early release of that announcement, but if it had been included in the motion that all parties agree on, we would all have been able to support the announcement not just on the record through the Official Report but at decision time tonight. I note, too, the Presiding Officer’s comments on the announcement. Being a member of the armed forces, particularly during times of conflict, is immensely stressful and beyond anything that we can imagine. However, such stressful situations create a level of commitment and an intense bond among service personnel that is unique to our armed forces in this country. I could only listen and try to work it out in my head when I heard from a soldier who had served in Afghanistan what it was like to come under fire and about that pressure and losing a fellow soldier who was as close to him as a member of his own family. I can only imagine how isolated someone must feel when they are discharged from the armed forces alone into society, perhaps with no family, after having such a close bond with the comrades with whom they fought. They return to the UK and perhaps live at much larger distances from one another. They go from living in close quarters with people whom they considered to be family—eating, sleeping, working and socialising with the same close group—to being discharged into a community of strangers who tend not to understand military life and the bond that it creates between people. That is particularly the case because, as the minister pointed out, the number of people experiencing military life has fallen from that in the early part of the previous century. The majority of servicemen and women make a successful transition to civilian life, but it really is not hard to imagine why some of our veterans struggle to adapt. It can put a massive strain on family life and for those without family, civilian life must feel like the loneliest place in the world. For those reasons, it is vital that advice and support services be put in place for former service personnel to help them to adjust to living in mainstream society, and that we support plans to co-ordinate and deliver support and advice services from the private, public and voluntary sectors for ex-service personnel and their families. There are too many fantastic organisations providing support and advice to ex-service personnel and their families to mention, or for me to do justice to all the work that they do in a speech in Parliament today, but I want to mention some, the first of which could give us experience of what being an armed forces reservist involves. I have mentioned previously the organisation called SaBRE—supporting Britain’s reservists and employers—which has area committees up and down Scotland. That organisation gives advice and information on the extra skills that a reservist can bring to an organisation and it encourages employers to look more favourably on employing reservists. The organisation can give employers first-hand experience of the sort of training that a reservist will get and it regularly holds employer weekends that members here could go to to experience the sort of training that our reservists get. I would be happy to give local contact details for area committees to anyone who is interested. We have to continue to support the organisations that do tremendous work for former service personnel across Scotland, including the Royal British Legion, which I visit regularly. The legion provides practical care, advice and support to armed forces personnel, ex-servicemen and women of all ages, and their families. It also runs the poppy appeal annually, and recent appeals have emphasised the increasing need to help the men and women who are serving today as well as ex-service people and their dependants. The legion also assists any serviceman or servicewoman to pursue his or her entitlement to a war disablement pension; every year up to 200 ex-service personnel in Scotland are represented at war pensions tribunals. We also have the Scottish Veterans Residences just across the road from the Parliament, which provides residential accommodation to over 300 ex-service personnel and their partners, and has helped tens of thousands of veterans throughout Scotland since it was established in 1911. We have the Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Families Association, whose Lanark branch covers the Central Scotland region, which offers financial, practical and much-needed emotional support to current and previous members of the armed forces and their families through services such as forcesline, which is a telephone service that is entirely independent of the military chain of command, and which provides supportive listening and advice and a specialist “absent without leave” advice line. The association also runs a forces additional needs and disability support group and organises children’s holidays that are run by volunteers and which concentrate on offering children who have additional support needs experiences and activities to which they would not usually have access. The last organisation that I will touch on is Erskine, which is the country’s leading provider of care for veterans. It provides a wide range of care, from respite and short breaks to residential and nursing care, dementia care, palliative care, physiotherapy, speech and language therapy and rehabilitation care, all of which are vital services for ex-servicemen and servicewomen and their families. I hope that the newly announced veterans commissioner will build on the tremendous work that is already taking place in our veterans community and that it will support the many organisations that provide essential services for people to whom we owe such a large debt. I also hope that the commissioner will bring together the wide array of services that operate in pockets of communities and ensure that veterans across Scotland get access to those fantastic services.

I close the debate on behalf of the Labour Party as I opened it, by restating the continued support that we give our armed forces personnel and veterans. It is telling that, as was pointed out by Ken Macintosh and Hanzala Malik, public support for our armed forces continues to rise despite what some would consider contentious conflicts that not all members of the public support. We owe a debt of gratitude to members of the armed forces and veterans, and we will be able to mark some of the key events from world war one over the next few years. I have met Norman Drummond, chair of the Scottish commemorations panel, who outlined the key dates and events that will commemorate some of the events that have a particularly strong Scottish dimension. I look forward to attending as many of those events as possible over the next few years. As well as work at a national level to commemorate events, local projects are on-going. As Ken Macintosh said, the Mearns history group has collated the records of the commitment of local people from the community who fought in world war one. The Croy Historical Society has compiled records in my region, to which I made a small contribution, with my great uncle’s “Soldier’s Bible” from the first world war, which was passed on to me—the Bibles were awarded to him and members of his regiment by the lord provost of Rutherglen before they went on service. Those serving in our armed forces are asked to make massive personal human rights sacrifices and, ultimately, to give up their right to life in service of the nation. Christina McKelvie and Hanzala Malik mentioned that in their speeches, continuing on from the excellent debate secured by Christina McKelvie on the ASAP report, which was welcomed right across the chamber. It is only right that Governments and we as a nation value, respect and support our armed forces, culminating in the annual commemoration of armistice day, when we stop to remember those who have given their lives in action so that we can enjoy the freedom that we experience today. Members of the armed forces have fallen back on that military covenant, when Governments in Scotland and across the UK and the wider public are able to show their support for them. Members might know that I spent some in the Territorial Army, in relation to which I have not had a similar experience in any other part of my life. Although I went through all the training that a reservist can, I did not deploy to any military conflict zone because of university and work commitments, so I cannot even start to imagine the level of intensity and commitment to fellow soldiers that go with a front-line experience. Having had that front-line experience, soldiers who return to society often enter that community of strangers that Nigel Don flagged up from my opening speech. That is what makes the Royal British Legion and other community focal points so important. For example, as Liam McArthur mentioned, the legion in Orkney operates with a large degree of community of support, given that it has 12 per cent of the population as members. With that focus on reintegrating members of the armed forces into the community, such organisations break down that community of strangers barrier and allow people who have the same experiences to interact. If people from the wider public are brought in, they can talk through a lot of their experiences in active service with them, spreading much more widely throughout the community an understanding of the role and the pressure that they are under. The support and advice that such community organisations and others provide are vital. A number of members used the word “plethora” when talking about the number of veterans organisations, which can be confusing for armed forces veterans. I hope that the veterans commissioner’s first action will be to address that point and make his or her door the first port of call for a veteran who is looking to be pointed towards the support services that they need. I hope, too, that the commissioner will build on the work of veterans champions in local authorities. In North Lanarkshire Council, for example, the work of the veterans champion has led to housing policy being amended to recognise the priority needs of homeless ex-service personnel—and their families—before they are discharged from the forces, so that appropriate housing can be identified and prepared before veterans rejoin the community. I support the motion in the minister’s name and I support the establishment of a veterans commissioner. I look forward to the consultation on the commissioner’s role and responsibilities.

Confidence in Monklands hospital has plummeted in my community, and it is understandable that people are choosing to take family members to Forth Valley or Glasgow hospitals. In light of the report, does the cabinet secretary have full confidence in NHS Lanarkshire’s senior management, particularly given that it was noted that NHS Lanarkshire already has record staffing levels?

13. To ask the Scottish Government when it last discussed student numbers with Colleges Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. (S4O-02604)

College lecturers in my region have told me that, for funding reasons, student numbers are of paramount importance until 1 November. If students are kept on courses until that point, the college will receive funding, and lecturers have been told to do everything in their power to counsel, cajole, or persuade students to stay on until then. Does the cabinet secretary think that that is right? Is that being replicated across Scotland? Has there been a drop in the number of college students since 1 November?

Let me start by thanking all those who have contributed to our consideration of the bill so far. In particular, I thank the convener, whose smooth running of the committee helped to ensure a consensual approach to the proposal. The Burrell collection is a large collection of art and artefacts, but no one can appreciate just how large it is until they go down into the art stores and see the sheer volume items that are not on display. The collection was gifted to the Glasgow Corporation by Sir William Burrell in 1944, and items were added to the collection by the Sir William Burrell Trust, which was established by Sir William’s will when he died in 1958. The Burrell collection is housed in the custom-designed building in Pollok country park. As a result of a poorly designed roof, members of staff are constantly moving exhibitions to protect them from water damage. The fact that exhibition space must be closed to the public restricts the space that is available to display items. As we have heard, the tarpaulins that have been engineered into a giant funnel to focus water into a big green wheelie bin do not really add to the atmosphere of the place and detract from the many marvellous pieces of art that are on display. Water continues to leak through the roof, as the source of the leak, or multiple leaks, cannot be identified. After the water penetrates the roof, it is absorbed by a layer of insulation that sits underneath, until the insulation is saturated and the water leaks out at random points. That threatens items in the collection all round the museum so, rather than focusing on what should be their core purpose of speaking to visiting members of the public about the items on display, the staff need to be more focused on looking for water flowing down the walls, which might have an impact on the pieces of art. Experts have also told us that preserving the temperature and humidity of the building is of the utmost importance. As an engineer, I can understand how difficult it must be to keep a building at a set temperature and humidity when, in effect, there is a massive wet sponge in the loft. Against that backdrop, there is an urgent need for renovation, and the bill would help by allowing lending for an international tour to raise funds. The estimated cost of the renovation is £45 million, and it is hoped that the tour would contribute £15 million towards that figure. The committee was not quite persuaded that all the £15 million could be raised, but that is a matter for Glasgow Life in trying to balance its books. The tour could have other spin-off benefits: it could increase the accessibility of the collection and raise awareness of it, for example. As Gordon MacDonald pointed out, visitor numbers have fallen from a peak of 1 million a year when the building opened down to less than a quarter of that. An international tour could increase awareness abroad, but it could also make us at home more aware of what we are missing, so it could encourage more local visitors. The key issue for us was whether we felt that it would be appropriate for us to alter the will of someone who is no longer here. As Sir William clearly had no issue with his collection being loaned, the main concern is whether he would be content for it to be loaned overseas. The practice of transporting art is much changed since Sir William’s time and, as has been pointed out, the main concern is about packing and unpacking at the point of delivery. It is perhaps no more dangerous for a piece of art to go on an international tour than it is for it to travel across Britain, just as it is no more dangerous for us to travel abroad by plane than it is for us to travel across Britain by car. I think that it is impossible for us to second-guess the motives for Sir William’s stipulation in his will. Given the requirement to carry out the essential renovation works and the probable reasons for Sir William writing his will in the way that he did, I support the committee’s recommendation that consideration of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill move on to the next stage.

I look forward to the work being done by the minister. Will that work include identifying the number of passengers who have been diverted off the Glasgow to Edinburgh main line through Falkirk High by the Glasgow to Edinburgh line via Airdrie, to reduce a lot of the congestion that passengers on the main line experience?

The debate is important and timely, given the level of discussion and the lobbying and campaigning by transport organisations and individuals who have an interest in transport infrastructure. Many of them have expressed concerns about delays, project cuts and an absence of transport infrastructure planning. I hope that the proposed cross-party group on rail will be a vehicle for people to put their transport expertise to good use by informing decision makers. The first thing that struck me when I saw the Scottish Government’s motion was the absence of any reference to buses. The minister mentioned them, but that was only because of interventions by two of my colleagues. The vast majority of public transport journeys are by bus, yet the Government’s support for bus services has been frozen at £53.8 million for the next three years, which is a real-terms cut. Bus operators’ costs are going up. Where people can get on a bus, fares are rising, too. Across Scotland, the picture is one of service reduction and withdrawal, closed bus depots and isolated communities.

I will come on to a positive suggestion for how the Government can improve bus services across Scotland. I genuinely hope that the minister will take it up. Time and again—in surgeries, on doorsteps and at a packed public meeting in Cumbernauld in the summer—people tell me that they believe that bus companies are operating in the interests not of the public but of directors and shareholders. Public opinion in my region is that buses are not operating in the spirit of providing a public transport service and I am sure that similar representations have been made to other members in their constituencies and regions.

Similarly, I hope that Mark McDonald will support Iain Gray’s proposed bus re-regulation bill. That would provide a solution for commuters in Aberdeen that would overcome the issues. If buses are an issue, as Mark McDonald pointed out, I am genuinely surprised that the Government’s motion does not mention buses. I hope that the minister will clarify how the Government does or does not value buses as part of Scotland’s transport infrastructure. One constructive thing that the minister could do is commit the Government to taking on lain Gray’s proposed member’s bill on bus regulation.

I have taken a number of interventions and I would like to make a bit of progress. lain Gray’s bill would give transport authorities much more power over how bus services are run and would include a new franchising power to tender contracts for profitable and non-profitable routes together, without seeking ministers’ consent or having to demonstrate market failure. Bus operators are cherry picking the most profitable routes and cutting quality and customer service to reduce costs, while abandoning smaller and more remote communities. Instead, we could have a strategic transport plan in regions across Scotland, to ensure that our bus network is fully integrated with other modes of transport such as rail and with park-and-ride and cycling facilities and to ensure that we have a sustainable service that connects our communities to employment and leisure opportunities. We know that the Scottish National Party used to support re-regulation of the bus market, and it is not too late to revisit that. I again ask the Government to get round the table with members who have an interest in the bus market and particularly in re-regulation to see what can be delivered. I repeat that I am surprised that the motion did not mention buses, but I am not so surprised that other aspects of transport infrastructure were excluded from it. Our amendment speaks about having transport infrastructure that is fit for the 21st century and about the challenges that we face in achieving that. I have mentioned bus re-regulation, so we can look at the next challenge that the amendment mentions, which is “reducing journey times, increasing capacity and increasing the frequency of rail journeys between Scotland’s cities”. That challenge is partly addressed by the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme—or at least, it would have been, if the original project had gone ahead. The project has been slashed—or phased, in civil service speak—and a lot of its benefits have been lost. Passenger capacity may be increasing but the increased frequency of services and the promised journey time reductions certainly will not be achieved. Parts of the project that would have increased capacity in the network have been dropped, such as the Garngad chord or the Croy turnback facility. The Dalmeny chord has also been cut, which means that instead of trains being able to bypass the Winchburgh tunnel during electrification works, they will be diverted via Dalmeny, increasing journey times and pushing people from rail to road. That will cause timetabling issues for services to and from Fife and will cost taxpayers an estimated £10 million in compensation payments to the franchise holder—and that is only if Transport Scotland’s initial estimate of 44 days of disruption turns out to be correct. Questions remain over the cost benefit analysis of the revised Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. In Audit Scotland’s recent report, “Scotland’s key transport infrastructure projects”, it asked how ministers were able to approve changes to the scope and cost of the project without an updated and approved outline business case. In that report, Audit Scotland says that Transport Scotland expected to have a full business case prepared and completed by May 2013. Perhaps the minister can tell the chamber where Transport Scotland is with that business case and whether members will be allowed to access that document to scrutinise the decision making around the project changes. Another challenge that we face in building a transport network fit for the 21st century is how we connect our major airports to our city centres and how the lack of foresight, planning and plain common sense by this Government has made that task harder. We heard last week about how the Scottish Government was a partner in a study into the options for linking Glasgow airport to the city centre by public transport. One of those options was a rail link, and we know that there is interest in the private sector in developing that rail link and that the Government is aware of that interest since it has been working jointly with the interested party on the airport access strategy document. Yet, while working with that interested party, this same Government chose to sell off the land that would make that project possible. We are now being told that the Glasgow airport rail link is “ill-conceived”—a dramatic shift in policy from the Government that previously described it as desirable but not affordable. I hope that the Scottish Government does not continue with that policy and will work with the promoter of the new GARL project to remove any barriers that might remain, without taking any liability on the public purse, which, until just over a week ago, was the Government’s main objection. On this side of the chamber, we will continue to challenge the Government on transport infrastructure, as we have done in our amendment. We will push to ensure that the Government shows the ambition that we really need in order to develop a transport network fit for the 21st century—one that serves our communities, joins up our cities and connects city centres to strategic airports, while improving connectivity, increasing active travel and reducing our carbon emissions. I move S4M-08270.1, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “recognises the work required in the transport sector and the need for a fully developed infrastructure investment plan with defined project timescales to meet the challenges of the 21st century and believes that these challenges include re-regulating the bus market to better serve the travelling public, reducing journey times, increasing capacity and increasing the frequency of rail journeys between Scotland’s cities, improving public transport links between Scotland’s city centres and airports, improving connectivity, including by road, and increasing the opportunities for active travel to stimulate the economy now, securing long-term sustainable growth and providing a modern and efficient transport system, giving people a choice and helping secure a low-carbon economy.”

The minister likes to tell the Labour Party how it should behave in opposition and he talks about it duping people. Perhaps he could look at the manifesto on which his party was elected, which committed to a full EGIP programme, and tell us how the Government should fund its own manifesto commitments.

It is outrageous that the Government has had to be dragged, kicking and screaming, to the chamber to outline how it has wasted almost £30 million of taxpayers’ money to cancel a project that would have had tremendous benefits for the economy of Glasgow: the driver of growth in the west of Scotland. However, it seems that the Government has had no hand in that loss; it is all the fault of the civil servants who sold off land that cost the people of Scotland £8.5 million for a grand total of £359,500. That is a massive loss to the public purse of more than £8 million for the land transactions alone. Let us be clear. The minister has stated again and again that he has played no part in those transactions. A civil servant in the Scottish Government has, therefore, taken the decision to declare land surplus to requirements, despite the fact that there is still an act of Parliament—the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Act 2007; the fact that GARL still appears in the national planning framework; and the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, stated at a parliamentary committee: “Essentially, the decision not to proceed with the Glasgow airport rail link was taken on the basis of the affordability of the project in the context of the Government’s programme.”—[Official Report, Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, 3 November 2009; c 2258.] So, it was nothing at all to do with the project being ill-conceived, then. Why, given those three facts, is a civil servant acting without any ministerial direction or oversight—which is what the minister has said—and declaring the pieces of land on the GARL corridor surplus to requirements and initiating their disposal? There is something there that does not quite make sense. I take on board the points from Government members that GARL was not a Government priority and that it had no intention of funding it. However, that does not mean that the Government should take a scorched-earth approach and ensure that a different Administration would not be able to implement the project. Even in the unlikely event that the Government achieves its aim of independence, the first Scottish Administration will now be unable to go ahead with the GARL project. There is a precedent here. The Queensferry crossing, which could possibly be described as this Government’s flagship capital investment project, would not be going ahead if the previous Administration had taken the same view on projects as the current one. When Sarah Boyack was a minister, she was approached by officials regarding the sale of the land that was required to build the Forth replacement crossing. She insisted that, although it was not a priority for the Government at that time, it would be wrong to tie the hands of a future Administration. Where would we be now with the Queensferry crossing if the previous Administration had taken the same approach as the current one? However, the land was declared surplus and sold at a fraction of the purchase price not by a Scottish Government minister but by an unnamed civil servant. A civil servant has acted independently of ministers, an act of Parliament and the national planning framework, but another twist is that this particular official also seems to have operated independently of other members of staff within his department. While all that was being done, a group of individuals, businesses and local authorities were sitting down with Transport Scotland to discuss the public transport options for Glasgow airport. As a result of those discussions, Transport Scotland part-funded a report that included an option recommending a train line to carry passengers direct from the airport to the centre of Glasgow—

I have looked at the Aecom report, although I do not know whether the minister has done so. I said that the report includes a recommendation for a train line to carry passengers direct from the airport to the centre of Glasgow. If the minister can point to the section of the report where it does not say that, I will happily come back to the chamber. Officials at Transport Scotland seem to have spent public funds on a report that recommends a train line to Glasgow airport, while a different official has sold the land at a massive loss and killed the possibility of the recommendation ever being realised. We have two parts of Transport Scotland working against each other, and we have a minister with no knowledge or oversight of any of it. When we have two parts of the same Government department acting independently of ministers, working against each other and wasting public money, the only reasonable option is for a full independent inquiry. I think that the public will be wondering why the minister has not already instructed one.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this important debate on community transport in Scotland. Although I was not a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee at the time of the inquiry, I echo Maureen Watt’s thanks to the committee clerks and all the organisations and individuals who have given evidence to the committee on this subject over the past nine months. Community transport services play a crucial role throughout Scotland, from rural villages to urban hubs, and are invaluable to those who use them to go shopping, get to a hospital appointment on time, visit friends and family or participate in a social activity. For many, those services provide the only means by which they can travel. Community transport takes various forms, from community car schemes to Strathclyde partnership for transport’s well-known mybus service and contractual services such as home-to-school travel. Community transport is particularly important to Scotland’s elderly population and the disabled; indeed, more than 80 per cent of the entire user base falls into those categories. That is why it is vital that we do all that we can to encourage sustainable investment in community transport. Currently, more than 1 million people in Scotland are over the age of 65. Statistics show that that figure will have increased by 21 per cent by 2016 and by 62 per cent by 2031, and it is expected that the over-85 population will have increased by 38 per cent by 2016 and by 144 per cent by 2031. Those statistics, which were provided by the Scottish Government, are stark. Given that ageing population and the significant spike in the number of people who will very likely rely on community transport services in the future, it is vital that action is taken to support older people in their communities as much as possible. Community transport relies heavily on dedicated volunteers, who play a pivotal role in providing the service in communities. In fact, when they gave evidence to the committee, organisations highlighted that many of them are completely or almost completely volunteer based. That shows the incredible dedication of those volunteers, who are willing to do all that they can in our communities. It is up to local and central Government to try to sustain that level of volunteer activity by removing barriers and offering encouragement. Licensing, which is one of the barriers, has been mentioned. I got my driving licence well after 1997. I am sure that many other members did so, too, and, like me, they will not be automatically entitled to drive a minibus for a commercial purpose. That is one of the big barriers that face a new generation of volunteers who want to support elderly and disabled people in their community, and I was glad to hear the minister talking about overcoming it. I welcome the vital role that those volunteers play, but there is a fundamental concern about the unpredictability that can exist in the voluntary sector and the distinct lack of cohesiveness that exists between local authority areas when it comes to service provision. It is concerning that there are considerable differences across the 32 local authorities on the issue. The financial support that is dedicated to community transport in North Lanarkshire will be different from the support that is offered in East Lothian, for example. The creation of a postcode lottery means that the opportunities for those who use community transport will be very different, depending on where they live. However, I certainly have a great deal of sympathy with our councils on the matter. They face exceptional financial cutbacks as a result of budget decisions in the Parliament, and they are being forced to make incredibly difficult spending decisions and to prioritise areas other than community transport.

There is no need for ring fencing if local government is properly resourced. The local government settlement as a proportion of the Scottish Government’s budget has continually fallen from its peak under this Government. Local government’s share of funding as a proportion of the Scottish Government’s budget has continually fallen—I do not believe that any Government minister disputes that. It is clear that the funding streams for community transport organisations offered more support prior to the Government’s concordat with local authorities. The Community Transport Association made it clear to the committee that, between 1998 and 2008, due to central Government investment, there were two funding pots, and we saw considerable growth in community transport across Scotland. Since that approach ended in 2008, however, we have seen a sizeable reduction in community transport initiatives. The reduction in funding, which is not necessarily related to the removal of ring fencing, and the rise in costs clearly hamper the ability of existing community transport organisations to provide an effective service, and act as a barrier to the establishment of new organisations or to the renewal of buses and other types of accessible transport. Vehicle replacement is key to the provision of an effective, comfortable and safe service in our communities, but many organisations find it difficult to source funding for fleet upgrades. Given the financial pressures facing local authorities, it is important that the Scottish Government contributes and offers community transport organisations what support it can on fleet renewal. At an event in the Scottish Parliament after the committee’s report was published, an operator commented on procurement and asked whether local authority buying power and Scottish Government buying power could come together to assist in pushing down fleet renewal costs. In Scotland, 100,000 people use community transport. With an ageing population, that figure will rise substantially over the years ahead. Yes, councils should do more—they should do all that they can to ensure that our constituents get an effective local service. However, the fact is that councils are struggling to provide even the core service that people rely on. It is important that the Scottish Government does more, particularly when it comes to fleet replacement, to assist organisations that carry out tremendous work, much of it on a voluntary basis, across Scotland.

The cabinet secretary will know from his meeting with Falkirk Council that it has, as a precaution, set up a task force to help to deal with any local job losses. What support can the Scottish Government give to the task force?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate on a potential rail link connecting Perth with Edinburgh. I congratulate Liz Smith on securing the debate, which is clearly on a matter of concern to her constituents. In the 21st century, it is vital that people throughout Scotland benefit from a modern and efficient rail service that links cities such as Perth with the capital in the timeliest manner possible. Labour has argued that the upgrading of our rail network is vital not only to provide jobs, to support businesses and to pursue economic expansion, but to improve the vital links that Edinburgh and Glasgow have with smaller cities and towns, and to reduce the number of people who feel that it is necessary consistently to choose their car rather than the train or other forms of public transport. With those objectives in mind, it is of concern that the transport alliance Transform Scotland highlights that journey times by train from Perth to Edinburgh are longer now than they were 100 years ago, with journeys between the two cities averaging about 80 minutes. The loss of the direct link in 1970 must have been a blow to the local area, and if it was reinstated it would certainly reduce journey times considerably. As the motion states, a direct link would be likely to provide improved services for people who live in places such as Kinross, Dunfermline, Cowdenbeath and Rosyth—places where, as in Perth, population growth is predicted over the next 25 years, as was mentioned earlier.

I take that on board. I recognise that population growth is expected in the Inverness area as well, which will only increase demand for services. It is important that the Scottish Government do all that it can do to improve our rail network, but I have been concerned about its commitment to doing that in recent years. Having initially welcomed the roll-out of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme across central Scotland, I was left disappointed—along with the Confederation of British Industry and transport organisations—when the Scottish Government slashed the ambitious programme by £350 million under the guise of phasing. The proposed increase in trains per hour was stopped, improvements to Croy station were rejected, the important plans for the Garngad chord were scrapped, and the Dalmeny chord was cancelled, which could lead to significant costs to the taxpayer and disruption to the travelling public across central Scotland when the Winchburgh tunnel closes for electrification work. I congratulate Liz Smith again on bringing her motion to the chamber for debate. It is clear that people in Mid Scotland and Fife and further afield would benefit from a direct rail link between Perth and Edinburgh, and I look forward to hearing the Government’s response.

I welcome the action that has been taken and support the Government’s ambition to bring Prestwick airport back into profit. What will be the Government’s position if efforts to do so are unsuccessful? Is it willing to sustain the airport in the long term if it does not return to profit? Indeed, is it able to do so under EU rules?

Does the minister recognise the benefits that the Glasgow crossrail scheme could bring to communities in the south-west of Glasgow? Is the Government minded to support that scheme in the future?

Under the new franchise, rail travel in the central belt has the potential to be more attractive as a result of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme, or EGIP. However, it will be significantly less attractive during construction if the Winchburgh tunnel is closed. Can the minister confirm that, as reported, the Winchburgh tunnel will be closed for three months, and will he say whether compensation payments will be made to the franchise holder as a result?

What work was done by the Government, as far as legally possible, prior to the pre-qualification questionnaires to encourage a non-profit bid for the franchise?

1. To ask the Scottish Government when Transport Scotland received Aecom’s initial recommendations on public transport infrastructure options relating to Glasgow airport. (S4O-02342)

Regarding the delay in publishing that report, it was reported that initial findings were given to Transport Scotland as early as April. That came alongside news that the last plot of Glasgow airport rail link land was sold back to the original owner for £50,000, which, at almost £800,000 less than they were originally paid, highlights the folly of the Government’s scorched-earth policy on GARL. What cumulative loss was made by the Government in disposing of land that had been purchased for the GARL project?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides to the private housing sector. (S4O-02264)

I assume that the Government is aware of the recent Bank of Scotland report on second steppers. What support can the Government offer to second steppers who wish to move on from their first property, potentially to start a family, but who face difficulties in selling their home due to a lack of offers and a reduction in equity caused by a reduction in house prices?

As a number of members have said, Scotland is often tagged as the sick man of Europe. We have among the worst levels of obesity in the developed world, and an increase in physical activity is key to improving the health of the people of our nation and providing our young people with a better chance of a healthier life. Figures suggest that just under 2,500 people in Scotland die prematurely every year as a consequence of physical inactivity. Levels of heart disease, stroke, colon cancer and non-insulin dependent diabetes could be significantly reduced if activity was increased. The chief medical officer Harry Burns confirmed that when he said: “improving physical activity even by a small proportion will reduce levels of heart attack and stroke.” Over the past few years, Scotland has hosted and participated in some once-in-a-lifetime sporting events. North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council hosted the 45th international children’s games in 2011, in which 13,000 competitors and coaches, representing 77 cities in 33 countries worldwide, made their way through the central belt. The world’s eyes were fixed on London last year, as Scottish athletes, as part of team GB, achieved mighty feats in the Olympic and Paralympic games. We look forward to Glasgow hosting the Commonwealth games in 2014, which will bring athletes from across the globe to Scotland. I am sure that we all hope that Glasgow is also successful in its bid for the 2018 youth Olympics. We send the bid our full support from the chamber this afternoon. Those events capture the heart of the nation. Figures show that thousands of Scots—young and old—increased their levels of activity post Olympics, whether that was swimming, cycling or simply going to the gym. Our challenge is to make sure that that increased activity is maintained beyond the honeymoon period after the games. One of the best ways to drive up levels of physical activity is through a culture of regular exercise and participation in sport, and our schools play a key part in that regard. If we get our young people interested in a variety of sports from an early age and sustain their interest, we can fight the significant challenges that we face. As a councillor in North Lanarkshire, I saw at first hand the council’s excellent work in trying to involve as many young people as possible in a wide variety of sports through its active schools network. Crucially, the 23 active schools co-ordinators work closely with schools to improve the physical activity of all children and young people. There are hard-to-reach groups across Scotland, as Patricia Ferguson and Nanette Milne said, and I am pleased that councils such as North Lanarkshire are taking a targeted approach to attracting into sports more girls and young women, young people with disabilities and young people from ethnic minority backgrounds and getting them to increase their participation. It has been my privilege to go back to my old school, St Maurice’s in Cumbernauld, which is a sports comprehensive that encompasses the motto of “raising achievement for all”. The school recognises—as many members have done—that education is not just about academic success and uses sport to build self-confidence, improve attendance levels and increase attainment. I have been able to go back every year when the school hosts an annual sport awards ceremony. St Maurice’s blazes a trail. The talents of young people from across the school are celebrated in every area—from football to badminton, from volleyball to netball, from rugby to basketball, and from gymnastics, table tennis, swimming and dance to dodgeball. The school also encourages young people to participate in the community sport leader award programme. A number of senior school pupils, staff, former pupils and club and community coaches are involved in high-quality sport in the school. A key element of the programme is that students achieve their qualifications by delivering sports coaching to pupils in primary schools, and that then feeds into secondary schools. That takes sports coaching down to the earliest possible level. Important as schools are in developing our young people and getting them interested in sport, a lot of work is done by volunteers in clubs throughout the country. There are 150,000 adults who regularly volunteer in sport. They coach young people, help them to hone their skills and generate that passion for sport that Alison Johnstone mentioned. Volunteers play an essential role in developing Scotland’s future sportsmen and sportswomen and in improving the health of the nation. It is therefore important that the Scottish Government and sportscotland do all that they can to break down some of the barriers that volunteers face. The Scottish Sports Association’s manifesto for sport in Scotland highlights volunteers’ many difficulties with disclosure checks. Through the cross-party group on sport, many organisations and individuals have highlighted the time that it takes for disclosure applications to be approved and for certificates to arrive. That can often result in volunteers having to wait for considerable periods before they can commence their work, and it creates the very real possibility that many volunteers will be put off. No one disagrees that disclosure checks are essential for people who work with vulnerable groups, but the length of time that Disclosure Scotland takes to approve volunteers could reduce the number of available volunteers and so hamper the opportunities for young people to get interested in the wide range of sports that is essential. I agree with Joan McAlpine that a wide range of sports is needed, although I contest the idea that the south-west of Scotland may be the birthplace of curling. Kilsyth certainly stakes a claim to be the birthplace of curling. We have our curling pond and we have even named a pub the Kilsyth Curling Stone after our fine curling traditions. Perhaps I will go back to the historians in Kilsyth and ask them to check their sources. The need to support volunteers by speeding up the disclosure process relates to the point that was raised about support for volunteers to apply for grants. The clubs across the country that receive investment often have people with skills in completing grant application forms. It would be beneficial if volunteers were offered training in that area to ensure that grant support is spread as widely as possible. I agree with my colleague Patricia Ferguson on the points that have been raised about the cashback for communities initiative, which I think sometimes spreads the cash uniformly across Scotland rather than targeting areas where the crime that most affects the community comes from. The cash would have a double impact if it were invested in the areas where crimes originate, with diversionary measures to ensure that the cycle does not continue with youngsters. I welcome the Government’s plans to produce a youth sport strategy. I am sure that the minister will agree that the strategy must recognise the challenges that we face, which members have highlighted, and reflect the tremendous opportunity that we have in Scotland with the many sporting events that are coming up.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in today’s debate on Scotland as a science nation. I am an engineer by trade and I know the important role that the STEM sector plays in a modern Scotland. Scotland has produced some of the world’s greatest inventors, scientists, mathematicians and engineers—pioneers who have led the way in innovation and whose imaginative thirst for knowledge and technological advancement has helped to shape the modern world. John Logie Baird, Alexander Fleming, Alexander Graham Bell and James Watt are just a few of the people who paved the way for the scientists, engineers, inventors and mathematicians of today—although it should be noted that, as Mr Findlay pointed out, the top 10 list of scientists contains no females. That is a point to which I will return. Science plays a pivotal economic role in Scotland and will continue to do so. It is predicted that the energy sector alone will create between 5,200 and 9,500 jobs per year to 2020. It is important that we do everything in our power to promote science in order to make it fun, interesting and accessible. Places like Our Dynamic Earth in Edinburgh, the Glasgow Science Centre, the Sensation Science Centre in Dundee and the Satrosphere science centre in Aberdeen do excellent jobs in presenting science differently, thereby capturing the imaginations and interest of aspiring scientists, young and old. As excellent as those facilities are, and as welcome as the Scottish Government’s support for the 18 science festivals that will be held in Scotland this year is, a lot more needs to be done. The real question that faces the Government is how to bridge the gap in science learning across Scotland in order to ensure that young people in the less-affluent communities have access to good-quality science education in schools, and to broaden the appeal of science and technology to females as much as to males. It is important that ministers work closely with local authorities to ensure that primary and secondary schools have the necessary equipment to provide a positive learning experience from an early age. It is equally important that guidance is given to teachers, particularly at primary school level, on science teaching. Last year the Government-commissioned science and engineering education advisory group expressed “major concern” at the lack of confidence among primary teachers when it comes to teaching science. I also have a number of concerns about the Government’s strategy in respect of colleges—a matter that I have raised in the chamber repeatedly. The Government’s science and engineering education advisory group highlights that “Provision in science and engineering is resource intensive and therefore vulnerable to cuts in expenditure, which presents a threat to expensive laboratory and workshop-based facilities.” By cutting college sector funding, the Scottish Government risks the quality of science teaching in our further education centres. Furthermore, with the forced merger of colleges, including two in North Lanarkshire, the Government will make it more difficult for students to access courses locally. As I said earlier—and as has been mentioned by previous speakers—the Scottish Government must do more to remove the barriers that face women who seek to work in the sciences or engineering. When I was studying mechanical engineering at university, I was in a class of about 120 students, of whom about 10 were female. That is less than 10 per cent of women in a class that was studying for a profession that has perhaps the best job opportunities and growth in Scotland—as was highlighted earlier through the projected job figures in the energy sector alone.

There is not necessarily a lack of role models, but I agree that a list of identified role models who might inspire young people does not come to mind easily. We have also to challenge supermarkets and other retailers on how they market materials for youngsters. Only recently, Tesco was challenged on the fact that its toys for boys section contained a chemistry kit; apparently, Tesco decided that the toy was fit only for young boys and was not appropriate for young girls. That is something practical that we could do to challenge the problem. If the number of women who started my university course was bad, the number who actually graduated was even worse. Of the 120 students who began the course, only three females graduated at the end of the four or five years. The picture did not change when I entered employment. In the company that I worked for, which manufactured crushers and screeners for the demolition and quarrying industry, only one of the approximately 50 staff in the design room was female, and on the factory floor there was only one female employee—a health and safety officer—among hundreds of skilled male technicians. That is not to say that the company had a poor record of employing women; there were plenty of women in secretarial and senior human resources, finance and marketing roles, but there was a clear divide between the technical side of the business and the rest of the company. The Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology has recently been awarded close to £500,000 from the Big Lottery Fund Scotland for its step up! project, which offers assistance to women who are entering or returning to the sector. However, I think it appropriate to highlight that the fund granted the award because, according to the fund’s director, Jackie Killeen, “barriers and discrimination ... are very real”. It is therefore incumbent on Scottish ministers to take action to remove the barriers that women face. I welcome the commitment and dedication of scientists, engineers, mathematicians and innovators and hope that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to provide the best opportunities for future generations of scientists from all genders and backgrounds across Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in today’s debate on Scotland as a science nation. I am an engineer by trade and I know the important role that the STEM sector plays in a modern Scotland. Scotland has produced some of the world’s greatest inventors, scientists, mathematicians and engineers—pioneers who have led the way in innovation and whose imaginative thirst for knowledge and technological advancement has helped to shape the modern world. John Logie Baird, Alexander Fleming, Alexander Graham Bell and James Watt are just a few of the people who paved the way for the scientists, engineers, inventors and mathematicians of today—although it should be noted that, as Mr Findlay pointed out, the top 10 list of scientists contains no females. That is a point to which I will return. Science plays a pivotal economic role in Scotland and will continue to do so. It is predicted that the energy sector alone will create between 5,200 and 9,500 jobs per year to 2020. It is important that we do everything in our power to promote science in order to make it fun, interesting and accessible. Places like Our Dynamic Earth in Edinburgh, the Glasgow Science Centre, the Sensation Science Centre in Dundee and the Satrosphere science centre in Aberdeen do excellent jobs in presenting science differently, thereby capturing the imaginations and interest of aspiring scientists, young and old. As excellent as those facilities are, and as welcome as the Scottish Government’s support for the 18 science festivals that will be held in Scotland this year is, a lot more needs to be done. The real question that faces the Government is how to bridge the gap in science learning across Scotland in order to ensure that young people in the less-affluent communities have access to good-quality science education in schools, and to broaden the appeal of science and technology to females as much as to males. It is important that ministers work closely with local authorities to ensure that primary and secondary schools have the necessary equipment to provide a positive learning experience from an early age. It is equally important that guidance is given to teachers, particularly at primary school level, on science teaching. Last year the Government-commissioned science and engineering education advisory group expressed “major concern” at the lack of confidence among primary teachers when it comes to teaching science. I also have a number of concerns about the Government’s strategy in respect of colleges—a matter that I have raised in the chamber repeatedly. The Government’s science and engineering education advisory group highlights that “Provision in science and engineering is resource intensive and therefore vulnerable to cuts in expenditure, which presents a threat to expensive laboratory and workshop-based facilities.” By cutting college sector funding, the Scottish Government risks the quality of science teaching in our further education centres. Furthermore, with the forced merger of colleges, including two in North Lanarkshire, the Government will make it more difficult for students to access courses locally. As I said earlier—and as has been mentioned by previous speakers—the Scottish Government must do more to remove the barriers that face women who seek to work in the sciences or engineering. When I was studying mechanical engineering at university, I was in a class of about 120 students, of whom about 10 were female. That is less than 10 per cent of women in a class that was studying for a profession that has perhaps the best job opportunities and growth in Scotland—as was highlighted earlier through the projected job figures in the energy sector alone.

There is not necessarily a lack of role models, but I agree that a list of identified role models who might inspire young people does not come to mind easily. We have also to challenge supermarkets and other retailers on how they market materials for youngsters. Only recently, Tesco was challenged on the fact that its toys for boys section contained a chemistry kit; apparently, Tesco decided that the toy was fit only for young boys and was not appropriate for young girls. That is something practical that we could do to challenge the problem. If the number of women who started my university course was bad, the number who actually graduated was even worse. Of the 120 students who began the course, only three females graduated at the end of the four or five years. The picture did not change when I entered employment. In the company that I worked for, which manufactured crushers and screeners for the demolition and quarrying industry, only one of the approximately 50 staff in the design room was female, and on the factory floor there was only one female employee—a health and safety officer—among hundreds of skilled male technicians. That is not to say that the company had a poor record of employing women; there were plenty of women in secretarial and senior human resources, finance and marketing roles, but there was a clear divide between the technical side of the business and the rest of the company. The Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology has recently been awarded close to £500,000 from the Big Lottery Fund Scotland for its step up! project, which offers assistance to women who are entering or returning to the sector. However, I think it appropriate to highlight that the fund granted the award because, according to the fund’s director, Jackie Killeen, “barriers and discrimination ... are very real”. It is therefore incumbent on Scottish ministers to take action to remove the barriers that women face. I welcome the commitment and dedication of scientists, engineers, mathematicians and innovators and hope that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to provide the best opportunities for future generations of scientists from all genders and backgrounds across Scotland.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how the works associated with the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme will impact on services from Croy railway station. (S4O-02119)

I have been advised that, during the engineering works, Edinburgh to Glasgow trains will be diverted via Cumbernauld. When it was opened by the minister, Croy station’s park-and-ride car park was Scotland’s largest, with 915 spaces. What arrangement will be put in place to accommodate the high volume of commuters who use Croy station car park and to mitigate the potential impact on communities around the alternative Cumbernauld stations?

It is right that we acknowledge the strength of Scotland’s energy sector, the potential of renewable energy sources in Scotland and the challenges that are associated with renewable energy. The renewable energy sector’s potential is well documented, as is the Government’s commitment to meeting the equivalent of 100 per cent of electricity demand from renewable sources. The challenge is how we tap into resources and ensure that they are best utilised. The Government’s targets on decarbonisation of the economy contribute to the challenge. The challenge for the renewables industry and the Government is how to match supply with demand for electricity while using an intermittent source. Will the Government simply export surplus electricity at times of high supply and import Russian gas or electricity from French nuclear reactors when the supply falls, or will there be investment in a much more independent solution to the problem? Investment in the right electricity storage technology could equip Scotland much better to manage the unpredictable peaks and troughs in the renewable electricity supply and to match supply to the far more predictable peaks and troughs in electricity demand. One such technology is pump storage, and there is a proposal for an £800 million project at the west end of the great glen. It would be interesting to hear from the minister what stage discussions on the project with SSE have reached, particularly now that the Highland Council has decided not to object to the proposal. Perhaps the minister will also say whether the Scottish Government is focusing on other storage technologies. There is a growing perception that the renewable energy agenda benefits only the big energy companies and wealthy landowners and that local people suffer the consequences. Communities often see little or no benefit from large-scale wind developments, for example. People are also becoming more and more concerned—many people say that this is unfair—that the renewables agenda is pushing up their electricity bills. One in three people is affected by fuel poverty, so an issue that is already massive will get worse as earnings remain static and energy prices continue to rise.

This has been a short but good debate. I look forward to hearing from the minister how we can overcome the challenges that come with the tremendous potential of Scotland’s energy sector, in particular renewable energy, in a way that benefits the communities that we represent.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take to ensure that people have access to regular and reliable local bus services. (S4O-02006)

The minister may be aware that, in Cumbernauld, the First Glasgow services X4, X80 and 36 are being cut. Those cuts mean that the bus depot in Cumbernauld is no longer viable and is to be shut down. What actions will the Government take to assist the people of Cumbernauld who will be affected by those cuts?

This has been a good debate, which has on the whole presented a more accurate view of Margaret Thatcher’s legacy in the UK than has been presented elsewhere, including in parts of the press. I cannot help but admire some of the personal attributes of Mrs Thatcher that Mr Carlaw mentioned, but I will concentrate more on the political impact of her legacy. I was born when Thatcherism was at its peak. The impact of the 1984-85 miners’ strike was felt across the UK. Despair was rife throughout once thriving industrial communities, many of which would become derelict wastelands within 10 years. Coming from an area that is steeped in mining tradition, I know the impact that Thatcherism had on hard-working men and women. An article that I read in The Guardian earlier in the week about one miner’s struggle brought back memories of the tales that are told so often in places such as Croy Miners Welfare Charitable Society. That miner said of the Thatcher Government’s policies at the time: “She said we were the enemy within. We weren’t. We were just looking after our lives, our families, our kids and our properties, everything that we ever had.” From the start, the self-centred, individualistic nature of Thatcherism did not play well in industrial towns in Scotland or in much of England and Wales, and it ultimately led to a less equal and more conflict-ridden Britain.

I am not arguing with that. That is why I am proud of the Labour Government, which introduced the minimum wage when it came into power and helped to reduce that income inequality. It quickly became clear that the Thatcher Government was intent on destroying trade unions. Believing that they had brought down the Governments of Ted Heath and James Callaghan, Margaret Thatcher was ultimately victorious in curbing union power, and she used her victory to follow an unrelenting path that would lead to the destruction of our manufacturing and heavy industries in favour of financial sector and service sector growth, as was pointed out by Ruth Davidson. The result of that was that the rich got richer and working-class men and women in Scotland, in Yorkshire, in the north-east, in Wales and beyond were forced into poverty and hardship. As a Lanarkshire MSP, it would be remiss of me not to talk about Ravenscraig and the ripping apart of Scotland’s steel industry. Only now, 20 years after the policies of Thatcherism brought it down, are moves being made to redevelop the site. At one time home to 13,000 workers and taking on hundreds of apprentices a year, Ravenscraig closed in 1992. Similarly, with the closure of Gartcosh in 1986, the impact was felt not just by the workers at the plants who lost their jobs, but by the tens of thousands of other workers from elsewhere in Scotland who supplied materials to the plants and who lost their jobs, too.

I am sorry, but I am struggling for time. The fall-out from those closures dealt a blow to Lanarkshire towns that had the heart and soul ripped out of them and would struggle to recover. For those who were forced from Ravenscraig, from Gartcosh, from shipyards in Glasgow, from car plants in Renfrewshire and from mines in Ayrshire, Fife and Lanarkshire—as well as people in the areas that Christine Grahame mentioned, in what I thought was an excellent speech, for the most part—what hope did Thatcherism give? This point has been made by James Kelly and Jamie Hepburn: Thatcherism gave no opportunities to those who lost their jobs with little chance of getting a new one. Many of them were blacklisted through their involvement in trade unions and were simply left on the dole. Apparently, that was a price worth paying. By the late 1980s, not only had Scotland borne much of the hardship of Thatcher’s ideological direction, but its people were set to endure further pain from the roll-out of the poll tax by Conservative MPs a year before its introduction in England and Wales. That added to the anger of Scots, and non-payment was widespread. The stubbornness of Margaret Thatcher on the poll tax, as on other issues, including Europe, ultimately led to her downfall. Unfortunately, it was not at the hands of the electorate but at the hands of her own colleagues. Many have gone on record over the past few days to say that she saved Britain. The experience of people in my home town of Kilsyth and across Lanarkshire and Scotland counters that myth. She did not save the country; she almost destroyed it. She wrecked whole communities, ruined lives and polarized the very society that, as today’s debate highlights, she did not believe existed. My condolences go out to Margaret Thatcher’s family, who have lost a mother and grandmother. However, in terms of today’s debate, we do not need to remember the legacy of Thatcher or Thatcherism, because we still see its effects today. It lives on in David Cameron, George Osborne and lain Duncan Smith. The horrors were felt—and are still being felt in some cases—in towns and villages across Scotland and the rest of the UK. When we look out over the barren landscapes that were once home to hundreds and thousands of workers, we will always remember the ever-present stain of the Thatcher Government on our society.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish the findings of its consultation on the maintenance of land on private housing estates, which closed on the 11th June 2011. (S4O-01980)

The maintenance of common land on private housing estates is a big problem across Scotland. In Cumbernauld in particular, residents are purchasing homes without the full knowledge that they will be burdened with future maintenance costs for areas of ground, play parks and public spaces. It is not acceptable that the results of a consultation that closed in June 2011 have still not been published, despite two parliamentary questions and an oral question from Jim Hume. Parliament was promised answers early in the new year. How many other Government consultations are still outstanding?

On 27 February, I asked the cabinet secretary on what date the waiting list figures for Cumbernauld College, and the accompanying analysis, would be made available. He assured me that that would happen “soon”. I again ask him when the waiting list information and the analysis for Cumbernauld College will be made available.

Will the member take an intervention?

I usually start my speeches in the chamber by saying that I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and, to be honest, looking at the title of this afternoon’s debate “10 Years on from the Invasion of Iraq”, I continue to do so. However, I fear that it would have been more appropriate to name the debate “10 Years on from the last debate in the Scottish Parliament on Iraq”. I fear that the purpose of the debate is to allow SNP speakers to rehearse the same arguments that they deployed 10 years ago and rerun the vote, rather than speaking about the situation in Iraq 10 years on. Member might wonder why I have those fears, but they only need to take a quick glance at the SNP website and the press release on today’s debate to see why. The press release demands apologies and explanations from individuals who took part in the debate 10 years ago, rather than focusing on the real issues that face Iraq 10 years on. The title of the SNP press release speaks for itself: “SNP mark 10 years since Holyrood Iraq debate”. Are members so full of their own self-importance that we have to have a debate to mark the anniversary of a debate, rather than speaking about the real issues facing another country and its people? I find it unbelievable that this is happening on the same day on which a foreign leader has spoken to the Parliament about the positive contribution that Scotland has made to her country. If the debate descends into going over all the same ground that was discussed 10 years ago—[Interruption.]

—we will have missed an opportunity to state our support for the families of those soldiers and Iraqi civilians who lost their lives, to state our support for the troops who have returned to Scotland and are coping with issues relating to combat stress, and to talk about Iraq 10 years on from the invasion. We will have missed the opportunity to talk about what our country can do to contribute to the regeneration of Iraq, how we can support its citizens to make them feel more confident and secure in their country and with their country’s place in the world, and how we can support Iraq, as a new democracy, by offering advice from another relatively new Parliament and Government.

I am not saying that the situation in Iraq is perfect. It is unacceptable. A sectarian war is on-going; it reached its height in 2006, and I will come on to talk about that. I do not think that even the most ardent supporter of the invasion of Iraq would consider the situation today to be acceptable, but not even the most vocal critics would say that there have been no improvements in the country since the invasion and the fall of Saddam Hussein’s regime. There have been improvements, although their pace has been far from that which was promised at the time of the invasion. Kenneth Gibson raised the issue of sectarianism, which has blighted Iraq. Although we are no longer at the height of the violence as it was in 2006, far too many people die every week in attacks motivated by religion, and we have seen news of more deaths today. I grew up with more awareness of the situation in Iraq than that of most people my age. My mum had a childhood friend called Mae who was an Iraqi. It is hard to imagine that someone who grew up in the streets of Dennistoun in the sixties would have an Iraqi best friend, but there we go. Mae had to move back to Iraq when she was young and my mum would often talk about her friend whenever there were reports about Iraq on the news. My mum would often wonder whether Mae was still alive and hoped that she would be okay, since Mae’s family was full of academics, who were considered a threat to the regime. Mae survived and was able to move back to the UK after the Iraq war. She got back in touch with my mum and has spent the past two Christmas holidays with my family in Scotland. She has spoken at length of the conditions that the Iraqi people lived in under Saddam and about how things are now for the members of her family who still live there. Mae has spoken about the sectarian violence that plagues the country; the number of people who are living in poverty; the power supply issues; and the issues around access to clean water. Those are the issues that should dominate the debate. How can we, as a country, support Iraq to address some of those issues and help boost the confidence and pride in the country that is clearly evident from Iraqi people I have spoken to and that has been displayed in a number of documentaries and newspaper features marking the anniversary of the war? Air links to Iraq are still not well developed—it is only a matter of weeks ago that Iraqi Airways flew its first London to Baghdad flight, connecting the Iraqi capital with one of the largest Iraqi populations outside the country. Grid electricity is supplied for only around 12 hours a day—in an energy-rich nation—because of slow progress in rebuilding power stations. The promised construction boom, which was supposed to kick-start the regeneration of much of the country that was affected by the war, is still at the planning stage. The situation for Iraqi citizens as regards security is clearly not acceptable, but it is improving. Citizens now have access to mobile phones and the internet for the first time and it is right that we should mention these things, but 10 years on from the invasion of Iraq, the focus must be on how we can support the continued regeneration of the country and its people.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Like all other members, I support the Scottish Government’s ambition to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up. For me, Scotland was the best place in the world to grow up. I love my country and the people who live here, and I love my community in Kilsyth—that is the reason why I am a member of this Parliament. However, that is not why Scotland was the best place in which to grow up. I am sure that a number of other places in the world would serve as the best place in which to grow up, because the place itself does not matter that much; what matters is the support that a child gets as they grow up. I grew up in a family of four, supported by loving parents, grandparents and 11 sets of aunts and uncles—I have lost count of the cousins. My dad was a welder, and throughout our time as a family he was made redundant only once and found work again relatively quickly. I am extremely lucky to have grown up in a stable and supportive environment, and I am grateful to my family for that. People throughout Scotland will identify with my brief comments about the environment in which I grew up. It is unfortunate, however, that to some people my story will be entirely alien. There are children in our communities who are living in families that are affected by drug or alcohol abuse, imprisonment, unemployment or low pay. There are children who live with the effects of some or all of those issues, and there are children who no longer live with their families as a result of such issues. Ultimately, those symptoms all point towards one thing: poverty. In my region, Falkirk Council, North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council have child poverty rates of 17, 21 and 18 per cent respectively. Almost one in five children lives in poverty across the whole region, but there are startling variations at council ward level. In Cumbernauld North, 8 per cent of children live in poverty. That is far too high a rate, but if we take a two-minute walk over the footbridge over the M80 we come to Cumbernauld South, where the rate of child poverty jumps to 23 per cent. A two-minute walk takes us from a ward where child poverty affects fewer than one in 10 children to a ward where one child in every four lives in poverty. I do not doubt that the children in areas that are affected by poverty live in loving and caring families, but they cannot help but be affected by the stress and strain that their parents or guardians must be under as they try to provide for them, particularly if they are dealing with issues such as drug or alcohol abuse or imprisonment, which often blight families and communities in such areas. I support the Labour amendment, because it recognises that we need targeted, intensive support and investment for children who are living in poverty. The most effective way of providing that support—as is reflected in the motion and all the amendments, in different ways—is through early intervention. We know that the longer we leave things and the older a child in poverty becomes, the harder it is to reverse the effects of the inequality between that child and one who has a relatively affluent lifestyle. Poverty affects a child’s health and wellbeing and it dramatically affects healthy life expectancy. Educational attainment is also affected—the very thing that can equalise the opportunities for children, whether or not they are born into poverty. The cycle of poverty is perpetuated for entire communities, because the attainment levels of children who have grown up in poverty are lower on average, as is the number of such children who go on to university. Opportunities to get highly skilled, highly paid work are, to a large extent, limited to people whose parents were able to follow such a path. It is just not acceptable that health, life expectancy, educational attainment and opportunity can be determined to such a large extent in a community that I represent by the side of a bridge someone grows up on. I welcome the Government’s stated aim of speeding up the pace of change and the initiatives that are in place, but there cannot be any complacency. Those programmes will have to evolve and be refreshed, in line with what my colleague Neil Bibby said regarding getting it right for every child and other initiatives. There is agreement in the motion and the amendments and throughout the chamber from all the members who have spoken so far that ensuring early intervention is the course of action that we should take. That means that there should be intensive support and investment for our vulnerable two-year-olds.

I thank the minister for the advance notice of his statement. We have seen a disappointing reduction in the number of armed forces personnel who are coming to Scotland compared with the number promised, and the Scottish Government is asking for clarity. What clarity can the Scottish Government give on the future of the armed forces in an independent Scotland and the civilian jobs that are associated with them? Figures today show that, as part of the UK, overall spending per head in Scotland is £1,197 higher than in the rest of the UK. In John Swinney’s leaked Scottish Government document on the future finances of an independent Scotland—

The statement says—and I quote: “I have made clear to the Defence Workstream that a much lower budget must be assumed”. Despite the public rhetoric, can the minister give a categorical assurance that the budget for a Scottish defence force will not be subjected to the savage cuts that John Swinney has suggested in the leaked document? Why is the SNP saying one thing in public and another in private? [Interruption.]

Does the Scottish Government expect special forces personnel to automatically transfer to Scottish armed forces? Some have expressed reservations about the deployment, specialist training and promotion opportunities that will be available to them. If there is no significant transfer of special forces personnel to a Scottish defence force, how long does the minister expect that it would take to recruit and train a special forces unit, and how long would key assets, such as North Sea oil rigs, be left vulnerable as a result?

5. To ask the Scottish Government on what date the waiting list figures, and accompanying analysis, for Cumbernauld College will be published. (S4O-01833)

The cabinet secretary has repeatedly stated that the waiting lists, as described, do not exist. For members to confirm or challenge that position, they need the figures and analysis. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the release of the figures as soon as possible is of the utmost importance to allow members to understand the waiting list situations in colleges in their constituencies and regions?

I agree with the sentiment of the Government’s motion; it is just a shame that the Government does not. The motion says: “the Parliament believes that access to higher education should be based on ability to learn, not ability to pay”. If that is the Government’s position, why is it pulling up the ladder to access higher education by cutting college funding year on year? While the aim might be for access to higher education to be based on the ability to learn, we know that it is actually based on two things: the ability to gain the qualifications needed to get into university and the ability to support oneself financially through education. Many people in my region do not have the qualifications required to go to university but they certainly have the ability to learn. I invite the cabinet secretary to Cumbernauld College to witness that ability to learn for himself. Figures released this month by the University and College Union have shown an east-west divide in educational attainment, identifying Airdrie and Shotts in my region as one of the three least qualified constituencies in Scotland. While we should aspire to a society in which attainment levels at school are not predetermined by postcode, the simple fact remains that colleges are the only safety net for those who leave school with few or no qualifications and want to go on to higher education. By reducing that college safety net, the Government is restricting opportunities for people in Central Scotland to gain the qualifications that they need to go on to higher education. How is access to higher education based on the ability to learn when young bright people from disadvantaged backgrounds cannot get into university? Those people have more than enough ability to learn but, for whatever reason—whether their childhood was affected by alcohol or drug abuse in the family, they are a carer for a parent, brother or sister, or they have been affected by imprisonment—they have not quite managed to fulfil their potential. Sometimes people simply lack the motivation at a young age to aim high and work hard. Those people do not have middle-class pushy parents with sharp elbows to drive them on and get them all the help and support they need. What they face in the first instance is a barrier to qualifications, not a lack of educational ability.

Those people are not being helped at the moment by the no-tuition-fees policy because they do not have the qualifications to reach university and benefit from it. At the same time, college funding is being reduced, which is taking away their opportunity to get those qualifications. For all the young people who, for whatever reason, did not achieve their full potential at school, access to higher education is based not on the ability to learn but on how well they coped with the circumstances in which they were born. For them, opportunity is based on birth and not ability. I do not believe that anyone in the chamber thinks that that should be the case, so I am genuinely confused by this Government’s cuts to the college sector and the SNP back benchers who cheered them. Colleges provide the opportunity for our young people and adult learners—particularly at a time of high unemployment and underemployment—to pick up the qualifications that they did not get first time round at school. As soon as this Government started reducing funding for the college sector, it started to reduce the opportunities for people from our working-class communities to access higher education. I said earlier that I felt that the ability to access higher education is based on two things: the ability to achieve the appropriate level of qualification; and the ability to support oneself through education. It is clear that this Government is failing working-class and disadvantaged communities on the first count. On the second count, the Government’s record of support for students from the poorest backgrounds is hardly one to be proud of. Previously, students could access a maximum bursary of £2,640 if their family had an income of less than £19,130. Now, students will be entitled to a maximum bursary of £1,750 if their family income is less than £17,000. That is a cut of £890 in the grant support to our poorest students and a tightening of the criteria, with a reduction of more than £2,000 in the amount of family income that qualifies students for the maximum bursary. How does that fit with the stated aim in the motion that access to higher education be based on the ability to learn? How does that approach fit with the previous SNP rhetoric about dumping student debt? As someone who was a student under the SNP Government—ever so briefly—I can confirm that my student debt certainly was not dumped. Anyone from a low-income family who happens to have the misfortune of being a student under this Government will have a debt burden that is sky high in comparison with that of previous generations. This Government withdrew the graduate endowment fee. One of the reasons given for doing so was that the fee had burdened students with an additional debt and had acted as a disincentive to accessing higher education. Surely by this Government’s own logic, the additional debt caused by a move from bursaries to loans and the restricting of the eligibility criteria will act as a disincentive to students from poorer backgrounds. I wish that access to higher education in Scotland was based on the ability to learn, but it is actually based on the ability to gain qualifications and a student’s ability to support themselves financially through their studies. The Government is failing students from working-class and deprived backgrounds.

Despite public opinion that is often to the contrary, I think that we all started out in politics because of commitment to our community and the people who live there. The planning system and planning reform are unlikely to be subjects of debate that will tend to excite us as politicians, but planning is a policy area in which the decisions that we take can have a massive impact on the lives of the people whom we represent. Similarly, a debate about planning reform will not generate massive interest from the general public, but an individual application will always create interest, whether it is for a development that is out of place in a community and which generates a high number of objections, a much-needed community facility that a whole town or village can get behind, or an unusual development—during my time as vice-convener of a local authority planning committee, I saw them all. The power of an individual application to motivate a community to act—to lobby for or against a proposal—is massive. I regularly met people who had had no interest in planning who were quoting the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 as though they were experts in planning law. The issue with people engaging with the planning system at the submission stage of an application, or sometimes at the pre-application stage, was that as soon as they started researching or asking questions about the process, they realised that the single biggest factor in decisions on an application was the development plan. People would often be critical as soon as they realised that. I would hear them say, “Why did nobody tell me that the local development plan was so important?” It may seem strange for a member of the public to say that, but in my role as vice-convener of a planning committee, I heard it over and over again. When people were being critical they would be critical of the council or councillors for not highlighting the importance of the plan, or critical of themselves for not thinking that something such as that would ever affect them. However, people generally lead busy lives and it is understandable that, just as not many people will pay much attention to this debate, not many people will pay much attention to a consultation about an abstract document called the local development plan. In any reform of the planning system, we should talk about the importance of the local plan in terms of the individual applications that generate so much public interest. We should ask people questions: “Does your community need more homes built for families and to support the local economy? Let your council know through the local plan. Is there an area of historic significance or important community leisure use that should be protected? Speak to your councillor about the local plan. Are you happy that a company is promoting a large-scale industrial site in your community? Would you welcome the jobs, or would you worry about the potential environmental impact? Find out what the site can be used for through the local plan.” That is the language that we need to use to engage members of our communities with the planning process but, at the end of the day, it costs money for local authorities to do that. A properly funded planning system is one in which the local authority has the resources that it needs to provide a good level of service to developers and members of the public, and in which both are treated in the same way. Often the developer is seen as a customer who pays a fee, while the general public are seen as an inconvenience. However, we must remember that, although only the developer pays a fee, often that fee is not enough to cover the cost of the application, which is subsidised by the taxpayer. That means that the ordinary person should be given at least the same level of service as the fee-paying developer; they should probably be given more attention, since they cannot afford to employ the services of planning professionals to develop their case for or against an application. That is why I welcome the Government’s decision to increase planning fees by 20 per cent. Councils are struggling through a harsh budget process, and making cuts to the planning service rather than in social work or education might be an easy decision for councillors to make. In the short term, that decision might not be unpopular but when areas miss out on vital developments that could stimulate the local economy because developers cannot get a decision on time, or when inappropriate applications are approved because planning officers have so many cases to deal with, the community will feel the effect of those budget cuts and people will start to question their elected members. Has the minister had any discussions with COSLA about the fee increase? Does he believe that the increased income will cross-subsidise other departments, or is he confident that a properly funded service will continue? I think that all members would like to see a well-run, efficient planning service, which engages with and takes account of the views of our communities in delivering places in which we would like to live and work. Such a service is possible only if it is properly funded. I welcome the debate and look forward to hearing from the minister about how he hopes to direct the 20 per cent increase that he mentioned into the planning service.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what its priorities are for culture and external affairs in 2013. (S4O-01666)

The United Kingdom Government will soon be offering high-end television tax relief to attract major production companies to the UK, but there are concerns in the industry that Scotland could lose out due to its lack of facilities compared with England and Wales. Will the cabinet secretary make it one of her priorities to ensure that facilities are in place to allow major production companies that will be attracted by the tax relief to base their operations—and to film—in Scotland?

I am glad that we are able to have this debate today on the Commonwealth games and I hope that we will be able to have another debate in July next year about the youth Olympic games in 2018. What we all hope will be a successful bid document was submitted to the International Olympic Committee yesterday and I congratulate Glasgow City Council on building on the Commonwealth games by bidding for other international events. Fantastic progress has been made on some of the venues for the Commonwealth games, particularly the Emirates arena and the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome, which are already open to the public and recently hosted the Scottish international badminton championships and the second round of the 2012-13 Union Cycliste Internationale track cycling world cup. I was lucky enough to attend the cycling event and the atmosphere in the velodrome was electric. Thousands of people were there to support some of the Olympic medal winners from team GB and I am sure that the cycling event will be one of the games’ main attractions. The venue certainly will not disappoint visitors from all over the world. Construction of the athletes’ village is also well under way and it was good to see a district heating scheme at the heart of the development, as John Mason mentioned. I have spoken about that repeatedly in the chamber and I hope that that sort of development will become the norm in future schemes, as a way of reducing heating bills and improving efficiency. The work at Hampden park to convert it for the track and field events and the closing ceremony is one of the big risks in the building programme, simply because the work is being carried out so close to the games. The Hampden working group has provided regular updates to the Public Audit Committee through the Scottish Government and appropriate plans seem to be in place, which organisers are confident of delivering. We have heard today that there will be increases to the security budget, and changes to that budget are not unexpected. The cost of securing the games was always going to depend on factors outwith the control of the Government or the organising committee. However, the Public Audit Committee should continue to be given regular updates on planning progress to allow for proper parliamentary scrutiny of the increased spending on security. Another major aspect of planning for the games will be the recruitment of the 15,000 volunteers who are needed. After the success of the volunteering programme at the London Olympics, I do not think that attracting those 15,000 people will be an issue; rather, the issue might be that many people who want to contribute to the games simply cannot because of the volume of expressions of interest. We have heard that the number of expressions of interest has already hit 40,000, and there is still time to register. Obviously, it will take a massive amount of time and effort to process applications and interview everyone who is interested in volunteering. I have registered an interest in volunteering and I hope that I will be one of the lucky 15,000. Perhaps members or those in the gallery who might be involved in interviewing already recognise me as a friendly and welcoming person. As Stewart Stevenson has already pointed out, we should ensure that the games are not just a spectator event. We need to plan for a sporting legacy from the games and ensure that people who are inspired by the events have the chance to take up some of the sports that they will see. Boosting physical activity levels can make a tremendous difference to people’s health and wellbeing—that was recognised in a previous debate in the chamber—and one of the most enjoyable ways to boost physical activity levels is through sport. Boosting physical activity levels in the Scottish population, particularly among sections of the public who tend to do little or no exercise, should be a key aspect of the games’ legacy. The Scottish Sports Association spoke about a “sporting legacy” for Scotland in the briefing that was provided for members in advance of the debate. It mentioned physical literacy, high-quality teaching for the two hours or periods of PE a week in school to ensure that every child can run, jump, throw, catch and swim—the basic skills that children will need for almost any sport—and encouraging a culture of regular physical activity. It spoke about volunteering, breaking down some of the barriers that exist and encouraging more employers to support individuals in their companies in volunteering. That will have benefits for the company, the individual and the community in which the individual volunteers. The association mentioned maximising the use of existing facilities. Members of the cross-party group on sport will know that opening up the school estate for affordable or, where possible, free community sport use is a particular hobby-horse of mine. A number of members have covered that issue. Finally, the briefing raises the issue of elite sports and asks that investment is continued in facilities and coaching to allow us to build on the tremendous performances by our athletes at the Olympics and other international events. The sporting legacy fund that has been set up will contribute towards achieving some of those aims. I welcome the £10 million that has been allocated to it. The fund means that areas outside Glasgow should be able to benefit from improved sporting facilities. Its key aspect is that bids should be community led. From my own experience of the development of a sports facility in Croy, I know about the benefits of community involvement in the design and planning of facilities.

Such involvement means that the facility will best meet the local community’s needs, and the local community will take pride in ownership of the facility. It is clear that there are challenges for the organising committee in delivering a successful games. However, a large part of our focus should be on maximising the legacy from a successful games by boosting participation in sport, boosting physical activity, increasing volunteering opportunities and improving facilities, as the motion states.

The minister has stated that advance works for the electrification of the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane line have been approved. Will the minister outline when the electrification work is due to go ahead? That is a vital component of a possible direct Stirling to London service run by Virgin that would potentially start in 2016 and would call at Cumbernauld station, benefiting my constituents massively.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I rise to raise a point of order relating to parliamentary written questions. On 5 October, I asked a number of specific parliamentary questions regarding the attendance and activity of Scottish Government ministers, officials and agencies at the 2012 Ryder cup. I received a holding reply from the minister on 2 November, which promised a reply to my questions as soon as possible. Subsequently, on 14 November, almost six weeks after I submitted my original questions, Clare Adamson MSP submitted a more general question in relation to the 2012 Ryder cup. Ms Adamson’s question was answered within two weeks, on 27 November. On the same day, I received answers to my questions, which simply referred me to the answer that was given to Ms Adamson. I find it disrespectful to Parliament and to parliamentarians that the Government chose not to answer my specific questions but instead to answer a more general question that was lodged by one of its own back benchers six weeks later. Presiding Officer, I ask that you use your authority to ensure that my questions are answered in full, without delay, and that you make it clear that the Government should answer all questions in a prompt and even-handed manner, and not using what I can describe only as a planted question to undermine the ability of Opposition parties to hold the Government properly to account.

Will the cabinet secretary collate the savings packages that the 32 local authorities will produce as a result of the finance settlement that has been outlined today, to allow his department to carry out a full economic impact assessment of them? Will he make that information available to the Parliament?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s debate. When I read the motion as I sat down to write my speech last night, I wondered where to begin in seeking to cover, in six minutes, a celebration of Scotland’s people and history, our food and drink and our traditional and contemporary culture. There is so much to talk about and so much will be happening on the day itself. Just the other week, the members’ business debate on Scotland’s film and television industry highlighted the excellent locations and production talent that we have here. That industry perhaps offers the most effective way for us to celebrate and showcase our traditional and contemporary culture to the rest of the world. In this year of creative Scotland, I am sure that our film and television industry will continue to flourish. Another area that I want to touch on is our food and drink industry, which we should rightly celebrate and promote as it has tremendous potential for growth and already contributes massively to the economy. Historically, our national drink has been the big-ticket export item, but recently a much more modern drinks company called BrewDog has been grabbing many of the headlines. Within a few years of being set up as a company in 2007, BrewDog was competing strongly in the international drinks market and had become one of the best-selling beers in Scandinavia. In 2010, one of the company’s founding members became Scotland’s youngest ever entrepreneur of the year. Scotland’s food industry has always performed well and has a good international reputation—as soon as we get past things such as deep-fried confectionery and other caricatures of the Scottish diet—because of our wide range of high-quality produce. For example, Scotland’s restaurant sector has successfully blended historical and contemporary influences. With immigration from Europe and Asia, inevitably restaurants have popped up that reflect the cooking styles and foods used by other cultures, but one does not have to look too closely at the menus of our Italian and Indian restaurants and Spanish tapas bars to see the Scottish influence on their cuisine and how they have been successfully blended. As a country, we also have a rich sporting history to celebrate. In football, the Scottish cup is the world’s oldest national trophy and was first contested in 1873. Although the national team often fails to live up to the expectations of a sometimes sport-obsessed nation, our domestic teams often punch above their weight in European competitions. Aberdeen, Celtic and Rangers have all achieved notable success. On that front, some of us—those of a certain persuasion—can only hope that history might repeat itself at Wembley next May. People say that Scotland’s national sport is football, but I worry that it has moved on to become complaining about football. Our national pastime seems to be to complain about the performance of the Scotland football team rather than to become more active and involved in the sport. So much time and column inches are dedicated to debating issues about the Scotland team rather than boosting the levels of physical activity to what we have historically known in Scotland. I hope that the Olympics and a successful Commonwealth games will provide both the inspiration and the facilities that many people need. The motion mentions the launch of book week Scotland, Scotland’s first celebration of reading, which takes place around St Andrew’s day and which will contribute to the celebration of Scotland’s traditional and contemporary culture. Last night, there was an event in Cumbernauld library—unfortunately, I was unable to attend—at which Harry the Polis, or Harry Morris, gave readings from a series of books. Harry, who calls himself an “observer of life”, was a police officer in Glasgow and Strathclyde for 30 years. I have read some of his funny short stories about situations that he found himself in during his time in the job, so I am sure that it was a fantastic night in Cumbernauld and a great way to start book week Scotland. Book week Scotland and the local events that are planned for the next few weeks highlight the importance of our local libraries to documenting our people and history and making it possible for everyone in the community to research that, regardless of the ability to access the internet, which many of us take for granted. The other month, I attended an event in Kilsyth library that showcased the contribution that ordinary people from Scotland made to the international brigades that went to fight fascism in the Spanish civil war. That local demonstration was enough to stimulate debate and to start people researching to find out whether anyone from Kilsyth joined the international brigades. A number of local people have been identified and work has started to erect a memorial to them in Kilsyth. Without the local library as a hub for that sort of activity in historical documentation and research, it would have been impossible for us to come together as a community for the project. I highlight the contribution that our libraries and their staff make to celebrating our people, history and culture.

I am not aware of which is the oldest competition in history, but I understand that the Scottish cup is the original trophy and that, as such, it is the oldest trophy that is played for in world football.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress the Scottish studies working group has made in promoting opportunities to learn British Sign Language in schools. (S4O-01520)

The minister will know that students in our schools are under pressure to study courses to achieve formal qualifications, whether that is for the purposes of employability or going to college or university. Will there be a qualification attached to the opportunity to learn—and learn about—British Sign Language?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on business tourism. Tourism in general has been targeted as a growth industry in Scotland, particularly in the run-up to the 2014 Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and beyond. Within that sector, business tourism has a massive part to play and is already contributing more than £800 million a year to the Scottish economy. Figures also show that business tourism visitors contribute 50 to 100 per cent more to the local economy in spending than leisure tourists, as has been said, and they are likely to visit again on holiday if they have a positive experience. That highlights how important it is that the Government and local authorities work to attract business tourism here, to bring money into the economy immediately and to increase the possibility of return visits by making people welcome and their stay as comfortable as possible. Glasgow has been tremendously successful in attracting business tourism and has secured its position as the UK’s largest destination for business tourism outside London. That did not happen by chance; it happened because the administration at Glasgow City Council recognised business tourism’s importance to the city’s economy. Council leader Gordon Matheson chairs the Glasgow City Marketing Bureau, which underlines the significance of the bureau’s activities. When we consider the figures, it is easy to see why the council’s administration places such emphasis on business tourism. Conference delegates account for one in five hotel beds in Glasgow.

The SECC is run by members of the council, so there is involvement by the council. Glasgow City Marketing Bureau markets all Glasgow’s venues, so naturally there is involvement, particularly given that such a high-profile council leader is at the forefront of activity. Glasgow has been successful in bidding for funding from the conference bid fund that the Government unveiled this year. The £2 million fund was set up with the aim of making Scotland more competitive in the international conference market and is open for bids to attract conferences that relate to one of the Government’s 12 target sectors. Glasgow has been able to secure seven major domestic and international conferences, which will bring into the city almost 17,000 visitors from around the world, account for about 80,000 hotel room nights and contribute a massive £27 million to the city’s economy. The conferences were won in an extremely competitive international market. Glasgow had to beat off competition from venues across the world, including Paris, San Francisco and Tokyo—the city is in illustrious company. The initial investment of £2 million in the conference bid fund has proven to be valuable. The minister illustrated with his coin trick just how valuable business tourism is. I am sure that other authorities will benefit from the funding and expertise that are on offer. As members have said, some authorities have already benefited. Aberdeen City Council is making great strides in attracting business tourism. As the Labour amendment says, the council has committed to paying off “the accumulated £26.2 million debt of the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre”, which shows the council’s commitment to business tourism and to growing international conference business in Aberdeen. It is important that the Government and local authorities work to increase business tourism, which brings an immediate boost to the local economy. It is perhaps more important that the experience of visiting delegates is positive, so that global organisations, trade groups and businesses feel confident about returning to Scotland to hold conferences or do business and delegates choose to come back here on holiday. That means that when, at a conference or convention, we have a captive audience of people who would not ordinarily visit Scotland, we must realise all possible promotional opportunities. That includes the friendly welcome at the hotel or venue, promotional material at the conference, good Scottish cuisine and easy access to recreational activities outside the conference. I hope that all conference delegates in Glasgow this month are made aware of the excellent shopping facilities in the city centre, as Christmas approaches. The Government also needs to ensure that journeys are convenient and comfortable and that transport connections are as seamless as possible. Our airports need to be directly connected to our cities. Since the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link, the Government has not come up with an effective alternative solution for linking the airport with the city centre. I do not want to end on a negative note, so I finish by praising the Government for its commitment to the business tourism sector and the £2 million bid fund. However, there is more to do to improve transport and ensure that delegates come back to Scotland again and again.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this afternoon’s debate and congratulate Nigel Don on securing it. I have grown up watching talented Scots flying the flag proudly for Scotland in film and television, on screen and at the other side of the camera. At the same time, Scotland offers the perfect location for production companies, from its beautifully scenic Highlands and lowlands to its bustling cities. Our country’s natural beauty has served and continues to serve as the perfect location. The fact that Scotland’s film and television industry is so diverse is a testament to the talent of our directors, producers, writers and actors. It acts as a beacon, spreading Scotland’s story across the globe, whether that is through fiction or non-fiction. Films such as “Brave” show Scotland’s Highlands as a deeply mythical and magical place. Films such as “Trainspotting”—one of my favourite films of all time—display the harsh realities of life facing young people in cities such as Edinburgh and Glasgow at the height of economic depression. “The Angels’ Share”, which was mentioned earlier, shows us all the hilarity of the Glasgow patter and after all that laughter we can always look to the Disney classic, “Greyfriars Bobby”, if we want a film that will just tug gently on the heartstrings. Nigel Don’s motion highlights the upcoming transformation of the classic 1932 Lewis Grassic Gibbon novel, “Sunset Song”, into film. The novel depicts the hardship that was faced by the working classes one hundred years ago. Scheduled to be shot on location here and in Sweden, I have no doubt that the film will capture the hearts of many. More and more often, Scotland is playing host to directors and producers who see what Scotland has to offer. A certain Mr Bond has made his way back home to Scotland on four occasions, in a number of different guises—most recently in the box office smash, “Skyfall”. We were all captivated, too, when just last year Glasgow was transformed into zombie-occupied Philadelphia for the Brad Pitt blockbuster “World War Z”, which is set for release this year. That is an example of how local authorities can open up cities as production sets and invite film-makers to Scotland. Scotland’s actors are taking the world by storm too. As mentioned earlier, household names such as Gerard Butler, Kelly Macdonald, David Tennant, Robbie Coltrane, James McAvoy, Ewan McGregor, and Peter Capaldi are all A-listers—or are sure to be A-listers soon enough. Our directors have also been mentioned and they have established themselves on the international scene, as well. Lynne Ramsay, Paul McGuigan and Kevin Macdonald have already had international success and will, I am sure, have more. A great deal of progress is being made within the Scottish film industry and it is important that it continues to grow and develop. 2012 is the year of creative Scotland and it is important that the Scottish Government supports, where it can, the continued development of our film industry along with local authority partners—such as Glasgow in the case of “World War Z”. So often, a country of our size can get tarred with a certain stereotype; there are people in pockets of the world who believe that Scotland is full of kilt wearers who have an unhealthy obsession with whisky and a little animal known as a haggis. Sometimes the film industry perpetuates that myth, but it has also been instrumental in showing the talents, the creativity, the skilfulness and the beauty that Scotland has to offer. I close with a remark from one of the directors whom I spoke about earlier, Kevin Macdonald. When he was asked why he had chosen to film in Scotland, his reply was: “Scotland delivered the perfect mix of ancient and modern. Its breathtaking scenery was easy to find and easy to shoot. All-weather crews, modern facilities, epic locations and world class cities to return to in the evening. Why would I shoot anywhere else?” Indeed, Presiding Officer. Why would anyone go anywhere else?

In an article in The Herald on 5 July the minister is quoted as saying that one of the reasons for revising EGIP was the need to tie it in with a future high-speed rail network in Scotland. How will this new announcement impact on EGIP and is the minister still committed to seeing the future phases of EGIP implemented as previously stated?

6. To ask the Scottish Government on what date the “exceptional circumstances” arose that the Lord Advocate refers to in his letter to Ruth Davidson of 30 October 2012 relating to legal advice on an independent Scotland’s membership of the European Union. (S4O-01441)

I thank the Lord Advocate for that answer. What was the legal barrier to allowing the Scottish Government to reveal to Parliament that no legal advice had been sought on continued EU membership, given that the agreement that he mentions has no legal basis and that no legislation has been passed in either Parliament? In legal terms, how did the signing of the agreement create the “exceptional circumstances” outlined in the letter to Ruth Davidson? Does the Lord Advocate agree that the three points stated in his letter to Ruth Davidson were valid on 4 March this year and that, on that basis, if asked, he would have been able to give the Scottish Government permission to disclose that no legal advice had been sought on continued membership of the EU?

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on securing today’s debate on presumed consent. It is a subject about which I feel strongly. I will be speaking today mainly from my very personal experience of the present organ donation system and I will discuss the tremendous impact that I believe moving to a system of presumed consent could have on the lives of those on the transplant waiting lists, and on their families. Almost five years ago to the day, a man was given the phone call that he had been waiting on for more than 10 years. He was called and told that a heart was available for him and that he should come into hospital to prepare for his transplant operation. He had taken ill 10 years before, as I said, and had been struggling with the diagnosed heart condition ever since, with his health gradually deteriorating all the time. That man and his family made the trip to the hospital and said their goodbyes on the Saturday night, full of hope that the operation would lead to a much better quality of life. Unfortunately that was not the case. After the operation he was placed in intensive care, as expected, but the hoped-for recovery just did not happen. I do not feel that the fact that he did not recover was a result of a failing in the care that he received from the NHS consultants who carried out the operation or the intensive care nurses, who sat vigilantly by his bedside 24/7 during the recovery period. The reason he did not recover was because his kidneys and other organs failed as a result of having had to work harder in the previous 10 years to compensate for the heart condition, and they just were not strong enough to cope with the operation. A matter of days after the surgery, he died at the age of just 47—a young man given the average age of death. He left behind a wife and a family of four children—two boys and two girls—the oldest of whom was 22 and the youngest of whom lost her dad at the age of 13. Today, he would have been 52 and would have been so proud to meet his first grandson, Charlie, who was born just a few months ago. That is just one of the many family milestones missed over the past five years, and there will be many more in the years to come when his presence will be sorely missed. Of course, it is naive to expect everyone to survive a major heart operation such as a heart transplant, but it is common sense that, for the person to be given the best chance of survival, they should have the operation as soon as possible after they have been placed on the waiting list. That is where the debate comes in. If we can follow the lead of the Welsh Government and push for a system of presumed consent—a system for which there is broad support in the chamber, albeit that some people have concerns about how that would be worked through, although I think that those can be overcome—we can immediately boost the number of organs that are available for transplant, so that people will get access to operations sooner and, put simply, we can save lives. I pay tribute to the Evening Times for the fantastic work that it has done through its campaign for an opt-out system. During the campaign, it has highlighted research—as have others today—that shows that, although 90 per cent of people are in favour of organ donation, less than half of the population are on the organ donor register. Speaking personally—and echoing a point that was made by Mr Stevenson—I think that the only thing that prevented me from going on the organ donor register previously was my unwillingness, as a young man, to confront my own mortality. That is a silly reason, when you think about it, and we could overcome that by having a system of presumed consent. Some members will know whom I was speaking of earlier, and others will probably have guessed that the reason that I have been able to speak personally about organ donation is that the man I described was my dad, who was lost to me, my mum and my brothers and sisters at such a young age. That is why I feel so strongly about the subject, why I supported the motion, why I am speaking today and why I would like the Government to introduce a system of presumed consent in Scotland.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what combined savings local authorities are expected to make in 2013-14. (S4O-01397)

I thank the minister for his answer but I asked about 2013-14. While I understand that perhaps not all local authorities have made public their spending priorities for this year, most have issued a savings package that runs alongside the spending review period. Why is it that the minister and his officials do not have the figure for 2013-14 to allow the minister and the cabinet secretary to analyse the impact on Scotland’s economy of the cuts that local authorities have been forced to make?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Unfortunately for your timetable, my question is relatively brief. I will keep it so for the benefit of members. My questions follow on from John Mason’s question. What discussions has the minister had with his officials in Transport Scotland about the possibility of a not-for-profit model of delivery of rail services? Does he have any plans to promote that type of service in Scotland?

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing tonight’s debate, even if the timing is slightly unfortunate for those of us who are of a particular footballing persuasion. [Interruption.] For a split second, I thought that I was going to get an update, but it turns out that this piece of paper is information about a far more important parliamentary procedure. I signed the motion and stayed behind to speak in the debate, partly because I get numerous calls every day from companies telling me that I am owed thousands in mis-sold PPI, that they can magically write off all my debts, or that they can get me compensation for an accident that I have never had. Those are examples of the nuisance calls that frustrate us all, but, as I said, they are only part of the reason why I signed the motion. As Mr Dornan highlighted, there are much worse operators than the PPI teams that call people up and down the country. Just over a year ago, an elderly constituent phoned me, almost in tears, about a contract that they thought they had committed to over the phone. An alarm company had called and told her about various break-ins in the local area. The salesman said that the company would be happy to come and fit an alarm for my constituent free of charge to give her peace of mind. He repeatedly went over in graphic detail exactly what had happened to other properties in the area and what the people in those homes felt like after they had been burgled. Although I have no doubt that being the victim of a burglary is extremely upsetting and that it leads to people feeling unsafe in their own homes, there is no justification for representatives of sales companies to use scare stories to push their products. After a long phone call, my constituent eventually agreed to the free alarm installation and a date was agreed for it to go ahead. At the end of the call, the salesperson dropped into the conversation that an engineer would call round next week and bring the paperwork so that my constituent could sign the annual maintenance contract, which would run into hundreds of pounds every year. The conversation ended quickly. My constituent called me as she was worried that the engineer would turn up at her door and install the new alarm and that she would have to go ahead with the expensive maintenance contract, which she could not afford. I was able to reassure her that she had not committed herself to anything and that she could just call the company back, forcefully cancel any appointment that she had made and ask the company to remove her details from its records. Fortunately, that resolved the problem, but only after considerable upset for my constituent. Who knows how many others the company had been calling? Perhaps some of them even went ahead with the arrangement. A matter of days later, I happened to receive a call from the very same company. The caller offered me the same free alarm and said that I should take advantage of it because of the increasing number of break-ins on my street. Now, I know my neighbours quite well and I think that I would have picked up on any break-ins that had happened on my street. I was a councillor at the time, and like other councillors I received monthly updates on crimes that happened in my ward, so I was able to open the latest report and say, “I can’t see the crimes that you’re talking about. Where is your information coming from? Can I speak to your manager?” The phone was quickly put down on me, but I was able to pass the information on to the trading standards department. It pursued the matter, and happily that saw the company named and shamed in the Daily Record about a year ago, which saw to its demise. Such calls, which go beyond nuisance, can cause genuine upset and worry, and can persuade people to waste money on expensive services that are not as urgently needed as is suggested. I would like to see such calls screened. In line with the motion, I would welcome “a single, simple point of contact for any individual wishing to protect their privacy from unwanted calls, texts, faxes and emails.”

We have heard of lots of positive examples in constituencies across the country where community sport is thriving. Although those projects are already up and running, we have to use the enthusiasm generated by the Olympic and Paralympic games and the upcoming Commonwealth games to get more people to participate in sport. The health and wellbeing reasons for being involved in sport and physical activity are well rehearsed and widely agreed; the challenge now is to get out and just do it, and community sport can play a massive part in that respect. After what can be described only as a thoroughly inspiring summer of sport, lots of people want to get involved in sporting activity and we must ensure that our facilities are available and affordable. As Duncan McNeil pointed out, that will undoubtedly mean working with local authorities to open up the school estate. More important, we must support the people who give up their time to volunteer in our community sports clubs. Without existing volunteers—and if we do not encourage new volunteers—we will not be able to accommodate the increasing number of participants that we hope to see. As a result, we must incentivise volunteering, whether through the partnership between sportscotland and Young Scot that gives young volunteers points on their Young Scot card for undertaking volunteer hours; through encouraging employee-supported volunteering programmes that, as Nanette Milne pointed out, benefit the employer, the employee and the wider community; or through the community sports leadership award, which can lead to a national governing body qualification. The latter can help by giving people experience to use in Universities and Colleges Admissions Service applications to further and higher education institutes and can provide payback in the form of support for active school sports clubs during volunteering hours. In the examples that I have seen in central Scotland, there has been very high uptake of the community sports leadership programme, particularly by female students, and it has proved to be very valuable. As well as incentivising volunteering, we must also break down existing barriers. At the last meeting of the cross-party group on sport, we heard from different organisations that have had fairly big difficulties in securing disclosure certificates for their volunteers. As soon as one person mentioned the phrase “disclosure check”, there was a free-for-all, with organisations piling in to tell their own stories about the length of time that it has taken their volunteers to get certificates. Some might well have been put off as a result and are now lost to volunteering. I realise that disclosure checks are essential for those who wish to work with vulnerable groups, but the Health and Sport Committee and indeed the minister should look at Disclosure Scotland’s performance and the length of time that it sometimes takes to issue certificates to volunteers. As I have said, volunteers must play a massive part in increasing participation; so, too, must our professional sports clubs. As well as inspiring people to get involved, they should in turn get involved in local communities. Many football clubs in the lower leagues have already adopted and developed community club models, but I believe that the bigger clubs, too, can make a contribution. For example, in my area, Celtic Football Club, as part of a series of sports schools that it ran across the west of Scotland during the summer, held a Victor Wanyama skills school in the newly opened Croy community sports hub. It had a great attendance and stands as an example of how bigger clubs can encourage participation and get more people involved by using their big names or elite athletes. More skills schools are planned for the October holidays. I congratulate the committee on bringing this debate to Parliament, and I respectfully ask the minister whether she will bring forward a debate about the legacy of the successful Olympics and the upcoming Commonwealth games.

I rise to support the Labour motion. I have to say from the outset that, as one of the members who were in the chamber to hear from the Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs on the future of rail in Scotland on 21 June, I am disappointed that there was no mention of the reduced Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. The minister was even asked directly by my colleague, Patricia Ferguson, whether the project was on track to be delivered by 2016. His answer was: “we will take some time and come back with a fuller explanation of what we are doing with EGIP.”—[Official Report, 21 June 2012; c 10426.] When the minister gave that answer, I do not think that anyone in the chamber expected that “taking some time” meant waiting 13 days until Parliament was in recess, and that the “fuller explanation” was a £350 million cut to the programme. The chamber was the right place to make that announcement, particularly given the minister’s response to questions, and I am again disappointed that it has taken a Labour debate for the minister to come back to the chamber to answer questions on the project cuts. We often hear the term shovel-ready project in the chamber. After extensive public consultation, and preparatory work such as design, compulsory purchase orders and bridge heightening, EGIP could have been described as a shovel-ready project. Why, then, when the Government has an opportunity to invest £1 billion in capital spending in Scotland without impacting on its own capital budget, has the minister decided to cut the project by more than a third? Let us not forget, as mentioned earlier, that the project is being funded by borrowing against Network Rail’s regulated asset base—

What Mr Hepburn fails to recognise is that before the election his Government had a full budget settlement and a fully costed manifesto. It promised EGIP to the people of Scotland and is failing to deliver. That £1 billion of spending, from borrowing against the asset base, could have boosted the Scottish economy right now. Reports today ask whether EGIP is being cut because the level of debt accrued by the Government is becoming unmanageable. How many jobs will the new scheme create compared with the previous scheme? Why should the people of Scotland accept reduced ambition after the Government has stated that its aim is to invest in infrastructure to stimulate the economy? The Scottish National Party was committed to EGIP in its 2011 manifesto and, in particular, to “more-frequent and faster journeys between Edinburgh and Glasgow”. The business community, trade unions and independent public transport commentators have all expressed concerns about the cutbacks. Regardless of the SNP’s promises, the cutbacks continue. I mentioned earlier that there has been extensive public consultation, the preparation of compulsory purchase orders, and station and bridge heightening design work, among other technical aspects. Stirling Council has commented publicly about the large amount of money and the hundreds of its staff hours that have been wasted by cutbacks to the programme that affect its area. Is the minister in a position today to tell the chamber the abortive cost of reducing the programme by £350 million? I would like to talk about my area. The loss of electrification beyond Cumbernauld via the diversionary Falkirk Grahamston loop is of massive concern locally. I fail to understand who Mr Hepburn spoke to in Cumbernauld who commented positively on the cutbacks, because that is certainly not what I am hearing. The director of CBI Scotland, lain McMillan, has criticised the failure to electrify beyond Cumbernauld as it means losing an alternative route for when there is a blockage on the main line.

Cumbernauld commuters association has expressed its dismay at the cuts, which will impact negatively on the people and commuters of Cumbernauld.

Was EGIP’s inclusion in the SNP manifesto just a dream? Was it included as part of a “wish list”?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on implementing the recommendation of the Scottish studies working group that opportunities to learn Scotland’s languages should be promoted. (S4O-01183)

Will British Sign Language be one of the languages in relation to which opportunities to learn are promoted?

I welcome the opportunity once again to speak on the subject of the armed forces, veterans and the vital support services and charities that operate in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom. I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate. Like other members, I congratulate those who operate and support ASAP. I look forward to reading CAS’s report on armed forces issues in greater depth than I have been able to in the past half hour—I thank Christina McKelvie for giving me a copy of it. Being a member of the armed forces is immensely stressful, particularly during periods of armed conflict—stressful beyond anything that any of us can imagine. That stressful situation creates a level of commitment and an intense bond among service personnel that is unique to our armed forces in this country. I could only listen and try to comprehend when hearing from a soldier who had served in Afghanistan what it was like to come under fire and lose a fellow soldier who was as close to him as any member of his family. I can only imagine how isolated someone must feel when they are discharged from the armed forces, perhaps alone and without family, after having such a close bond with the comrades whom they fought alongside and possibly lost in combat. Going from living in close quarters with people whom they considered to be family—eating, sleeping and socialising with the same group—and being discharged into a community of strangers who tend not to understand military life and the bond that it creates must be isolating. As the motion states, the majority of servicemen and women make a successful transition into civilian life, but it is not hard to imagine why some of our veterans struggle. The transition to civilian life can put a massive strain on family life for those who struggle to adapt, and civilian life must be one of the loneliest places in the world for those without family. There is a simple thing that I picked up from one of the quotations in the reports. People in the armed forces take cooking for granted, as meals are provided at a set time. They rely on the armed forces to provide something as simple as their diet for them so, when they are discharged, they can end up being inactive and they might not be able to cook for themselves. Something as simple as that can be a massive issue. Therefore, it is vital that advice and support services are in place for former service personnel to adjust to living in mainstream society, and that we support plans to co-ordinate and deliver support and advice services from the private, public and voluntary sectors for ex-service personnel and their families. There are too many fantastic organisations that provide support and advice to ex-service personnel and their families to mention and to do justice to all the work that they do in a four-minute speech, but I want to mention one organisation that could give us experience of what being an armed forces reservist involves. SaBRE—supporting Britain’s reservists and employers—gives advice and information on the extra skills that a reservist can bring to an organisation and provides weekend training courses for employers who would like to experience the sort of training that a reservist gets. It regularly holds employer weekends. Members could go and experience first hand the sort of training that a reservist gets. I would be happy to pass on details to any member who is interested in going on one of those training weekends to get a small flavour of what our reservists do when they go away every weekend. I will close my speech as I opened it, by offering my support and congratulations to the armed services advice project and by congratulating Christina McKelvie on securing the debate.

11. To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it gives to national health service boards on consulting patients when changes are proposed to services delivered to patients at home. (S4O-01169)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that constituents in Lanarkshire who rely on incontinence support services delivered to their homes were given just over a week’s notice of, and no consultation on, a change to that service? Many of those who rely on the service are frail and elderly, and they valued the personal approach to delivery that they received until 1 June. Patients now have to call an 0845 automated number in Bradford and key in their patient identification number—their date of birth—before they can key in a product number. That might be easy for some, but not for the majority of those frail and elderly patients. Will the cabinet secretary investigate why NHS Lanarkshire introduced that service change without consultation, and is she able to tell me whether the same approach is being rolled out across Scotland?

Constituency MSPs for Airdrie and Shotts, Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, Falkirk East and Falkirk West have all campaigned for new stations in Plains, Abronhill, Bonnybridge and Grangemouth. Can the minister advise whether any of the £30 million funding will go towards building those new stations to fulfil the promises that were made to communities across central Scotland?

I note the statement and the national retrofit programme, but has the cabinet secretary considered the supply side as well as the demand side? Will he consider feasibility work on the retrofitting of power stations, particularly in relation to coal generation and implementing district heating schemes around power stations to reduce consumption and to lift those who live near power stations out of fuel poverty?

Like other members, I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing this debate on deaf awareness week, which will raise the profile of the week inside Parliament and, I hope, among the wider population. Before I came into Parliament, I had a degree of awareness about deafness. My great-grandparents were a deafblind couple and, when I was growing up, I heard stories about how they coped with everyday life and raising a young family. My great-grandmother would tie a piece of string to my grandmother’s foot while she was in her cot. Because my great-grandmother could neither see nor hear the baby crying, she used the movement of the string to alert her to the fact that the baby needed something. Hearing stories like that as I was growing up brought home the reality of the barriers that deaf people face. As we have heard, approximately 850,000 people in Scotland have some form of hearing loss, which equates to about one in six of the population, and the number is expected to jump to 1.2 million by 2031. About 5,000 to 6,000 of those people use British Sign Language as their first language. There is a lack of awareness and understanding of BSL among the hearing population, which means that deaf people do not have access to the same information and services as hearing people. Even where provision has been made to make information available to BSL users, there are often difficulties with arranging interpreters. In Scotland, the entire deaf community has to rely on 80 dedicated sign language interpreters whereas, in Finland, which has a similar population and deaf population, there are 750 interpreters. Access to services across the public sector is piecemeal. A recent report by Action on Hearing Loss on access to social services in Scotland highlighted the wide variation among local authorities on access to just one service area. Action on Hearing Loss surveyed BSL users regarding their experiences of access to healthcare. Of those surveyed, 61 per cent said that they had put off going to a health appointment because they were worried about communication problems; 68 per cent had asked for a sign language interpreter to be booked for a GP appointment but did not get one; 57 per cent had been confused about how to take their medication because no sign language interpreter was provided; and, most worryingly, 10 per cent had definitely taken medication incorrectly because no sign language interpreter was provided to help them understand the directions from their GP. When people start taking health risks by missing appointments or taking medication incorrectly, something has to be done. The Government and public authorities, in consultation with BSL users and those with an understanding of the language, need to draft action plans on how they will open up access to information and services. That would allow public authorities to measure their performance against other bodies and to share best practice across Scotland. The plans could be scrutinised by national charities and groups to assist authorities in making progress towards any targets that they set, and we as parliamentarians could scrutinise public bodies, particularly those that come under Government direction, to ensure that they perform satisfactorily. As Ms Marra pointed out, 90 per cent of deaf children are born to hearing parents, who tend to have limited or no prior knowledge of deafness. If their child then goes on to use BSL, how will they communicate with their parents and brothers and sisters to the same level as hearing children do? Unless the family has the financial means to learn BSL, a child can easily become isolated in their own home. I ask the minister to say how the Government plans to address the issue of families that do not have the financial means to take BSL classes.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what the public consultation process is when national health service boards are considering where to locate new-build community health facilities. (S4O-01013)

In Kilsyth, there are much-welcomed plans for the development of a new community health centre. However, along with existing health centre medical staff, I have concerns that there are accessibility issues relating to the preferred site. What can the cabinet secretary do to continue to assure my constituents that users of the new facility will be fully consulted before a final decision is taken on site selection?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate on a pressing issue. We have heard from various speakers that Scottish people who are obese experience a negative impact on their health and wellbeing. We have heard about the strain that they put their bodies under, the increased risk of developing heart disease and certain cancers, and the cost to the economy and the NHS in Scotland. We also know that Scotland’s record among developed nations is one of the worst for levels of obesity. An increase in regular physical activity is one of the key ways in which we can address the problem and one of the best ways of driving up levels of physical activity is through a culture of regular exercise and participation in sport. Our schools have a key role to play in that. When I was at secondary school—although it was not yesterday, I think that it was more recently than anyone else in the chamber—[Laughter.]

Mr Yousaf challenged me on which of us was younger and I won through on that, so I can say with some confidence that I am the youngest member in the chamber. When I was at secondary school, my classmates and I got two periods of PE every week. Those two periods were certainly beneficial to me, although I never needed much encouragement to take off my shirt and tie and get my shorts and T-shirt on—I promise members that I do not have a change of clothes with me, so they need not worry. That meant that although my time at secondary school predated the Government’s targets, if those targets had been in place at the time, they would have been met and my classmates and I would have contributed to another positive statistic for the Government. However, we must look at the education that is delivered in such lessons. When I was at school, the two classes in my year were merged and then split up into a boys group and a girls group. Roughly 25 boys would be getting ready for PE in the changing room when the PE teacher would announce his entrance by shouting, in his deep, booming voice, “Right boys—football!” There would be a cheer from most of us and then—rain, hail or shine—we would be sent out on to the ash football pitch for a 40-minute grudge match between the two registration classes. From first year to fourth year, I was involved in twice-weekly football matches between the C class and the D class. There was little else by way of PE in between. As I said, that was beneficial for me. I loved playing football and I still do. As members can imagine, in a west of Scotland school, most of the guys in my class enjoyed it, too. I cannot speak in a debate about sport without mentioning the fact that one of those guys was Darren Barr, who I imagine will feature for Hearts in the Scottish cup final at the weekend. However, not everyone enjoyed football. The same core of five to 10 pupils would forget their kit or have sprained ankles or sore heads, or they would just mill about the pitch to avoid a confrontation with the teacher. Those five to 10 boys would never have got into the culture of regular activity through their two periods of PE, as the extent of their physical activity was the short jog from the changing room up to the football pitch. Despite that, they would still have been classed as having their two periods of PE every week, in line with Government targets. I am glad to say that things have changed at my old school. After I left it, the previous Scottish Executive made St Maurice’s high school a sports comprehensive, along with two other schools in North Lanarkshire. That was done to advance the principle of raising achievement for all, which involved recognising that education was not just about academic success and, similarly, that sporting and physical activity was not just about football. Fitness motivators were piloted to introduce in the PE curriculum classes such as body jam, cheerleading and dance classes. The intention was mainly to encourage girls to participate, but boys took part, too. The provision of those classes marked a shift away from the regular netball PE lessons, which seemed to disenfranchise more girls than football did with boys. North Lanarkshire Leisure now provides free access to the gyms and swimming pools in the area for S5 and S6 pupils during exam time to help continue the culture of regular physical activity beyond S4. Active schools co-ordinators are driving up participation and performance levels in schools. At the recent St Maurice’s high school awards, the regional and national successes of girls basketball, netball and football teams were amazing to see. Their performance was at a much higher level than that of the equivalent boys teams. I spoke to some of the recipients of awards, who told me that they were planning on moving on to university and that they would join university sports clubs and teams because of the positive experience that they had had at school. What has happened in North Lanarkshire and at St Maurice’s, in particular, is a shining example of how to engage pupils in sport and physical activity by providing the time for high-quality PE teaching that covers a wide range of sports and activities, and which caters for all abilities. One of the getting it right for every child principles is that children should have “opportunities to take part in activities such as play, recreation and sport which contribute to healthy growth and development”. We should ensure that we have a new generation of young Scots for whom a culture of irregular or no physical activity is alien, because they have been engaged in high-quality physical activity that suited them and which they enjoyed.

However, we will not achieve that if we continue to count throwing 25 boys out on to a football pitch for two periods a week as a success. I look forward to hearing from the minister how the quality of physical education will be assessed as we move forward with the range of initiatives that she has announced.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate as Parliament discusses the legislative consent motion, unites—at least for now—on a cross-party basis and appears to be about to agree that the Scotland Bill, as amended, should be considered by the UK Parliament. The Scotland Bill is the culmination of years of work by respected academics, business, community and trade union representatives and Scotland Bill Committees in both Parliaments in this and previous sessions. I put on record my support for the work done by those committees. In the main, the bill reflects the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution. The Labour Party has continued to give broad support to the Scotland Bill but has tabled amendments at every stage to improve it. In the latest report of the Scottish Parliament Scotland Bill Committee, we welcomed the new changes while stating that it would have been beneficial if powers over air passenger duty were included and the limits on borrowing powers extended. While we feel that the bill would have been strengthened if those measures had been included, the Scotland Bill is still the biggest ever devolution of tax powers and responsibilities. It makes us as MSPs much more accountable and responsible for raising money as well as spending it. There is a simple test for the bill, which is whether it makes the Scottish Parliament stronger. I do not think that anyone could say no to that. There are measures that Labour would like to be included, but we support a number of the amendments that the UK Government proposes. There is the concession on national speed limits to extend the devolution of powers to cover all classes of vehicle. We would have had a very confusing situation here if we had had Scotland-specific speed limits for cars and UK-wide speed limits for all other vehicles. That was a sensible step to ensure that visiting drivers know that any changes in speed restrictions will affect them as soon as they cross the border regardless of whether they are in a car travelling on business or in the same car with their family, towing a caravan on a Scottish holiday. There is the power over drink-driving limits, which I hope will strengthen this Parliament. I fully support Mr Thompson’s aspirations. I hope that when the power is devolved, we can work towards a zero tolerance approach to drink-driving. We support the creation of the post of Crown Estate commissioner with special responsibility for Scotland, which provides clarity over the role and responsibilities of the new post and ensures Scottish interests will be represented in the Crown Estate. There are a number of other amendments with which we are content, although we await full details of the discussions between the Scottish and UK Governments on how certain issues will be overcome. One of the main aspects of the Scotland Bill is the additional borrowing powers that the Parliament will be given. Capital spending is crucial in this economic situation to drive the economy forward. There is a slump in the construction industry, while there is massive demand for social housing. Parents expect their children to be educated in buildings fit for the 21st century, and businesses need a modern transport infrastructure in order to thrive in Scotland. Perhaps most important of all, we have queues and queues of people waiting to work—graduates who cannot get a job after working hard at university; school leavers desperate for apprenticeships; and families struggling with the effects of unemployment for the first time in a generation. Although borrowing powers will not give us everything we need at the stroke of a pen on a cheque book, they will mean that we can continue to invest in vital areas in years when capital budgets are falling and can spread costs to years when we predict that budgets will start to increase.

I take that point on board. However, any additional borrowing powers would give us the power to boost the economy when it is lagging and when budgets reduce. Having the borrowing power would increase our capacity. We would be able to boost the economy by creating desperately needed new jobs and opportunities and, at the same time, by creating the sort of infrastructure improvements that businesses need to flourish and grow. That is how we will make Scotland an attractive place for business and investment—and for the job creation that comes with them. What would not be helpful is corporation tax competition with our closest neighbour. We know that corporation tax is one of the most volatile sources of revenue available to government, and the immediate impact of reducing the tax rate would be to take funding away from key public services in the hope of attracting businesses to Scotland to make up the shortfall. Even if that were the case and businesses were willing to relocate, would it necessarily bring the associated jobs and investment, or would it simply be an accounting procedure that meant that a company already trading and operating across the UK would simply pay corporation tax in Scotland? All we would be doing would be robbing Peter in the rest of the UK to pay Paul in Scotland. What would be the reaction from the rest of the UK? Would they sit idly by as corporation tax revenues flowed into Scotland?

Sorry, but I am in my final 15 seconds. As I was about to say, I really do not think that they would sit idly by. As soon as it could be managed, corporation tax in the north of England would be reduced to entice companies back over the border. Gradually, the reduction in corporation tax would spread across the whole of the UK in a race to the bottom, with the losers being the public purse and the public services funded by it. As I said earlier, the key test of the Scotland Bill as it stands is whether it makes our Parliament stronger, and stronger in the right areas. In my opinion, it passes that test.

I hope and believe that the Parliament will reaffirm Scotland’s ambitious targets on climate change and renewable energy, and I am happy to continue to commit to that position on behalf of my party. The renewable energy target follows on from the climate change target, and the reasons for tackling climate change are well rehearsed and become more apparent every day. I am proud that Scotland, through the Parliament, is leading the way in tackling climate change and I am happy to reaffirm my commitment to the targets that have been set. The motion that Patrick Harvie and the Green party have lodged is right: there is a growing perception that the renewable energy agenda is benefiting only big energy companies or wealthy landowners, while local people often feel that they suffer from the consequences. In the case of large-scale wind developments, for example, communities often see little or no benefit. People are becoming more concerned that the renewables agenda is pushing up their electricity bills. With one in three people affected by fuel poverty, that is already a massive issue that will keep getting worse as earnings remain static and energy prices continue to rise.

I am sorry, but I am tight for time. It is right that we should push for the creation of public energy companies that are publicly owned and publicly controlled and which deliver the benefits of renewable energy in our communities in the form of locally generated electricity, which is more efficient because of reduced transmission losses. The profits from the sale of the electricity can be reinvested in additional renewable developments or in adapting homes in our most deprived communities to reduce energy consumption, to help to lift people out of fuel poverty and to ensure that people do not have to choose between heating and eating. Regardless of whether profits are reinvested in further renewable projects or in energy conservation methods, the revenue that is generated is, due to the nature of renewable electricity generation, also renewable and can be used to continue to stimulate the local economy. That would be a welcome boost to engineers who are looking for employment, or to builders who are currently looking for work as a result of the lack of new housing developments. Alternatively, profits could be invested—as the motion suggests—in providing front-line services at a time of reducing budgets. Programmes to reinvest profits in new renewable projects or housing improvements can be supplemented by modern apprenticeship schemes, which many local authorities are running. As alluded to in the motion, it is hard to imagine a scheme that could contribute to so many Government priorities: reducing emissions and energy consumption; boosting sustainable economic growth; reducing fuel poverty; and increasing employment generally and youth employment in particular. That can all be done in a sustainable manner by a publicly owned and controlled company. It is enough to make me smile just to be talking about publicly owned companies in Parliament, although that sentiment might not quite be shared across the Parliament. I am glad that the Green party lodged the motion, because it has given us the chance to debate public ownership and the change in public perception that could be achieved if the renewables revolution was being driven by the public sector to benefit communities and not big business, with profits being reinvested in reducing fuel consumption and fuel poverty rather than electricity bill premiums delivering dividends for shareholders. I hope that the Parliament can unite around the principles of the motion and that members will also agree to the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack, so that we do not lose the opportunity to track the progress of the concept and possibly give members the chance to feed into the development at a future stage.

How many local development plans have been amended by reporters since the 2006 act was passed? Does the minister believe that the process is open and democratic when a local plan that has gone through numerous rounds of public consultation can be significantly amended by a reporter carrying out limited neighbour notification? Does he believe that the consultation on the examination process will address such issues of accountability?

When I was on a recent visit to Barlinnie, many of the inmates told me that they had joined the methadone programme simply to get through the boredom of the day. What measures will the cabinet secretary take to address that issue, particularly in Barlinnie, which, the governor tells me, has the biggest methadone queue in western Europe?

The National Library of Scotland is an extremely important resource for the people of Scotland, so any changes to its structure and operating procedures must be given careful consideration. Originally set up in the 1680s as the library of the Faculty of Advocates, it was formed as the National Library of Scotland when the contents of the faculty’s library were presented to the nation, together with an endowment of £100,000 from Sir Alexander Grant of Forres, because the upkeep of the collection had become too much for a private body. Officially established as the National Library of Scotland by the National Library of Scotland Act 1925, it is Scotland’s only legal deposit library, which means that it is entitled to receive a copy of all printed items that are published in the UK and the Republic of Ireland. As well as the collections that it has received via legal deposit, the National Library has acquired books, maps, music and manuscripts through gift, loan or purchase, and it has a wide collection of important items that relate to the history of Scotland, the Scots and our culture. It has a collection of more than 7 million books, 14 million printed items and more than 2 million maps. It also holds many ancient family manuscripts, including those of clan Sinclair, which date back as far as 1488. The library holds the last letter written by Mary, Queen of Scots, which was shown publicly to mark the opening of the new library visitor centre in September 2009. It holds a copy of the Gutenberg Bible, which was the first major book to be produced on a printing press; the letter that Charles Darwin submitted with the manuscript of “On the Origin of Species”; the Chepman and Myllar prints, which are the only known copies of nine of the earliest books to be printed in Scotland, and which were produced on Scotland’s first printing press in approximately 1508; the first pictorial survey of Scotland, which was published in 1693 by John Slezer; and, perhaps most important, copies of the first two “Oor Wullie” annuals, which were published in 1940 and 1942. They date back far beyond my collection, which grows every two years thanks to Christmas presents from my mum. The library is now a non-departmental public body that is funded by the Scottish Government, and it is also a registered Scottish charity. It is responsible for a budget of just under £15 million for the current financial year. The library employs approximately 300 staff, and it attracts thousands of people to the library and to the outreach programmes that are held across Scotland, including roadshows and support for local book festivals. On the changes that are proposed to the library, one of the key recommendations is a reduction in the size of its board. I know from the cabinet secretary’s evidence to the committee and her comments today that she is not in favour of larger boards, but I am pleased that she has committed to increasing the minimum number of board members from seven. A recent report for the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator indicated that charities with a low number of trustees are the most likely to fail and that those with nine members or more perform best. I am in a similar position to that of the committee in that I do not feel able to make a recommendation on what the optimum number of board members would be, but I am content that the Government has taken note of the report for OSCR, which supports having a board that has a minimum of nine members and the right number of people to cover the range of skills and experience that it feels are required. At the same time, I welcome the Government’s expectation that the board should represent broader society and the opportunity that there will be for the board to gender balance its membership and to increase opportunities for younger people to join it, to help drive forward a future digital participation strategy. Another proposed change is the provision for a ministerial power of direction, which has proved to be relatively contentious. I understand why the cabinet secretary favours such a power, as it will allow for proper audit and accountability to Government. The library is funded by taxpayers’ money, so it is beneficial to have a direct line of ministerial accountability. Regardless of that, the proposal has still proved to be relatively contentious. National Museums Scotland, the National Library of Wales, the British Library and the National Library of Scotland, among others, have all expressed concern about a power of ministerial direction and its implications for the board and the charitable status of the library, although I note that the Government took advice from OSCR, which confirmed that the library is exempt from certain aspects of the charity test. That means that the power of direction is compatible with the library’s charitable status.

I take that on board, and I appreciate that OSCR has confirmed that the power of direction would not impede the library having charitable status. However, the British Library cautioned against the overshortening of the arm’s-length principle, which it said might have the effect of discouraging potential donors. Neil Findlay made that point. Before I conclude, I want to touch briefly on the digitisation of future deposits. Books, journals, music and films are now produced electronically. As the committee report said, they are “born digital”—that phrase was new to me. One of the biggest challenges that the library faces will relate to how that new digital material is stored and accessed. If the library is to continue to be able to adapt to modern society, I should be able to access that material online at my fingertips, probably through a smartphone or a tablet PC—although I will not be using either of those in the chamber today.

That issue should be at the forefront of any changes to the library, and I hope that the cabinet secretary and the new board will give it due consideration.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. There is cross-party support for the motion and broad support across the Parliament for the bid that has been submitted to the UK Government for the green investment bank to be located in Edinburgh. That reflects the support that the bid has received across civic Scotland from council leaders, chambers of commerce, the renewables sector and academics alike. In the short time that I have been a member of the Parliament, the best outcomes have been achieved when the Parliament has been able to unite behind solving a particular problem or supporting a particular project. I hope that that continues to be the case with the Edinburgh bid for the bank. The green investment bank is the first of its kind in the world. Its location will become a focus for investment, expertise and leadership in the green economy. Already, 32 bids to host the bank have been submitted from across the UK. The competition is fierce, but I hope, as we all do, that with the support of the Parliament, the Government and wider Scotland, the Edinburgh bid will be successful. It makes sense to locate the bank in Scotland, given that we have almost half of the UK’s total renewable energy capacity. It should follow that a high proportion of the projects that secure investment will be based in Scotland. It also makes sense to locate the bank in Edinburgh, given that it is ranked as the fourth-largest financial centre in Europe, with 60,000 people in the surrounding area being employed in the financial services sector. In addition, Edinburgh is home to four universities and it clearly has the research capability to develop and deliver some of the projects that the green investment bank would be likely to invest in. Although the investment bank group anticipates that it will create only 70 jobs initially, against the backdrop of 60,000 people being employed in the financial services sector, those 70 jobs will still be warmly welcomed by people who are looking for work. It is expected that, in time, many more jobs will come to the city as it establishes itself as the financial centre for renewable energy. That will be another big boost for anyone who is out of work at the moment, even for people who live as far afield as Kilsyth, as I do, since the city is only a 40-minute train journey away. Locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh would be a big boost for the city and for Scotland, but the big prize would not be simply the hosting of the bank; it would be the concentration of renewables firms—and expertise—in and around the city, bidding for part of the £3 billion-worth of funding that will be available over the next three years. If the bank is located here and that concentration of businesses materialises, we can expect the local economy to benefit massively, with the result that we can start to overcome the challenges that Scotland faces in achieving the renewable electricity generation targets. One of the biggest challenges for the renewables sector is how to manage demand at peak times and what to do with the surplus electricity that is generated when demand is low. The excess electricity that is generated could be exported when demand is low, but that would not address the issue of high demand when the wind is not blowing. Large-scale electricity storage schemes will be required, such as the proposed £800 million hydroelectric storage scheme at the west end of the Great Glen that is planned by Scottish and Southern Energy. Such projects have massive storage potential, but they would have a significant impact on the landscape, and the availability of suitable sites is limited. The green investment bank could invest in large-scale electricity storage, which has been described by a respected American academic as “an energy game-changer, unshackling alternative energy from the constraints of intermittence.” Technologies such as compressed-air storage, battery technologies and hydrogen fuel cell technology will be vital for storing surplus electricity for use when demand increases at peak time. Investment in research and development is needed to create projects that use those technologies on the sort of scale that is required to store significant quantities of energy. Such technology is much needed if we are to achieve our ambitious targets for renewable electricity generation, and the funds that the green investment bank could provide, if it was located in Edinburgh, would be crucial. The bank could create jobs for engineering apprentices and graduates like me. Who knows? If things do not work out for me in politics, funds from the green investment bank might mean that there will be a job for me to move into.

I am grateful for that support. My career prospects aside, the funds of the investment bank mean that there is massive potential for job and wealth creation. I am still in touch with a lot of my colleagues from the mechanical engineering department at the University of Strathclyde, and I know that many of them have struggled to find work. Many of those people who are struggling to find meaningful employment are waiting for something to kick-start the renewables revolution in Scotland, and the locating of the green investment bank in Edinburgh could be that catalyst. I urge all members and the Government to continue to support the bid so that Edinburgh and Scotland can benefit from the obvious advantages and employment opportunities for our young apprentices and graduates that would come about as a result of the green investment bank locating in Edinburgh.

Chartered teachers make a positive contribution to our education system; that is what headteachers and the General Teaching Council for Scotland tell us. In fact, “Chartered Teachers can be a valuable resource to assist and lead other teachers in improving educational outcomes.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 22 December 2011; S4W-04603.] Those are not my words; that is what the cabinet secretary said in December. Despite recognising again today chartered teachers’ important contribution to the education system, why has the cabinet secretary decided to accept recommendation 19 of the McCormac review and cast aside the views of 75 per cent of people, who told the Government that it would not be in the best interests of school pupils, the education profession and the whole education system to abolish the chartered teacher scheme?

I draw members’ attention to my declaration in the register of interests as a member of North Lanarkshire Council. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, but I certainly do not welcome the particularly poor budget settlement for local authorities in comparison with the overall budget settlement that the Scottish Government received. According to figures from SPICe, the Scottish Government budget for the next three years has been cut by 1.3 per cent, 2 per cent and 2.2 per cent respectively, in real terms, compared with the 2011-12 level. I recognise that that is a challenging environment for the Government to work in, but I am concerned by the figures that show that it has chosen to cut local authority budgets by a staggering 3.1 per cent, 5.6 per cent and 5.7 per cent over the next three years in comparison with the 2011-12 level. How does the new local government minister feel about the fact that his department is being squeezed to such an extent at a time when the cut to the Scottish Government budget is less than half that level? The overall levels of cuts to departments, excluding local government, are 0.4 per cent, 0.1 per cent and 0.4 per cent over the next three years, compared with the cuts of 3.1 per cent, 5.6 per cent and 5.7 per cent to his department.

I am arguing for a fair share for local government, as are councils throughout the country. They want the share that has been passed on from the Westminster Government to be reflected in the budgets that are passed on to local government. That would be a fairer distribution for local authorities. The budget highlights just how little the SNP Government values local authorities, their staff and the services that they provide.

I want to make some progress just now. If we look at the cumulative impact of year-on-year cuts to local government, we find that local authorities will be £1.66 billion worse off in real terms at the end of the next three years. No doubt the Scottish Government will try to blame the Westminster coalition for that reduction, but it must accept that £1 billion of those cuts are a result of this Government depriving local government and communities of much needed funds. If this Government had chosen to maintain the local government share of the overall budget at the 2011-12 level of 34.45 per cent, at the end of the spending review local councils would have had an extra £1 billion to spend on maintaining services, boosting staff levels and improving local facilities, all of which would, in turn, boost the local economy. How can the minister continue to argue that this is a good deal for his department and local authorities?

I am not asking for preferential treatment for local government; I am simply asking that it and the communities that it serves get their fair share of the Westminster cuts. When we drill down into the figures and analyse the impact on North Lanarkshire Council, which covers a large part of my region, we see that over the next three years local services will have to be cut to the tune of £98.3 million in real terms. Of that cut, the proportion that is a result of the coalition’s cuts to the Scottish Government budget is £37.5 million. However, the Government is making a cut of over £60 million to North Lanarkshire Council. Does the minister really expect the people of North Lanarkshire to accept from the SNP a cut to their council’s budget that is almost double the cut being made by the Tories? Moreover, local authorities will have £220 million withheld from their capital allocations over the next two years. Although that money will be paid back—but not until years 3 and 4 of the budget settlement—local authorities that cannot cover the revenue costs of borrowing will have to postpone projects of local importance such as schools, nurseries or council houses and for the next two years the local economy will be starved of investment at a very delicate time of already high unemployment. Instead of being used to meet local priorities, this £220 million is being channelled into projects of national significance such as the Forth replacement crossing, from which my Lanarkshire constituents could have benefited from an increase in employment as a result of the steel supply contract. Now they face the double whammy of a reduction in local projects and a Forth replacement crossing made in China. For a comparison between that approach and what a Labour administration can do, we need look no further than North Lanarkshire Council, which is investing £150 million in its council stock to build over 1,000 social rented houses. That promise to the residents of North Lanarkshire will not be watered down to 1,000 affordable houses; the council will deliver 1,000 new and much-needed council houses while maintaining one of the lowest weekly rent levels in Scotland. North Lanarkshire Council has also unveiled a £15.8 million package to help 5,000 young people back into work over the next three years through a mix of apprenticeships and entry-level private sector jobs. Again, that shows what local authorities can do if they are bold and show the “good leadership and clear vision” that Audit Scotland has credited North Lanarkshire with. [Interruption.] Audit Scotland said that, not me. Local government and communities are not asking for much; they are asking only for their fair share. If this Government simply passed on the same cut that it was hit with, local authorities would be better off by over £1 billion and my area by £60 million. If we add to that constraints on local authorities with regard to maintaining police and teacher numbers and the fact that they will be unable to raise income through local taxation over the next five years, the only option is massive cuts, which will have a disproportionate effect on the families of both local authority employees who will be made redundant and those who manage to keep their jobs and end up stressed and sick because of increased workloads. Cuts will also impact on vulnerable elderly service users and children’s education. So much more work could be done on service delivery, capital investment, employment and regeneration if only this Government valued local authorities as highly as I do. That is why I support the amendment in Sarah Boyack’s name.

I welcome the Government’s ambitious target for next-generation broadband coverage, but the infrastructure action plan does not answer a number of questions about how the Government will deliver on its commitment. It seems appropriate that the term “grey area” is used in the plan to signify areas where it is unclear whether the market will be able to deliver. However, far too much in the Government’s action plan is left as a grey area outside that technical definition. It is particularly lacking in detail on the procurement strategy. Of primary concern to me is the current level of service that is experienced by many of my constituents in Cumbernauld, particularly those north of the A80—that is, the M80; the road has been upgraded, so we will wait and see whether the broadband follows. Normally, the service that many people receive is less than half what it is supposed to be. At peak times people are lucky to get the most basic access or any service at all. Worse, they are paying internet service providers a fee that is similar to the fee that is being paid by people in other parts of Cumbernauld and North Lanarkshire whose service operates at 10 times the speed. My fear is that the Government invests in areas on the basis of reported levels of service, rather than based on actual speeds. A doubling of reported available speeds from 20 to 40 megabits per second will not help the people who are struggling along on a fraction of the reported speed, regardless of their package and the equipment that they are using. As I said, many families who live north of the M80 in Cumbernauld are plagued with access and speed issues. People have told me about frequent outages and access that is often extremely difficult at peak times. A number of constituents who are required, or would prefer, to work at home find it impossible to do so. Enabling people who run businesses and people who work in demanding jobs to work flexibly when necessary would be of great benefit to them and to the wider economy, so I welcome the Government’s acknowledgement of the benefits of enabling people to work in such a way. It is vital that the Government emphasise extending working broadband services to Cumbernauld and areas that have similar access problems. There are limitations to upgrades, which will need to be looked at. Upgrading of exchanges over the existing copper network means that any beneficial effect will be limited by distance. The situation in Cumbernauld is particularly bad where there is aluminium wiring. The problems are not restricted to residential areas. A new company, which has just taken over a 45,000ft2 factory in the Westfield industrial estate, is struggling with broadband access. The company is planning to double its workforce, but the broadband problem could force it to move out of the area, taking much-needed jobs with it. There is a long way to go. I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that Cumbernauld needs improved broadband service. I hope that the siting of additional street cabinets and exchanges will bring the level of service up to standard, and I am optimistic that if progress is made, in line with the ambitious target that the Government has set, my constituents will be able to benefit from improved services. It is of particular concern to me that the infrastructure action plan states: “the 40-80Mbps target is intended to signal the extent of the step change required, rather than being a precise measure.” The cabinet secretary should set a definitive target and produce a clear strategy for how he intends to achieve it, instead of raising expectations with a vague statement. When my constituents get past the headlines they might be unimpressed by an unclear cop-out clause that is hidden in the small print. It is suggested in the infrastructure action plan that the market will not be able to deliver for nearly 30 per cent of homes, so I welcome the commitment in the plan to go where the market will not go by 2015. However, 30 per cent of homes equates to a large amount of people who have no access to next-generation broadband, and the Government has failed to spell out its procurement strategy in relation to its commitment. In the plan, Sweden’s “robust strategies and funding mechanisms” for delivering on its ambitious targets are acknowledged. Swedish planning was based on a high proportion of users having access to some level of broadband. The cabinet secretary should accelerate action on the issue, so that a full plan, which is as robust as the Swedish model, is developed as soon as possible rather than by the end of the year. Such an approach would allow options for delivery to be considered and decided on quickly and sensibly, to meet a firm target. Areas where the market is unwilling to deliver must be identified swiftly. The situation will differ from area to area. Specific solutions will have to be identified to tackle specific problems, for example in Cumbernauld, where the up-front figures do not represent the actual level of service. The digital programme office will need to ensure that it works in partnership with local authorities and communities to address specific access issues. A top-down centralised approach will be unlikely to address local issues efficiently. To guarantee next-generation access to people in rural areas will require an approach that is different from the one that is needed in urban areas such as Cumbernauld. Cash-strapped local authorities will require significant support from central Government to help them to deliver on local projects. It is of concern to me that local authorities, despite their best efforts and intentions, will be unable to meet shortfalls in central funding, due to cuts that are being imposed on them. I hope that the cabinet secretary will work constructively with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to deliver improved high-quality next-generation broadband.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in a debate on local government elections. I declare that I am a member of North Lanarkshire Council, although that will no longer be the case after the elections that we are debating. I am glad that the Government has acknowledged the importance of the local government elections by scheduling the debate and explicitly stating that importance in the motion. To sustain that acknowledgement of importance, we must talk only about the local government elections and not allow the debate to veer off into other areas; that diminishes the profile of both the local government elections and the debate. By focusing solely on the elections, we should be able to achieve the aim of the motion and our amendment and increase voter engagement, registration and participation. There have been welcome changes to the administration of the local government elections. There is a new provision to allow a member of the public to cast their vote after 10 pm as long as they are in the queue to vote before the 10 o’clock deadline. That will avoid the confusion that there was at some polling stations in England in the 2010 UK election, when a number of people were unable to vote despite arriving on time, and the criticism that followed. Like the minister, I am not sure that we will reach a high enough turnout to cause queues at polling stations at 10 pm. You never know, though. Perhaps the voters of Kilsyth will be energised by the fact that Mark Griffin will not appear on the ballot paper; perhaps voters in Renfrew North will be similarly enthused by the fact that there is no Derek Mackay on the ballot paper. Perhaps they will all be so happy at the prospect of getting a different councillor that they will turn out in huge numbers. That is a bonus—they will be able to vote after the 10 o’clock deadline as long as they get to the polling station in time. There is also a return to electronic counting, of which I am a massive fan, despite the problems in 2007. I think that those problems were more a result of voters being faced with three different voting systems at once than of the machinery. Tests in Perth of hundreds of thousands of ballot papers have been successful. A test of the procedures in a by-election also went smoothly. The reason that I am a fan of electronic counting is that the results of the election can be released down to ballot-box level, as long as it is not lower than the 200-ballot limit, for voter identification reasons. That means that political anoraks such as me—I would not call myself a party animal—can analyse local voting trends in tremendous detail, just as I could after the 2007 election. I am pleased that Aileen Campbell was able to reassure me about that at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee last October. Derek Mackay has given the Parliament a similar assurance that the Government will seek to release that data. There have been successful tests of draft ballot papers with sample groups. As the minister said, participants have described the design as clean, simple and straightforward. However, as stated, the main cause of errors was the lack of understanding of the single transferable vote. I am pleased that the Government has accepted the recommendation to work closely with the Electoral Commission to run an information campaign to improve awareness of STV and encourage voter engagement and participation. We already know that local government and Scottish Parliament elections have been decoupled by moving to two five-year terms for local government. That was intended to put local government elections at the mid-point of a Scottish parliamentary term, but the situation has now been complicated by five-year, fixed-term Parliaments in Westminster and a five-year session here too. If it is to be assumed that five-year terms will continue in the Scottish Parliament in order to prevent clashes with Westminster elections, we will also have to debate five-year terms for local government in order to continue the principle of free-standing local government elections. Although I agree with the principle of decoupling to give local government the focus and priority that it deserves, collectively we will have to deal with the issue of a potentially reduced turnout and the implications of that. Jointly we will have to do all that we can as politicians to encourage as many people as possible to participate in the elections, although I imagine that in practice that will result in us all going our separate ways to encourage our own supporters to turn out and vote. Taking that aside, the Government should start a voter registration drive to encourage people to get on to the electoral register and a campaign to encourage people to switch to a postal vote, as figures show that turnout is much higher in that section of the electorate. I am also pleased that the Government has accepted another recommendation from the Gould report, in that the period between close of nominations and polling day will be increased from 16 to 23 days. That is a welcome change that will allow more time for the printing, distribution and return of postal votes, reducing the pressure on election administrators at a very busy time and potentially eliminating the scenario in which a postal ballot is received by a voter, but too late for it to be returned in time to be counted. That is a big issue for anybody who falls ill or becomes housebound on an emergency basis, applies for a postal vote at a late stage and is unable to cast it. I am glad to see that that potential scenario has been overcome. I look forward to the measures that I have mentioned being implemented and, I hope, the smooth running of local government elections in May. I also look forward to playing a big part in the elections locally, although perhaps not as big a part as I anticipated this time last year. I support the amendment in Sarah Boyack’s name.

The unemployment statistics that were released yesterday demonstrate the seriousness of the economic situation facing Scotland, particularly for young people out of work. In that context, the case for capital investment to kick-start economic recovery is undeniable. Regrettably, however, the infrastructure investment plan spends a lot of time providing what is essentially a progress report on projects that were announced in 2008, and the rest of its focus is a list of aspirations for the future. Admirable as those ambitions might be, without clear plans for how they will be funded, they will remain aspirations only. Over the course of the next year and the remainder of the session, the Government will need to provide in-depth details of how future projects will be funded. It is disappointing that much of the detail of the plan focuses on projects that are already in the pipeline, which have been announced before. Little confidence about the finance arrangements for some of those projects is inspired by phrases such as “Specific additional delivery models will be developed” And “To be decided”. If the minister would like to decide quickly how he intends to fund those projects, I am sure that members across the chamber would be happy to see him back in the Parliament to supply us with the substantial detail that is missing from the plan. I hope that those vital measures, which are needed to stimulate the Scottish economy, will not be subject to extensive delay. It would be a damaging mistake if the Scottish Government chose to delay decisions on how to deliver on the commitments that it has made, especially while thousands of Scots are on the dole and eager for the work that infrastructure projects would provide. “To be decided” is not a good enough answer from the Government on how it will fund the plans. It would have been more responsible if the Government had looked to what it could do now to bring forward investment in order to create the jobs that the economy is crying out for. More than half of the projects that are listed have no clear funding mechanism attached. Of those that do, the RAB and non-profit-distributing mechanisms will require significant private sector investment. Given the economic climate, it is uncertain whether that will be forthcoming. The Government needs to provide more detail on the level of next-generation broadband service that it intends to guarantee across the country. Indeed, the infrastructure investment plan acknowledges that “the level of coverage expected in Scotland to 2020 is not yet fully understood”. The definition of next-generation broadband in use by the Government needs to be clarified. Does the Government guarantee equal speeds of 30, 40 or 50 megabits per second throughout Scotland? Is the provision of a universal level of service guaranteed, or can different parts of the country expect varying speeds? Constituents of mine in large, densely populated areas of Cumbernauld do not have access to current-generation broadband and they are looking for assurances that they will not miss out on next-generation coverage. Investment of £68.8 million from the UK and £25.5 million from the European Union should go some way to meeting the universal coverage target. It is clear that significant levels of funding will also need to come from the private sector, but there is no estimate of exactly what level of private sector investment will be necessary to achieve the target of access for all in Scotland. The funding for this parliamentary session amounts to £143.5 million. That includes the UK and EU money, which makes up the majority of the funding that is available for delivering next-generation broadband. However, the report identifies the cost of rolling next-generation broadband out across Scotland as being at least several hundred million pounds. The vagueness around how the Government intends to close that funding gap and what role private sector investment will have must be addressed. Many of the projects that have been unveiled, such as the dualling of the A9, the replacement crossing over the Forth, the reduction of Glasgow to Edinburgh journey times, the Southern general hospital project, more energy-efficient homes and the expansion of digital broadband, are projects from the previous plan simply reannounced. Proposals for a new health centre for Kilsyth, which is in the area that I represent, were also included in the 2008 infrastructure investment plan; they were included again in the 2011 plan as a community project whose delivery is being explored through the Scottish Government’s hub initiative. A more concrete commitment to delivering those facilities is required. There are several instances in the 2008 and 2011 plans in which the Scottish Government has been slow in bringing forward schemes or identifying how they will be funded. Given the cuts to local health services in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, the Government should make a firm commitment to deliver modern facilities rather than simply including them in a wish list of projects that will be passed over into the next plan. Scotland needs the Government to kick-start economic recovery, not reannounce the projects that it began to look into nearly four years ago. The Government must be clear about how it will bring about the private sector investment that is needed to make the plan viable. I hope that the minister will return in the new year with the detail on how the Government will fund the projects into the 2020s, which is lacking in the report.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will assist further education colleges to avoid compulsory redundancies. (S4O-00464)

A number of colleges have been unable to give a guarantee on no compulsory redundancies, given the scale of the cuts that they face. Nearly 900 jobs were lost last year, of which 50 were compulsory redundancies. How many redundancies, compulsory or otherwise, does the cabinet secretary anticipate that colleges will have to make to cover the budget reductions?

I welcome the chance to take part in this Labour Party debate on what is an absolutely crucial issue for the people of Scotland. It is poignant to discuss youth unemployment after yesterday’s industrial action. In visiting pickets across Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and being in Motherwell for the rally yesterday, I found youth unemployment to be one issue that was at the forefront of striking workers’ minds, as it is for members of the Parliament. With more than 100,000 young people unemployed, it is clear that Scotland is in the grip of a youth jobs crisis. This is a very worrying time for families, struggling with higher prices and fuel bills, and small businesses are also feeling the squeeze, with many experiencing reduced turnover. That is why the Scottish Government must put tackling youth unemployment at the top of its agenda. If we want to see a strong economic recovery in Scotland, the Scottish Government must use all of the considerable levers at its disposal to reduce youth unemployment now.

I want to make some progress; I have just started my speech. The figure of more than 100,000—one in five—unemployed young people represents an historic high, and the Scottish Government now has an opportunity to demonstrate how seriously it takes the issue. Accepting the recommendation of the Smith group to create a ministerial portfolio with sole responsibility for bringing levels of youth unemployment back under control is a positive first step. The group’s recommendations make it clear that that would ensure accountability and priority for an issue of such importance.

The staff who work in Jobcentre Plus do a fantastic job, and I do not think that they would do any better a job if we changed their employer from the UK Government to the Scottish Government. They already do a fantastic job. A dedicated ministerial portfolio would be superior to an add-on to an existing, wider brief. Leadership from the Scottish Government, backed by funding of £30 million, is the best way for the Government to prove to Scotland that it will not sit idly by while young people struggle to find work. A dedicated minister speaking out within the Government on the issue of youth unemployment sends a strong message to young people about just how seriously the Scottish Government takes the issue. The appointment of a minister who will make reducing youth unemployment their dawn-to-dusk task is therefore a necessity, and I am glad that the Government agrees with the Smith report and the Labour motion on the matter. It is also important to emphasise education and skills. One of the tragic aspects of this youth unemployment crisis is that highly trained and skilled young people now find themselves unable to get work. Members will have shared my experience of speaking to constituents who have completed degrees, apprenticeships and other training schemes who are unable to get on to the employment ladder. That squeezes the life and the hope out of young people who have been told since starting school that, if they work hard and pursue their education, they will have a guaranteed return on that investment in the form of a good, secure job. Therefore, it is vital that the Government prioritises capital investment projects that will result in the creation of jobs, as called for in the motion. The Scottish National Party Government’s 20 per cent cut to further education is a matter of particular concern to me. At a time of high unemployment, further education has a central role in helping unemployed people—particularly young people—to retrain or upskill so that they can be ready to get back into work when jobs become available.

I have taken an intervention, and I now want to make some progress. The Scottish Government’s commitment to provide college places for 16 to 19-year-olds is a development that colleges welcome, but without additional funding in place, it will have a prejudicial effect on the ability of colleges to provide places for other learners. With little prospect of improvement in the economic situation faced by school leavers, pressures on further education can only continue. As I mentioned earlier, young people who have already been unable to find work after completing their training will consider returning to education in the hope of finding better luck in another sector, or of improving their CV to boost their chance of getting a job. The front-loading of the 13 per cent cut, in addition to the 10 per cent cut foisted on colleges last year, will make it incredibly difficult for colleges to meet the increased demand for places, particularly given the reform agenda being pursued by the Scottish Government. It is just not feasible for colleges to make heavy cuts in the number of places for older learners while unemployment remains too high across the board.

I am coming to the end of my speech now. Furthermore, the severity of year-on-year cuts by the Government means that many colleges will not be in a position to offer a guarantee of no compulsory redundancies. Having to lose staff will only undermine colleges as they seek to give our young people the skills that they need to find work. The Scottish Government needs to provide adequate funding to colleges to ensure that they can provide opportunities to the unemployed; it must not proceed with the 20 per cent cut to college funding. It is our duty to act to prevent another generation of young Scots from being lost and consigned to the scrapheap. I do not mind saying that—I do not want them to become a lost generation that is consigned to the scrapheap. The motion provides for a number of positive steps that ministers could take now to ensure that we give our young people the chance that they deserve, which is why I support the motion in the name of lain Gray.

12. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to consult on introducing a ban on smoking in cars carrying children. (S4O-00410)

Studies that came out in February and August this year showed that the level of particulate matter in cars in which people were smoking were similar to those in a smoke-filled pub. Does the minister agree that that has a disproportionate effect on child passengers because of their less developed immune systems and faster breathing rates? Will the minister commit to considering a ban in the strategy that he mentioned?

Has the cabinet secretary discussed with the SPS the 28 per cent increase in remand prisoners at Barlinnie since 2009 and the effect of that on overcrowding, which I witnessed at first hand on my visit to the prison on Monday?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on a subject that is close to my heart and to close for Labour in the debate on veterans. It has been an excellent debate, and I hope that veterans and members of the armed forces alike take heart from the unanimous support that members have offered. During my time at university, I was a member of the UK Territorial Army, first with the Royal Regiment of Scotland and then with the Royal Engineers. I have no doubt that, if it had not been for the sequence of events that resulted in my being elected as a councillor in North Lanarkshire in early 2008, I would now be serving as a regular Army soldier, deployed in some part of the world where the UK Army has a presence. If I had been a serving soldier, I would have welcomed the commitment to the military covenant. I am glad that the UK Government and Scottish Government are both committed to that. Those who serve in our armed forces are asked to make massive personal sacrifices in their human rights and, ultimately, to be prepared to give up their right to life in the service of the nation. It is only right that, in return, Governments and we as a nation value, respect and support our armed forces. That culminates in the annual commemoration of armistice day, when we stop to remember those who gave their lives in action so that we could enjoy the freedom that we experience today. I enjoyed the camaraderie that I experienced with my fellow recruits and then private soldiers as we made our way through the trials of basic training and then combat infantry courses. It was physically draining to spend days and days training, eating and sleeping—when there was a chance—on the hills and heather moors around Fort George outside Inverness. However, I am sure that that was nothing compared to the training that the minister underwent as a Royal Marine. No one in that group of soldiers got through training on their own: at some point, every one of us relied on someone else to pick them up and push them on. None of us minded the extra effort of dragging along someone else when we were already exhausted, because we knew that they would do exactly the same for us the following day. Everyone in that unit would have run through a brick wall for the others—or, at the very least, helped someone else to get over one on the assault course. I hope that my description has not put anyone off the kind of experience that people get in the Territorial Army. I urge members to get in touch with SaBRE—supporting Britain’s reservists and employers—an organisation that gives advice and information on the extra skills that a reservist can bring to an organisation. It also provides weekend training courses for employers who would like first-hand experience of the sort of training that a reservist gets. That can help to overcome the issues that Alex Fergusson mentioned by raising workplace awareness of a reservist’s role. I have never experienced in any other situation the camaraderie that I experienced during my time in the TA. I experienced it in training, but I cannot even begin to imagine the level of intensity and commitment to fellow soldiers that those on the front line experience. I could only listen and try to comprehend when I heard from a soldier who had served in Afghanistan what it was like to come under fire and lose a fellow soldier who was as close to him as a member of his own family. I can only imagine how isolated someone must feel if they are discharged from the armed forces into society—alone and, perhaps, with no family—after having such a close bond with the comrades with whom they fought and whom they perhaps lost in combat. It is vital that the advice and support services are in place to enable former service personnel to adjust to living in mainstream society and that Governments continue to plan, co-ordinate and deliver private, public and voluntary sector support, advice and employment services for ex-service personnel and their families and children, as stated in the amendment. I welcome the news that North Lanarkshire Council is amending its housing policy to recognise the priority needs of homeless ex-service personnel who have just been discharged from duty and of their families, and I welcome the commitment by Dumfries and Galloway Council that Elaine Murray mentioned. We must continue to support organisations that do tremendous work for former service personnel across Scotland, including the Royal British Legion, which I often visit in Cumbernauld. The legion provides practical care, advice and support to armed forces personnel, ex-servicemen and women of all ages and their families. It also runs the annual poppy appeal. Recent appeals have emphasised the increasing need to help the men and women who serve today, as well as ex-servicepeople and their dependants. The legion assists any serviceman or woman in pursuing their entitlement to a war disablement pension. Every year, up to 200 ex-service personnel in Scotland are represented at war pensions appeal tribunals. Across the road from the Parliament, Scottish Veterans Residences provides residential accommodation for more than 300 ex-service personnel and their partners. It has helped more than 60,000 veterans throughout Scotland since it was established in 1911. The Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Families Association—its Lanark branch covers my region of Central Scotland—offers financial, practical and much-needed emotional support to current and previous armed forces members and their families. It provides services such as forces line, which is a telephone service that is entirely independent of the military chain of command and which provides supportive listening and advice, and the specialist absent without leave—AWOL—advice line. The association runs the forces additional needs disability support group and organises children’s holidays that are run by volunteers and which concentrate on offering experiences and activities to which children with additional support needs would not normally have access. Jim Eadie, Neil Bibby and Jamie Hepburn mentioned Erskine, which is the country’s leading provider of care for veterans. It provides a wide range of care from respite and short breaks to residential and nursing care, dementia care, palliative care, physiotherapy, speech and language therapy and rehabilitation care. They are all vital services for ex-servicemen and women and their families. As I said, the subject is close to my heart. I could speak in glowing terms all day long about the organisations and the tremendous services that they provide. I mentioned as many organisations as I could squeeze in because the services that they provide are vital to creating a sense of support and community for veterans. It is of the utmost importance that the Government, the Parliament and the public continue to support those organisations through the Scottish veterans fund, which the minister outlined, through public donations, which we have all made this week to the poppy appeal, and through volunteering, which Liz Smith mentioned. The support that we continue to give such organisations is vital to ensuring that they can do their tremendous work for veterans and armed forces personnel across Scotland. The level of support makes our serving and former servicemen and women feel valued, respected and supported, as outlined in the military covenant. It also goes towards creating the community support network for those who have left the armed forces and who might have difficulty in settling back into what could seem like a lonely and isolated life in comparison with their time in military service, when they were surrounded by comrades who supported them. I support the motion and the amendment in Richard Simpson’s name.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how it ensures access to orthodontic dentistry for all children who would benefit from it. (S4O-00299)

Strict new guidelines that are being imposed on dentists by the Scottish Government will see parents pay thousands of pounds for orthodontic treatment if a dentist cannot prove that their child’s health will improve as a result of it. Does the minister understand concerns that the strictness of the new guidelines will create a tiered system in Scotland, with poorer families who do not meet the criteria and who cannot meet the costs of treatment being forced to go without? Will he take action to protect those young people?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive how it proposes to improve the availability of local NHS services. (S4O-00274)

On the sustainability of services in particular, NHS Lanarkshire has just decided to close a treatment room in Kildrum health centre in Cumbernauld, which means that residents will no longer have simple clinical procedures such as blood tests or dressing changes available locally, despite the Government’s stated determination to keep services local and to improve their availability. Patients who are fit enough to access the services locally will have to travel into the new centre in Cumbernauld, and many will not be able to travel—

Those patients will have to have a home visit by a nurse, which is a false economy. Will the cabinet secretary commit to investigating the change and the additional costs that will result from increased home visits?

It is good to have the opportunity to speak in the debate and to acknowledge the work that Historic Scotland is doing in partnership with others through the Scottish ten project to digitally record important heritage sites and open up access. The work will assist in the preservation of our important cultural heritage, because changes to sites over the years will be tracked in detail and it will be possible to take appropriate measures to prevent lasting damage or loss. Education plays an important role in getting children interested in our heritage. By using the digital resources on websites such as Scran and PASTMAP to illustrate the past, we can get children excited about the history of Scotland. We have an opportunity to get schoolkids interested in their heritage by using technology in the classroom, rather than showing them pictures and text from dusty textbooks. Pupils should be able to explore important heritage sites interactively and learn in ways that excite and challenge them. However, the use of digital material in schools should be not the end of the educational experience but the first phase of learning. The obvious follow-up to exploring a site electronically is a class visit to the site. In central Scotland, the Antonine wall runs for 60km from Old Kilpatrick on the north bank of the Clyde to Bo’ness on the Firth of Forth. It was designated a UNESCO world heritage site in 2008. The wall cuts across the council ward that I represent, and I grew up in the shadow of Bar hill, where the remains of a Roman fort and bathhouse can easily be found. When I was at school, there was a strong focus on our cultural heritage, and the wall and the Romans often came up in projects, but it was only when we visited the sites that real interest was generated in the history and heritage behind the projects. With that in mind, the Government should put in place a programme that runs alongside the storing of images, to ensure that the digital students become real-time students who appreciate the range of heritage and culture that Scotland has to offer. The same can be said for digital tourists. Although it is important to acknowledge the work that Historic Scotland and National Records of Scotland do to digitise collections for future generations, thereby opening up access to their collections for a much wider audience, we must do more to encourage people to visit sites in person. In a recent briefing, the British Hospitality Association said that more than 23,000 people are directly employed in the hospitality sector in central Scotland, which contributes massively to the regional economy. Those employees depend on visitors to the region. More must be done to raise the profile of our world heritage sites through the digital archives. Third sector organisations are involved. The Croy Historical Society has researched and collated material that relates to the Romans and the Antonine wall and regularly hosts exhibitions to do with local history and heritage. Such voluntary organisations should be applauded for, and supported in, their work to preserve and promote local history. If they could be linked into the project to digitise heritage sites, they might be able to expand and enhance the online experience and perhaps provide a local point of contact for people who want to visit the sites and explore them in more detail.

I am sure that those people will have been members of the Croy Historical Society. They display massive passion for their local history and heritage and for the Antonine wall, with its links to the rest of Europe. That is exactly the range of local knowledge that we could feed into the national project. Although I entirely agree that we should be storing the records of such sites digitally and promoting online access to archives of Scotland’s heritage, we have to take on board the fact that not everyone has access to reliable broadband services, as a number of speakers have mentioned.

I promise that I did not speak to Bill Walker before, but he has led me on nicely to exactly what I wanted to say. In Cumbernauld, which is an urban area, we have massive problems with access to broadband. It is slow and unreliable and, at peak times, it is non-existent. In a recent written answer, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment assured me that the funding that had been awarded to the Scottish Government by Westminster for broadband would be invested to provide next-generation broadband in areas that had not been provided for by the market. Given the market failure to deliver reliable broadband services in Cumbernauld, I look forward to the Government investment that will allow my constituents to access the online digital heritage that we have spoken about today.

As I said earlier, it is important that we recognise the work that is being done. However, it is of equal importance that we encourage people to visit sites in person. I therefore support the amendment in the name of Patricia Ferguson.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how many of the modern apprenticeships delivered in 2010-11 went to existing employees. (S4O-00208)

A local business owner informed me that he was offered a number of modern apprenticeship places last year. He immediately agreed to take on those places and informed the agency that it would take a number of months to advertise, interview and recruit. He was told that there was no time for that and that if he simply gave the names of existing employees, he would receive funding. Colleagues have told me that that scenario has been repeated across the country. In the current climate of pressure on public spending and a fast-increasing youth unemployment rate—

Does the minister agree that that was a shocking misuse of public funds, in an area that is desperately needing attention, in order just to hit Government targets? Will the minister commit to investigating in order to ensure that it is not repeated in the next round of modern apprenticeship awards?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive whether a time limit applies for payments to private companies delivering public services and, if so, whether this applies to payments made to subcontractors. (S4O-00191)

When I was on a recent visit to a company in Cumbernauld, the managing director told me that the biggest issue that faces his and other small and medium-sized enterprises is prompt payment for work completed, which can make the difference between a company staying solvent or going bust. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that, in line with his answer today, payments to subcontractors are made within the time period that he mentioned?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Members who have listened to and taken part in the debate know the importance of working towards a low-carbon economy. Climate change and global warming are not made up or fantasies. Our collective global and generational carbon footprint is taking its toll on our planet, as we can see. Rarely does a week go by without our seeing on our television screens the terrible effects of hurricanes, tsunamis, floods and droughts, which claim many lives and destroy communities around the world. We hear frequently about rising sea levels and can see for ourselves the devastating impact of coastal erosion, which eats away at the coastline and frequently takes with it people’s homes and livelihoods. I am sorry if Mr Johnstone feels that I am being overly enthusiastic about wanting to combat that. There is no doubt that action has to be taken, but whether members believe that the Scottish Government’s plans are ambitious or unrealistic might depend on where they sit in the chamber. There is nothing wrong with ambition, but it must have a credible degree of attainability. That is why I am concerned by the views of industry experts such as Professor Tony Mackay, who believes that the Government’s renewables pledge is “just not possible” and Dr Euan Mearns from the University of Aberdeen, who fears that the Government’s plans may make Scotland “a world leader in a white elephant.”

I take that point on board, but we cannot simply dismiss the opinion of professionals in the industry. We should take on board opinions from across civic life in Scotland and from industry experts.

I have already taken one. I want to make some progress. Coming from an engineering background, I was interested in the recent policy statement from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers regarding negative emissions and carbon recycling. The IME highlighted an issue that I raised in a previous debate on renewables: the importance of recognising the many different ways of reducing emissions. The Government cannot simply focus on one or two green energy sources—for example, onshore and offshore wind farms, which evidence shows cannot be relied on in the long term given that average wind speed continues to fall across the UK. We can see just how difficult the job ahead is by looking at the 2050 decarbonisation targets. Despite the excellent work that has been done by firms such as Argent Energy, which is based in Newarthill in Central Scotland and is the country’s foremost biodiesel producer and which works with businesses on reducing their carbon emissions, we are not on course to meet that 2050 target. To do so, we would have to reduce carbon emissions by 5.5 per cent per annum, but the best rate that we have achieved so far is 2.3 per cent per annum—in the 1990s. That is further evidence of the need to research and invest in other methods. I mentioned in a previous debate that we must use the carbon fuel that we have in the most efficient way possible, and the minister showed that he shares that sentiment in his opening speech. We cannot continue to have a situation in which power stations convert only 35 per cent of the energy and discharge 65 per cent as waste heat. The Government should engage with industry to initiate a feasibility study into the costs and technical obstacles involved in using the wasted hot water to provide neighbouring communities with district heating schemes. We have discussed carbon capture technology for fossil fuel power stations and other large-scale, static producers of CO2, but we have heard no proposals on how emissions from planes, ships and cars and the historical greenhouse gases that are already in the earth’s atmosphere can be dealt with. Governments have largely ignored the potential of technology that can extract greenhouse gases from the atmosphere, which can then be stored or recycled, reducing the levels of CO2 in our atmosphere to a concentration that could be agreed through discussion with the climate science community. An example of that technology is air capture, which is at an advanced stage of design and is reaching the pilot demonstration phase. It involves the extraction of greenhouse gases—primarily CO2—from the atmosphere, regardless of where in the world the gas was emitted. The removal of CO2 from the atmosphere creates negative emissions and allows the captured CO2 to be stored or processed and recycled. We have already seen the benefits of carbon capture from high-polluting industrial sites. For example, Carbon Recycling International, which is based in Iceland, successfully captures CO2 from energy-intensive industries and converts it into renewable methanol, a clean fuel that, when blended at various levels with petrol, can be used as a drop-in fuel for existing cars and hybrid vehicles. Scotland is in a unique position to lead in this new carbon capture technology, due to the massive storage potential in the depleted oil and gas fields in the North Sea. With an EU carbon trading scheme, Scotland could position itself to receive significant income from other countries, as they would effectively be paying Scotland to absorb and store their emissions. At the same time, thousands of jobs and opportunities would be created in a new industry that manufactured air capture devices and processed the captured carbon. It is the view of many in the industry, including the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, that air capture can play an important role in reducing greenhouse gases and growing the Scottish economy. I hope that the Government will seriously examine that technology when planning for the future.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I add my congratulations to you on your new elected position. I also congratulate the minister on his new appointment and wish him all the best in his new role. I look forward to working with him under his declared open-door policy for members across the Parliament. It is a great honour to be elected to the Parliament, although it was a slight surprise, as I probably worked hardest not to be elected. I campaigned in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth for Cathie Craigie and I pay tribute to her for her 12 years’ service to her community in the Scottish Parliament and for her many years’ service as a councillor before that. On a personal note, I thank her for the tremendous advice and support that she has given me in the past few years. The Scottish Government has tabled ambitious plans that have split the opinions of many in the energy sector. I support much that the Government has proposed and I think that most people in the Parliament support the principle of meeting all our electricity needs from green sources, but I must ask whether that aim can be achieved, especially in the timescale that the minister has proposed. I have several concerns about the cost and sustainability of the Government’s plans. The Government’s “Draft Electricity Generation Policy Statement 2010” makes it clear that a low-carbon energy supply that has no reliance on nuclear power is the preferred way forward. If the Government wants to reduce the current reliance on fossil fuels and nuclear power—I take it that the Government means that in its entirety and that we would not import nuclear-produced energy from other countries—it will have to invest heavily in wind, wave and tidal power. According to the Government’s figures, investment in offshore and onshore wind farms will increase, but is the minister aware of the concerns that senior meteorologists have raised about the sustainability of wind energy? Official UK Government figures show that the average wind speed in 2010 was down by 20 per cent on 2008. Professor Michael Lockwood from the University of Reading is on record as saying: “The probability is that decline will continue for the next 40 years.” Another expert, Dr David Brayshaw, has expressed his concerns and pretty much stated the obvious: “If wind speed lowers, we can expect to generate less electricity from turbines”. The wind speed figures and expert opinion concern me and must concern the minister in relation to the sustainability and viability of wind farms. The Government’s plans rely heavily on private sector investors, who will not be willing to put capital into schemes if wind speeds and electricity generation continue to drop, which will result in a lower return for their investment. I urge the Scottish Government to display a degree of caution to ensure that if deeper problems arise with the wind energy industry, it has plans in place to utilise all forms of renewables to their full potential only while it remains cost effective. I want to talk about fuel poverty, which is a subject sadly missing from the motion. I thank Nigel Don for raising the subject earlier. Fuel poverty affects a greater number of people with every passing winter. Energy Action Scotland has stated that one in three Scottish households is affected by fuel poverty—that number is increasing year on year and will continue to rise as conventional fossil fuel and nuclear power plants close and supply is switched to more expensive renewable electricity. While the Government is right to aim for all new fossil-fuelled power plants to be equipped, and existing plants to be adapted, for carbon capture and storage, we should be more ambitious. We should push for those plants to become cogenerating, to get away from the current situation, in which, according to Scottish Government figures, only 35 per cent of fossil fuel is converted to electricity and 65 per cent of the energy is lost as waste heat. A cogenerating plant, in which electricity is generated and the heat that is normally wasted is pumped into neighbouring communities as hot water, can operate at levels of efficiency close to 90 per cent. That increased efficiency would go a long way towards achieving the Government target of a 12 per cent reduction in energy consumption; at the same time, it would lift thousands of families out of fuel poverty in surrounding communities, allowing the Government to concentrate resources in other areas. We all recognise that the Government’s plans are ambitious, but unless the minister utilises all forms of renewables to their utmost and reduces the levels of waste heat being discharged from our power stations, the Government’s goal will be unachievable.