I, too, thank Stuart McMillan for bringing the debate to the chamber, and I thank the Trussell Trust for all the good work that it has done both in the food banks and around the debate. The subject is probably one of the most schizophrenic for a politician to deal with. My local MP, Tom Harris, and I, along with local councillors, were at the launch of the Netherauldhouse food bank, and it was an event at which I felt simultaneously proud and ashamed. I felt proud of the work that the church and local volunteers were doing, the goodwill of local supermarkets, such as the local Morrisons in Newlands and others, and the people who donate food, but I felt shame that that was needed in 2013. In 2012, I visited south-east Glasgow’s food bank on Butterbiggins Road. I have some statistics from there. In the year 2012-13, it fed 682 people. In the first three months of 2013-14, it fed 1,200. There is a huge impact locally and nationally. The national figures are staggering and some of them have been discussed already. In 2006, approximately 3,000 people used food banks in the UK; now, the number is almost 350,000. That should terrify us. I am in a fortunate position. December is kind of the month for kids, so every December we try to get people to donate toys, which we dish out to charity from my office. Last year, having been at the launch of the Netherauldhouse food bank, we decided that we would ask people to donate toys and food and we would pass them on to the local food bank. We were overwhelmed by the generosity of constituents and the community. We managed to fill a few cars and get them up to the food bank, where the food was gratefully received and well used. While I was talking to people at the food bank, they told me that just that morning they had fed a family of eight. As has been mentioned a number of times, people who use food banks are not people who have not worked for 10 years or are struggling to find a place to stay, but people who have an established life. Many of them will be working and many of them have families to bring up, and have been bringing them up until circumstances change and they go from having a reasonably stable life to not being able to feed their kids. How bad must that be? Like Neil Findlay, I have been unemployed and, unfortunately, for a while I was pretty poor. I had a young family at the time and I know how difficult it was, but I was never in that kind of situation because I had a support network around me. To have to forgo your pride to make sure that your family gets fed does not bear thinking about. We as politicians have a huge task ahead of us to mitigate that. I am not going to play party politics here; it is far too serious an issue to do that. The only thing that I will say is that councils are responsible for the Scottish welfare fund and councils are responsible for ensuring that the money is used properly. We should be wary of trying to score points on that issue—I am not even going to mention my council. I was very impressed with Cara Hilton’s speech, which I thought was good, as were Neil Findlay’s and others’. Kezia Dugdale made a very good point about councils paying no matter what they get. I will look at whether there is any scope to ensure that, if that does happen, it is looked at.

Okay. Once again, I thank Stuart McMillan and I thank the Trussell Trust for all their good work. Congratulations.

I start by responding to the point that Alex Johnstone just made. I would have thought that, if anything, the bill would strengthen marriage because it makes marriage much more acceptable for every sector of society. I also think that Alex Johnstone’s argument about the weakening of marriage being at the root of all evil over the past decades is a bit simplistic. However, the bill can only help to strengthen marriage and make it more acceptable to everybody across society. I would like to thank Jackson Carlaw for his kind words, but he clearly does not want to hear my words as he is not present. He gave a very eloquent speech, but it left me feeling a wee bit empty because when he started to talk about “South Pacific” I was fairly confident that he was going to sing but, unfortunately, he did not. When I got elected to Parliament in 2011, I realised very quickly that we were going to be part of something special and that Scottish National Party members were going to be part of at least one memorable day and event, which would be the referendum. What I had not quite realised was that there would be other opportunities to do something really historic. Today is one of those rare days when I can say as a politician that, no matter what happens, even if today is my last day as a politician—and given that the vote goes the way that I hope it will tonight; I do not know what time it will take place now, Presiding Officer, but it will be some time after six—my colleagues and I will have made a difference to improve the lives and rights of many people across Scotland. We should all be proud of that. Like others, I recognise that there has been a change in society. I recognise what it was like a long time ago and when I was growing up. That we have come to where we are in such a comparatively short period of time in historical terms—although I have been here a fair length of time, to be fair—is something that we should be immensely proud of. As I said in a previous speech, I have no concerns about safeguards with regard to the bill. All the safeguards are in place and I am confident that celebrants and religious bodies will find that to be the case. In my speech last November on same-sex marriage, I talked about my brother Michael and how he had just contacted me to tell me that he was going to get married. As things often happen, he phoned me very quickly after that and said “I’m not just getting married, James. I’m getting married next Wednesday.” So, I had to contact Joe FitzPatrick, who I have to give huge thanks to because he was incredibly helpful, along with the whip’s team—Bill Kidd, Fiona McLeod and Graeme Dey, who covered for me when I was away—and I managed to get away to see Michael getting married. It was a lovely ceremony that was very small and family oriented. There were two things about it. One is that I was the only member of our family who was there. That is understandable as it was very short notice; I also have a very understanding boss and I could afford to go. Other members of my family could not afford to go in that time period, and my mother is 79 years of age and she could not travel to Lisbon, so there was a hole. It would have been perfect if members of the family had been able to go. I have no doubt that if we had had the legislation in Scotland, the wedding would have been here, because Raoul has a smaller family than ours and they are more mobile than us, so they would have come over here and we would have had that opportunity. That was a shame. The other thing is that it did not rain. I looked back to that UK Independence Party comment and I thought, “No—that just can’t be true.” There was no thunder and lightning. It was a lovely sunny day. The sun was even shining through the windows. It was just a perfect, lovely day, so that was really strange. In my previous speech, I said that my opinion was that they were getting married because they had got to an age at which they thought that it was right to ensure that their affairs were settled, and I knew that it was a strong relationship. But when I was over there, what really got to me was that I realised just how much the day meant to them. That kind of surprised me. It was the right thing for them to do to ensure that, as they get into their 60s, everything is settled, but it is a marriage based on love, and it was an absolutely lovely thing to see. I was honoured and delighted to be there. I just wish that it could have been here. I finish with two quotes. One is from more than 2,000 years ago and the other is from more than 150 years ago. The first is: “The only stable state is the one in which all men are equal before the law.” If we take it that “men” means the species as opposed to the gender, that is a good quote. I said that because Nicola Sturgeon was giving me a funny look. [Laughter.] The other quote is from Robert Ingersoll, who was a civil war veteran, a political leader and a radical orator. He said: “The true civilisation is where every man gives to every other man every right he claims for himself.” I suggest that that includes the right to be married. On that note, I am delighted and proud to support the motion.

Like others who are in the chamber, I was in the Candleriggs when the announcement was made that we were getting the Commonwealth games. I think that John Mason and Sandra White joined me and I suspect that Patricia Ferguson and Hanzala Malik were both there as well. It was an exciting time. We were enthusiastic, but I am sure that we were a wee bit nervous about how we were going to cope with it—the Commonwealth games does not have an unblemished track record, to use a pun. However, congratulations are due to the minister, the Scottish Government, Glasgow City Council, the Commonwealth games team and their partners because, to date, it looks like the games will be a resounding success. The news that the minister announced about thousands of legacy tickets going to those who may well not have been able to attend events is welcome indeed. I am in the privileged position of representing the constituency that will host the track and field events at Hampden and the biking events at Cathkin Braes. I am fortunate that the facilities in my constituency have benefited from upgrading. In the case of Cathkin Braes, a new facility was created that will be used long after the games go. I suggest that, given the fact that the closing ceremony will also take place in the national stadium, Glasgow Cathcart is at the centre of the Commonwealth games, despite the ludicrous claims that we are about to hear from another MSP. I look forward to them over the next few months. I suspect that the legacy of the games will be wider than we first envisaged and than that to which we were looking forward, because I have been fortunate to be involved in the conception of a couple of local organisations that have come into being now because of the Commonwealth games. They would have come into being anyway, but the Commonwealth games focused minds on ensuring that they were in place. Both organisations will benefit from the publicity that the games will give them and the focus that they will have. I suggest that that is part of an unplanned legacy. Liz Smith might be delighted to know that one of those organisations is Scottish Women in Sport, which is the brainchild of Maureen McGonigle. I was fortunate to be part of the creation of Scottish Women in Sport along with the television presenter Alison Walker. We are now ably supported by a number of extremely high-profile and talented women from the sporting world and beyond. We were privileged to have Kathleen Grainger, Judy Murray and the inestimable Belle Robertson at the launch supporting us. The main aims of the organisation are to educate women about sport, encourage the participation of women in sport and celebrate women in sport. I hope that one of the lasting legacies of the Commonwealth games will be more and more people getting involved in sport, particularly women. Southside routes came about from me asking a group of southside organisations that are involved in the tourism industry how best we could work together to redress what we consider to be the imbalance that exists between the south side, the city centre and the west end of Glasgow—I am not really making any friends; I have had a go at John Mason and I am just about to have a go at Sandra White—regarding the promotion of tourism facilities. The organisation is in the process of being formally constituted, and we are working together to produce a leaflet for tourists with the working title “50 Things to Do in the Southside.” The timing of the launch is primarily due to the approaching Commonwealth games and the document will be a lasting legacy of the games. The list of tourism facilities will include amenities that have been built for the games, such as the mountain bike tracks at Cathkin Braes. As a local example, we have the Kings Park community festival, which has been put together by local volunteers led by the Rev Sandra Boyd and will celebrate the games and the positive impact that they will have on the Kings Park community. That can only have a long-term benefit or legacy for the area. However, I think that the prime example of a local community legacy is the one that will be provided by celebration city, which will be based in Cathcart old parish church. Many members will be familiar with the good work that the Rev Neil Galbraith has done over many years, not just in the Cathcart area, but throughout the city, elsewhere in the country and beyond. He has put together an unbelievable programme of events. It is a case not just of hands across countries, but of hands across parties, because Tom Harris and I will jointly host a couple of the celebration city events. There are not many things of which it could be said that Tom Harris and I have been jointly involved, but that just goes to show the beneficial effects of an event such as the Commonwealth games. The legacy that we hope will be achieved from celebration city will be for veterans, who should feel as much a part of society as anyone else. There is a veterans centre in Cathcart and, just beside Cathcart old parish church, there is a Territorial Army centre, which, unfortunately, will be closed down at the end of the year. A close relationship exists with the veterans, and it is important that they feel part of the Commonwealth games and their legacy. There will be a legacy from celebration city for better community relations, whether between young people and the police, between people of different ethnic or religious backgrounds, or between younger and older people. Celebration city will also have a positive legacy for disabled people and their carers, and a positive legacy through arts, music, history and literature. I could go on. Among the events that will take place are the gathering of the Commonwealth parliamentary group, with entertainment being provided by MP4—members will all know someone in that band; Scottish National Party members all know Pete Wishart. In addition, there will be the southside special games and the Bravehearts musical, which is a great event that will be put on by children in a club that is based in Cathcart old parish church who have special needs. It is an extremely special place that is very well attended, and I am really looking forward to that event. There will also be the Cathcart fair, the Cathcart festival of food and much, much more. There will be a number of large multicultural celebrations of faith and an African village experience, where it will be possible for people to stay overnight and to live as people live in some African villages. As well as having a real Commonwealth flavour, that will provide a legacy in that, when people leave and the village closes down, school pupils, adults and all those who have experienced it will have an understanding of what other people have to put up with and how they have to live. There will also be an impact on young people. I am delighted that the baton relay has been so popular. In my constituency, Dean Thornton, who is a pupil at Castlemilk high, was elected to be the baton carrier for his school. He must be a very proud man, and his family must be proud of him; I congratulate him. It is clear that a number of community groups are working hard to prepare for the Commonwealth games. The Jeely Piece Club in Castlemilk is playing an extremely important role; there are far too many others to mention. I have a question for the minister. Is there some way in which we could give such groups some sort of recognition? Could the minister write them a letter? That could be issued through the local MSPs, if that would be the easiest way to do it. We could let the minister know about the relevant organisations, or we could distribute the letter to them. I am sure that many of those organisations would be delighted to get recognition from the Government and the Commonwealth games organisation for the good work that they are doing and the legacy that they will leave behind once the games have finished.

On the different ethnicities among people in Glasgow and the people who will come to the city, does Mr Malik share my delight at hearing today that Anne McLaughlin, our former colleague, and Graham Campbell have secured funding for the emancipation jam, which will mark the importance of emancipation day at four venues in Glasgow’s merchant city and consider Scotland’s links to the slave trade and to emancipation and subsequent good work?

You will not need them.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thought that I did not jump up and down at all, Presiding Officer. I accept Patricia Ferguson’s points and that the Labour-Lib Dem Executive did a lot of good work before the SNP came into power. I was the leader of the SNP group on Glasgow City Council at the time, so I recognise that a lot of great work was done by the council and by both Governments. My concern or nervousness was not so much about our ability to do it; it was based on the track record of previous attempts by other cities.

Glasgow City Football Club trains in my constituency. I have been along to see the team training and I went to see them play in the quarter final of the European cup, which was a great game. I agree that representation of women’s sport in the media needs to improve. Part of Scottish women in sport’s role is to push for that to ensure that we achieve what the member and I are looking for.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the impact of United Kingdom Government welfare reforms on health and wellbeing in Scotland. (S4O-02837)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the reforms are clearly having an adverse effect on people, including many young people, across Scotland? Does he share my concerns that both the coalition reforms and Labour’s recent threats to remove benefits from the under-25s will only add to the pressure on our young people and that only with independence can we assure Scotland’s people that they will have a Government that is committed to ensuring a better, fairer and healthier life for them all?

Does Gordon MacDonald accept that although William Burrell wanted the collection to be kept together and to be shown to the public, the condition of the building just now is such that many items in the collection have never been shown to the public and that one of the ways to deal with that while the building is being refurbished is to allow the items to be seen outwith Scotland?

I was not going to take part in the debate but, with your indulgence Presiding Officer, I will make a short contribution. Some members have already raised the point about a preponderance of males aged between 35 and 54 committing suicide. If it is not altogether understandable, we can see why people in that group might feel the most pressure. People reach an age at which they feel that they should have achieved something. They might well have done so, but in their minds they have not and they feel disappointment and pressure. That pressure might not come from outside; an individual might feel inside that he should have done something that he has not managed to do, despite the fact that he might be a very successful businessman or successful at something else. Other people do not see that pressure that those people are feeling. Christine Grahame talked about Daniel Perry’s mother saying that he did not let things get to him. Often, other people do not know who we are. It might look as though we are coasting through life and everything is hunky-dory, but it could take just one thing to trigger a devastating action. I do not think that those who are left behind are part of the Government’s suicide prevention strategy. Suicide might be a tragedy for a small group of people, but it can have a larger effect. I know of someone who found their friend who had committed suicide by using a hose on an exhaust pipe. Three days after he had gone missing, his friend found him. It happened a long time ago now, but the vision lives with his friend to this day. He has suffered mental health issues that were based on the stress that finding his friend caused. Although it is important to have some sort of prevention strategy, suicide is sometimes not preventable—sometimes we just do not see it coming—and those who suffer because of the act of the person who has committed suicide need to be protected. It is great to see the Government dealing with the stigma of mental ill health, and I congratulate the Government on the suicide prevention strategy and the work that it has done up to this point. Many speakers have mentioned online attacks. It used to be that, when someone slagged someone else off, they slagged them to their face, or they might have sent a poison pen letter. An individual can now be publicly ridiculed for no reason whatsoever, and they do not even know who the people are so there is nothing that they can do. They cannot defend themselves against it. People retweet things and jump on any bandwagon. That individual then feels as though they are being assailed from all sides. They feel helpless and they feel useless and that is when they get to the stage of considering suicide. It is important to note that the strategy will help in many ways, but it will not help in every way because people cannot always tell. Families can look after somebody and they are the ones who think that they know that person the best, but they are the ones who are the most shocked when that final action is taken. I have seen a number of people who have suffered from this. Kevin Stewart talked about people coming to see him earlier on. In the past six months, I have had a number of people coming in to my office who have attempted suicide and have talked about attempting it. One 17-year-old girl had tried to kill herself three times in the space of six to eight weeks, so it is not just us middle-aged and elderly men who are committing suicide or attempted suicide; it is people in the young group, too. They are finding the pressure of life so difficult—they might be finding it difficult to get a job or to get that boyfriend or girlfriend they think they have to have to be cool. We need to keep in mind that it is small things that can trigger those huge actions. I welcome the strategy. Everybody has to play their part in this: everybody has to look at their own family and to watch their own friends. If they see a change in a family member’s or friend’s behaviour, they need to take note of it. Somebody earlier on—I think that it was Neil Findlay—mentioned the macho issue and how Scots males are not very good at interacting with each other about our emotions. Sometimes we have to put that aside and just take a chance. If we think that somebody does not look right, we have to ask the question—we have to ask them what is wrong. If we do not, sometimes what happens is that we live to regret not asking them—we find that it is too late.

Like others, I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing the motion to the chamber. When I came into the chamber for the debate, I did not expect the Portuguese theme that I have heard and, unfortunately—

I am going to continue it, yes. As many members know, I was over seeing my brother get married on Wednesday. Michael is an immigrant to Portugal. He has been there for nearly 40 years and has made a life for himself. However, more interestingly and because it is right that we recognise clearly that there is a distinction between immigration and asylum, Michael’s partner, Raul, stayed in London because he was a refugee from Salazar. He could not go back until the dictatorship had fallen, and that is when they moved over to Lisbon. People we know are affected by asylum and immigration all the time, which made me think about the issue on a personal level. The difference between asylum and immigration must be at the forefront of the debate, because the two have been conflated by politicians for their own ends and we must acknowledge that there is an important difference. I first heard of the campaign when a constituent contacted my office to tell me about the posters. Like most people to whom I have spoken and like everybody who has spoken in the debate so far, I was appalled that such messages were being used at all and particularly in Scotland. I wrote a motion and wrote twice to the Home Secretary asking her for justification for the posters, but I am still waiting on a response. I feel a bit peeved: Kezia has had one and Nicola has had one, but I have not had a response from anybody.

My apologies, Presiding Officer. I also wrote to the then Minister of State for Crime Prevention, Lib Dem Jeremy Browne, after some encouraging newspaper comments from him. Unfortunately, since then, he has been removed from office. I am sure that that is just a coincidence. Of course, like everyone else, I welcome the Home Office decision to discontinue the go home poster campaign and the commitment by the Scottish Parliament to condemn the pilot programme. However, not only was the campaign appalling and insensitive, but its intent was clear: it was to say, “We don’t want you here.” The posters added more fear and distress for those who were already living life on the edge while seeking asylum in the UK. Robina Qureshi from Positive Action in Housing said it well when she said of the rhetoric: “As we all should know, ‘Go Home’ is a well-known racist taunt that has been used for decades in this country by fascists and racists against those of us from immigrant communities. That a government agency should decide to take up the same racist and xenophobic refrain while ‘processing’ would-be refugees to this country, is shameful and deeply offensive.” More than being “shameful and deeply offensive”, it is harmful to the country’s reputation and, more important, to asylum seekers’ wellbeing. I doubt that it ever once crossed the mind of the Home Secretary and her officials what feelings the use of language such as, “Is life here tough for you? We can help you go home,” would stir up for people for whom that is not an option at all—men, women and children who have fled for their lives, been separated from their families or seen their families killed. It is that lack of compassion from Westminster that appals me the most about the campaign. As well as being condemned by almost the whole chamber and the third sector, the campaign was condemned by The Herald. I think that its editorial of 30 August perfectly captured public feeling on the matter. It said: “What is particularly offensive about this is that these adverts, which are also being piloted in London’s Hounslow, appear to be directed at asylum seekers who have fled their countries of origin because they were no longer safe there. These are people whose claims are being processed by the UK Government. What point can there be in urging them to return to countries where they could be tortured, imprisoned or killed?” That ties in with the Home Office statistics that show that Pakistan, Iran, Iraq, China, Syria, Bangladesh and Afghanistan—countries where significant human rights abuses have been and continue to be documented—are among the top 10 countries from which asylum seekers come. Are we really saying that asylum seekers from those countries should be pressured into going back there? As we know, the majority of asylum seekers in Scotland live in Glasgow, where they form less than 0.5 per cent of the population. If all the asylum seekers in the city were put in Hampden stadium—which is in my constituency, in case I have not mentioned that previously—it would not even be 40 per cent full. It is clear that the pilot was designed not for Scotland, but for the south of England, where UKIP—as has been mentioned—is a threat to the political status quo.

Yes, I will do. I am pleased that the white paper promotes the idea of a truly progressive immigration and asylum system that would consider each application on its merits and which would not ask people to go home, because we want everyone who lives in Scotland—for whatever period of time and wherever they have come from—to see it as their home. I support the motion.

It is important to recognise that, although we have taken huge strides towards eliminating violence against women and towards changing a culture that had accepted it for centuries, there is still a long way to go before we eradicate it completely. We cannot become complacent. I hope that every member across the chamber will welcome the steps that the Government is taking to put in place Scotland’s strategy to tackle violence against women—although it does not sound like it. It is the first strategy of its kind in Scotland, and as well as focusing our attention on the issue, it ties in more broadly to Scotland’s national action plan for human rights, which is the first of its kind in the UK. It is becoming ever more clear that violence against women is a matter of human rights. Over the past couple of decades, it has been seen more and more in that light, including at an international organisational level. The former secretary general of the UN, Kofi Annan, said in 1999: “Violence against women is perhaps the most shameful human rights violation, and it is perhaps the most pervasive. It knows no boundaries of geography, culture or wealth. As long as it continues, we cannot claim to be making real progress towards equality, development and peace.” That rhetoric has been echoed by his successor, Ban Ki-Moon. It is crucial that a strategy to tackle violence against women encompasses the full spectrum of gender-based violence, from domestic abuse to rape and human trafficking, in order to tackle the issues head on. The terms “violence against women” and “gender-based violence” are often used interchangeably, as most—but not all—gender-based violence is inflicted by men on women and girls. It is important that we properly define what it is. It is violence that is directed against a person on the basis of gender and is almost always motivated by power. We must also understand that gender-based violence reflects and reinforces inequalities between men and women. It is encouraging to see that the Scottish Government is working to reduce inequalities in many areas, all of which will indirectly feed into one another to eradicate gender-based violence in Scotland. That approach is recognised by the UN commission on women, which stresses that it will take multiple approaches to tackle the issue, from Governments implementing policies to empower victims and prosecute perpetrators to the creation of a culture in which gender stereotypes are broken by encouraging men and boys to take an equal share of responsibilities in their homes and families. The work of the white ribbon campaign in organising men and getting them to condemn other men who commit violent acts against women has a key role to play, as does the work of violence reduction unit, which is headed by Karyn McCluskey and which has been at the forefront of groundbreaking research into methods to curb violent behaviour since it was founded in 2005. A method that it has found particularly useful is its mentors in violence prevention project, which involves an approach to gender violence and bullying prevention that is designed to train students to speak out against rape, dating violence, sexual harassment, bullying and all forms of violent and abusive behaviour. It does that by focusing on an innovative bystander approach and teaching viable options in response to incidents of harassment, abuse or violence. That teaching method is particularly important because research that was conducted by Dr Nancy Lombard on young people’s attitudes to violence found that men’s violence against women was justified through the use of gender stereotypes, and that the triggers for violence that were identified were things that women had not done. The 10 and 11-year-olds concerned already had a view that the victim was to blame, not the perpetrator. That belief needs to be challenged at a younger age, and I hope that the strategy will look at that. I am sure that the strategy will also recognise the importance of local groups and networks in the prevention of violence, including violence against women, and the vital support that they can provide for women and children. I am delighted that I will host a members’ business debate in the early new year to highlight the work of the children experiencing domestic abuse recovery—CEDAR—project and the Castlemilk Domestic Abuse Project, which includes the work of the women against violent environments group, in supporting women and children who have been affected by violence. I look forward to seeing the strategy when it is launched next year and firmly believe that it will be crucial as we continue to work to change the blame culture and gender inequalities that we now recognise as being key factors that we need to address if we are stop violence against women once and for all.

The only thing on which I agree with Margaret Mitchell is the hope that this is not an annual debate.

I thank Linda Fabiani for securing the debate and, like her, would like to welcome to the Parliament her guests from the field of maxillofacial prosthetics, as well as those who have benefited from their work; I hope that they have enjoyed their day so far and that they are enjoying the debate. It is clear that the work of maxillofacial prosthetists and technologists can be life changing. As Linda Fabiani said, they work to reconstruct the face after accident or disease. Those who work in the maxillofacial departments of hospitals across the country assist burns victims, cancer patients and many others who need treatment for the disfigurement of the head and neck region. In Glasgow, we know that there have often been specific reasons why such treatment has been required. The west of Scotland regional maxillofacial prosthetics service operates from two laboratories—one is at the Southern general and the other is at Glasgow royal infirmary. It is responsible for providing a full range of highly specialist technical and prosthetic services to the west of Scotland and Forth valley, as well as to other referring authorities nationally and internationally. I look forward to visiting the unit in the near future. The department is internationally recognised, not just for Michael O’Neil’s groundbreaking work with 3D printing, which Linda Fabiani highlighted in such an interesting way. One of his colleagues in the service was also presented with an award at the same conference in Inverness earlier this year. I am delighted that George Payne from Glasgow royal infirmary is in the gallery. He was presented with the Mount Vernon award, which recognises outstanding clinical practice—although I suspect that John Mason thinks that it has something to do with him. George is currently the principal maxillofacial prosthetist based at the Glasgow royal infirmary, providing a prosthesis service to a large number of plastic and ear, nose and throat surgeons. That involves the fabrication of all forms of facial and body prostheses, including burns therapy appliances. After almost 40 years of working in the west of Scotland maxillofacial prosthesis service, developing invaluable skills and expertise along the way, George Payne can be held up as an example of outstanding excellence in his field. It is testament to the strength of medical research in Scotland that NHS Scotland practitioners are continually being awarded for their research excellence and expertise across a wide variety of work in the national health service. I have recently been working with a local constituency group to support ME sufferers in Glasgow under the NHS, and have been struck by the practitioner research coming out of that field. I hope that it will be as useful to ME sufferers as Michael O’Neil’s research will be to those who require maxillofacial prosthesis. That excellence is fostered through health research fellowships initiated by the Scottish Government in March 2011. The fellowships are intended to allow clinical staff to develop a research career alongside their clinical duties by funding protected time for research activities. Some of the areas for study in those three-year fellowships include optimising treatment for patients with cardiac disease, improving outcomes for people who have dementia, developing personalised medicine for women who have ovarian cancer, and improving the management of children who have inflammatory bowel disease. It is hoped that the scheme, which has its first fellows about halfway through their first three-year placement, will continue to encourage a culture within the NHS that recognises research as a vital and important part of healthcare that contributes to improvements in patient care. It is great to be able to speak in a debate that helps to highlight just how much research talent Scotland has to offer across such a wide variety of skills and sectors, particularly in a field such as this, which can make such a huge difference to the lives of those who are treated. Long may it continue, and I hope that Michael O’Neil and George Payne continue with their groundbreaking work for many years to come.

Presiding Officer, I would like to raise a point of order under standing order 7.3.1. In this afternoon’s debate on the white paper, Johann Lamont stated: “This is a Government that promises better childcare if we vote for independence but which in six years has not been able to deliver an extra hour of physical education for our children.” I have had the opportunity to check that and the reality is that the number of hours of physical education being delivered in Scottish schools has increased substantially under this Government. Figures show that, in 2004-05, less than 10 per cent of schools were meeting the PE target but, under this Government, by June 2013, the figure had risen to 89 per cent. Presiding Officer, given that, should Ms Lamont now be given the opportunity to correct the record, as she has so often called on others to do, either now or in section K of the Scottish Parliament’s Business Bulletin? Alternatively, should we take it as more evidence that it is difficult to believe a single word that Labour says?

I start by welcoming Stuart Callison and Helen Forrest of St Andrew’s First Aid to the gallery, and by thanking the charity for the essential work that it does throughout Scotland to raise awareness of first aid. St Andrew’s First Aid has provided access to the highest standards in first aid training and services in Scotland for more than 100 years. From its creation in 1882, St Andrew’s has been a principal figure in championing first aid and is without doubt Scotland’s leading first aid charity. St Andrew’s achievements include providing Scotland with its first ambulance service in April 1882; publishing Dr George T Beaton’s “Ambulance Hand-Book” in 1891 to make first aid teaching more uniform; establishing permanent headquarters in Glasgow in 1929, due to the growth of the organisation; and playing an active role in the war efforts during both world wars. I should put on record that all those things are history for me, as I was not there for any of them. During the first world war, St Andrew’s staffed all Scotland’s military hospitals and during the second world war it provided staff for the civil nursing reserve, transportation services for air-raid casualties and first aid training for school children. Currently, St Andrew’s provides first aid training to more than 20,000 people per year in Scotland’s workplaces and communities, where it offers a range of courses for every need. Its volunteers deliver first aid services at numerous events throughout Scotland, from local community gatherings to Scottish Premier League and Scottish Football League—now the Scottish Professional Football League—matches as well as at T in the park. Additionally, St Andrew’s emphasises youth development through its badgers and cadets programmes, which encourage interest in first aid and provide Scotland’s youth with the opportunity to develop skills in first aid and related subjects. The organisation’s successes can be seen in the stories of its volunteers who have been able to save lives, as well as those who have gained valuable life skills. For example, when St Andrew’s first aid volunteer Tracy Jones was on holiday with her three children, she saved the life of a 19-month old baby who had gone missing and was found floating face down in a pond. The baby had stopped breathing and her parents did not know what to do, but Tracy successfully administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation and saved the wee girl’s life. In such emergencies, people tend to panic or freeze when they are unaware of what to do, so having even basic first aid skills can become a matter of life or death. Tracy was able to keep a level head as she used the skills that she had learned during her first aid course. Her heroic actions deserve the utmost praise. The training that St Andrew’s offers allows individuals to acquire not only the skills that can potentially save a life but the confidence that is needed to take charge of the situation, as Tracy did admirably. During last year’s St Andrew’s First Aid debate, I mentioned that I wanted to gain first aid skills myself. I had the opportunity to do so in a basic tester class at the campaign launch for Scottish first aid week. There I had the pleasure to train alongside Clyde 1 disc jockey Knoxy—clearly, from his smile and nodding head, Bob Doris knows who Knoxy is—and several St Andrew’s volunteers. The volunteers included Emma Nicholson, who was winner of the youth first aider of the year competition in 2012, and Callum Derrick, who has been nominated for this year’s award. Even with the short amount of training that I received, I now feel much more prepared to address any emergency situation that I might face. I was extremely delighted to see the level of support for the campaign as well as to hear of Emma’s and Callum’s achievements with St Andrew’s First Aid. Callum, who is now 17, has been involved with first aid since he was 10 and he encourages whomever he can—especially young children—also to gain the skills. He plans to continue volunteering with St. Andrew’s First Aid as he pursues his ultimate goal of joining the Royal Air Force. Emma has been associated with St. Andrew’s since she was 14 and has completed both the cadet program and the standard first aid course. She has volunteered at events in Glasgow and has recruited other cadets. She plans to apply the skills that she is learning in her future career—she plans to be a teacher. It was inspiring and a pleasure to meet those young volunteers and to see how they are gaining valuable life skills from being involved with first aid. The courses and opportunities provide Scotland with dedicated individuals like Emma and Callum, who are equipped to respond to any crisis or emergency in their communities. The skills can be learned at any age, by young children or adults, as I proved at that taster session. Therefore, it is concerning that, in spite of the high-quality training that is available throughout Scotland, fewer than one in four Scots has basic first aid skills. Even more worrying are the facts that 45 per cent of parents would not know what to do if their child was choking and that only 8 per cent of adult Scots have completed a child-related first aid course in the past three years. YouGov research that was commissioned by St Andrew’s First Aid found that parents’ greatest fear is of their child sustaining a head injury, followed by choking then drowning then burns. First aid intervention, even while waiting for emergency services, would be invaluable should any of those things occur. As a father and grandfather, I understand how helpless a parent would feel in an emergency if they were unable to deliver potentially life-saving first aid to their own child and how imperative it is to learn the techniques. The statistics are reason enough to do so. It is extremely important that we each, individually, take the initiative to gain first aid skills and that we encourage others to do so. I recognise the vital work that St Andrew’s First Aid does to ensure that more Scots gain first aid knowledge. Scottish first aid week, which started on 24 November and runs until Saturday, is dedicated to promoting first aid awareness. This year, the charity is focusing on a Scotland-wide campaign called “First aid? Count me in”. The campaign will target the public, voluntary and private sectors and aims to increase awareness of the fact that basic first aid skills save lives. The count me in pledge states: “No one should die because they needed First Aid and didn’t get it.” The campaign’s objective is to receive at least 34,000 signatures, which is a significant goal; it is equivalent to the number of Scots who are admitted to hospital each year as a result of burns, falls and choking. That number is even more serious given that 77 per cent of Scots lack the knowledge and confidence to administer basic first aid, so they immediately call 999. That high number of yearly accidents creates an excessive strain on national health service hospital and emergency services. That strain could be prevented because they are injuries to which first aid can make all the difference. Even a few minutes of administering first aid before paramedics arrive can have a significant impact, from decreasing the extent of the injury to ensuring that the injured person does not require any further medical attention or hospital admission. I am determined to help St Andrew’s First Aid to raise awareness of the campaign in order to make certain that more people throughout Scotland become better equipped to address such emergencies. I take the chance, during first aid week, to stress how important it is for Scots to take the various opportunities that they have to gain basic training. First aid is not a skill that will go to waste and it can be called on when one least expects it. I strongly encourage folk to do as much as they can during and after first aid week to increase their knowledge of the subject, from signing the St Andrew’s count me in campaign or accessing online resources about first aid facts to signing up for and participating in a training course. First aid week concludes on Saturday with the Scottish first aid awards—one of the highlights of the week—which will be held in Edinburgh. The awards will recognize and celebrate individuals, volunteers and businesses who have played an active role in championing first aid. It is important to celebrate those role models, because they create awareness and provide our society with examples of how everyday people can make a difference and save lives, encouraging each of us to be more proactive in learning and improving our first aid skills. As I mentioned, the count me in pledge states: “No one should die because they needed First Aid and didn’t get it.” I emphasise how valuable it is for our society to have individuals who can administer basic first aid and prevent the latter half of that statement from becoming a reality. I thank St Andrew’s First Aid for the high-quality services, training and opportunities that it is providing throughout Scotland as it pursues its goal to promote first aid. I am pleased to have brought the debate to the Scottish Parliament and hope that Scottish first aid week continues to be a success and encourages more Scots to learn life-saving skills that create safer schools, workplaces and communities.

We are all hugely influenced by our early experiences. I was fortunate in mine: I come from a conscientious, working-class, Irish Catholic family steeped in social awareness and was taught from an early age that perceived difference mattered not a jot and that we were all Jock Tamson’s bairns. That maxim has stood me in good stead over the years, and that is why I will support the bill at decision time. It is not because I have had a number of emails that say I should support it. If anything, on balance, I have probably had more against it than for it. I will vote on the basis of what I believe to be right and because of some personal experiences. This is a huge step for the Parliament and for Scotland. We have talked about the bill being a good thing for the Scottish Parliament, but I think that it is a good thing for the country. We pride ourselves on our values of equality, fairness and social justice, as Jackie Baillie said earlier, and I think that the bill is a perfect example of those. We have talked about safeguards and the bill has safeguards for celebrants, both religious and belief celebrants. We are not forcing anyone. The bill is about religious freedom, because it will allow certain religions to opt in or to opt out: they do not need to do same-sex marriages and nobody is forcing anyone. I have two sons who are both married and neither of them will feel less married if my brother can get married to his partner. That kind of argument is ridiculous. I am a bit older than some of the earlier speakers who gave very eloquent speeches, such as Ruth Davidson, Marco Biagi and Kevin Stewart. I remember what it was like for people who were gay when I was growing up, although we did not really know who they were, because they were in the shadows. My brother Michael was 15 when he came out, but the situation was so bad in Glasgow and Scotland at the time that he never came out to us. He waited until he was 17, then he went down to London and started a new life. He met a guy and went over to Portugal with him. He had to do that because of the Scotland that we lived in at the time, yet people say that we should not be moving on. The bill is a good thing. There are no losers in this; there are only winners. I completely understand that people have different views. I completely understand that people with a religious perspective might have concerns about the bill. The interesting thing for me is that Michael was more religious than me and kept his faith much longer than I did, even though he was being discriminated against by his church. Religion should not be a barrier to accepting the bill, which is highly important legislation. Michael created a life for himself outwith his homeland. He is in Portugal with his partner of 39 years. I am delighted to say that I phoned him up last night and said, “Michael, guess what I’m doing? I’m going to use you in a speech in the Parliament tomorrow.” He said “Oh, again. Right.” So, he is comfortable with it. He told me a wee while ago that he was thinking of getting married. He and his partner have been together for 39 years, which is a fairly long engagement, but they have decided that now is probably the time to get married. I suspect that part of the reason for that is that none of us is getting any younger, so they are looking to make sure that everything is right for when one of them goes, and so on. It is great that they are getting married but, unfortunately, they have to do it in Lisbon. I hope that any member of my family, or anybody I know of a younger generation who is homosexual—gay or lesbian—will be able to get married in Scotland. I do not know whether the party whip is in the chamber. He is. Hello, Joe, I will speak to you. I will be looking for that day off to go to Lisbon to see my brother getting married. It would be much easier if he was getting married in Glasgow or Edinburgh. The bill is a great thing. When I spoke to my brother last night, I said to him that I was going to use him in this speech and he said to me, “Oh? Okay. Coincidentally, James, I’m going in tomorrow to sign the papers so that we can organise the day that the marriage gets celebrated.” His marriage is coming soon and same-sex marriage will be coming soon in this country. I am confident that we will vote yes tonight and I am confident that when we get to stage 3 the bill will become law. Scotland will be a much better place for it.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the 2014 year of homecoming. (S4O-02556)

The minister will have noted that recently Scotland was named one of the best places to visit next year by the Lonely Planet guide. I am currently working with local organisations to see what we can do to highlight all that the south side of Glasgow has to offer tourists and residents in the run-up to the Commonwealth games and beyond. Does the minister agree that the 2014 year of homecoming offers a unique opportunity for tourists and locals to learn more about the oft-forgotten gems on their doorstep?

I also start by welcoming Angela and Marie to the chamber, and I thank Sandra White for bringing the motion for debate, because it gives us the opportunity to debate and celebrate the great work that Glasgow Women’s Aid has done during the past 40 years, as well as, unfortunately to look forward to its necessary and continuing role in the coming years. As we have heard, the first refuge in Glasgow was opened in 1973 and was underpinned by an ethos that had come from the Canadian Interval House model, which is based in Toronto. Glasgow Women’s Aid was set up mainly as a way of putting feminist theory into practice, and of positively affecting lives in a real and useful way. As many of us will remember, the culture around domestic violence back then was totally different to what it is today. Domestic abuse was a behind-closed-doors issue and the police and wider society seemed to be willing to turn their heads away from it. Things were changing even then, but the pace was still glacial. It is my view that the change of attitudes that was brought about by Glasgow Women’s Aid and the wider Scottish Women’s Aid movement was its most effective work. Without the pioneering work of women’s aid groups, I doubt very much that Scottish society would have progressed as far as it has in terms of seeing abuse of all kinds as being simply unacceptable. I was astounded to learn that the Glasgow and Edinburgh centres were open for almost a decade before spousal rape was made illegal in Scotland, and that it would be a further 10 years before it was made illegal in England. Against the backdrop of spousal rape then still being legal, it is no great surprise that when Glasgow Women’s Aid started, it was assumed by many—mostly males, I suspect—that the women who were involved just hated men and wanted to break up families, to ruin men’s lives, and to turn women against them. Although there was some support from the social work department, there was also unease among some social workers who, in the words of one of the contributors to the documentary that was made by Scottish Women’s Aid about its history, saw it all as “a bit odd”. Of course, we now know that the work that Glasgow Women’s Aid has done is not “odd”; rather, it has been integral to our understanding of what domestic abuse actually is and how we can deal with it. As well as the fantastic assistance that women’s aid groups give to individual women and the families who come to them, Glasgow Women’s Aid has become the model that other organisations across Glasgow and, I am sure in the wider country, work to. It is clear that although the refuge part of the work that Glasgow Woman’s Aid does is important, the support network that it offers is just as crucial. I was delighted to hear Sandra White mention CEDAR. I have met CEDAR a couple of times and have a member’s business debate scheduled for later this year or early next year on its behalf, in order to congratulate it on the good work that is doing and its good practice. Testimony from the countless women and children who have been helped over the years by Glasgow Women’s Aid shows that its support has been integral to their recovery. It is clear that domestic violence can happen to any woman, at any time, in any part of Glasgow, at any age, and in any social class. The common thread that runs through all the women who have been helped by Glasgow Women’s Aid is their shared experience. Being able to talk things through in a supportive and understanding environment, and getting help to get a new job or a new home has allowed them to move forward with their lives. The Glasgow Women’s Aid model is now used across Glasgow, with Women Against Violence, and the domestic abuse project that is based in Castlemilk in my constituency, which offers help and support to women and children who have fled domestic abuse. The Jeely Piece Club offers a play strategy to assist children who have difficult, chaotic and stressful home lives. The local housing associations also try to act sensitively when issues of domestic abuse are raised, and they do what they can to ensure that women and children are housed appropriately. Although all those organisations are crucial, on my visit to Glasgow Woman’s Aid I was delighted to hear about its aim to expand its work in the south of Glasgow. As I made clear at the time, I am keen to help where I can to ensure that that expansion comes to fruition. Unfortunately, although the work of Glasgow Women’s Aid has helped countless women and children, we are not yet free of the scourge of domestic abuse. Attitudes are changing, but we still have a way to go with the message that the person who is being abused is never to blame for the abuse, regardless of whether they are drunk or have consented before. There is still a role for Women’s Aid educational outreach programs to ensure that the “The abused is not to blame” mantra is reinforced to young adults, because recent research shows that some young people continue to find certain forms of abusive behaviour acceptable within relationships. That attitude clearly needs to be challenged through education; curriculum for excellence offers an avenue for that to be explored. Once again, I thank Glasgow Women’s Aid for all the work that it has done. I look forward to seeing it expand its services into the south-east of Glasgow and I will help in whatever way I can.

There is no doubt that there are clear long-term economic and social benefits attached to play, and that investing in children’s play is one of the most important things that we can do to improve children’s health and wellbeing across Scotland. Play is good for the child, as it gives them confidence and the ability to communicate and share with other children. When Jayne Baxter spoke about her grandchildren, it reminded me that my two grandkids spent their early years in a tenement. It was a lovely tenement house in a lovely place, but there was no play area for them. They moved away—10 years ago, now—and within a year I could see a huge difference in their confidence and their physical abilities. Therefore, Jayne Baxter made a very good point. As for George’s inner child, I think that he is still playing. The action plan addresses four domains: “In the Home”, “At Nursery and School”, “In the Community” and “Positive Support for Play”. I will concentrate on the last of those and will explain why in a minute. First, here comes an episode of “All Our Yesterdays”. When I was a kid, during the holidays we left the house in the morning, come rain or shine, came home at lunchtime—sometimes—and then came home for dinner, hopefully to go back out to play before bedtime. We played hide and seek or allevio and hid up trees. We played best man’s fall, with branches for guns, and then rolled in the mud once we had been shot with those guns. We played football, and occasionally cricket, in the summer, with jumpers for goals or stumps. We came home dirty, hungry, scraped and bruised, but happy and fulfilled. For lots of reasons, many of which have been articulated, we seem to have lost the opportunity for children to go out and play without structure or supervision, which is why the strategy recognises the benefits of active play. In many ways, things were easier back then and, although money may have been extremely tight—it certainly was in my case—we did not have the stresses that exist for many families now. Throughout my constituency there are families who find the pressures of life so great, and the existence of grinding poverty so wearing, that they do not have the time, or in many cases the expertise, to play with their children. By the time their children go to school—or sometimes, tragically, even by the time they go to nursery—the children can be difficult to control and to get involved in play or any other activity. That is where the fourth strand, or domain, comes in. In my case, I am talking about the Jeely Piece Club, which is a magnificent organisation that I am extremely proud to have in my constituency and has already been named by the minister as a fine example of outdoor play provision. Founded in 1975 by a group of parents in Castlemilk who wanted to provide play opportunities for their kids, the club initially ran play schemes during the school summer holidays. In time, funding was raised to run activities all year round, before the club became the hugely successful nursery and play centre that it is today. The Jeely Piece Club now has two bases in Castlemilk, is open for 342 play sessions a year and delivers a 10-week holiday programme. Its play zone receives more than 22,000 visitors a year. As the only soft play centre in the area, the Jeely Piece Club is the only centre that is focused on meeting the free-play needs of children up to 12 years of age—the most important time. The club has also opened an outdoor children’s play park and has opened up access to Castlemilk wood for outdoor play, as part of its go play project. More than 1,000 kids a year take part in the club’s outdoor activities, which include climbing trees, building dens and learning about nature. As well as being a well-run organisation that delivers not only the successful play schemes, but a nursery either free or for a nominal fee, the Jeely Piece Club seeks to deliver personal development for children and families, some of whom are growing up in highly adverse social and economic circumstances. We know that living in chaotic households can have serious emotional and physical consequences for children and their parents, which can, unless they are addressed in early childhood, have a lifelong adverse impact, with consequential issues for the family and society as a whole. As an organisation that is trusted by parents, the community and agencies, the Jeely works mostly with the mothers in aiming to help them to help their children, through play and other interventions, to overcome those issues and to develop, so that they can start primary school with the skills that are needed to engage with the wider education system. There is no doubt that the difference that the Jeely makes to the local community cannot be overstated. A huge vote of thanks is due to Tracey Black, Grace Lamont and all the staff, volunteers and parents who work so hard to make the Jeely a success. Members should just listen to this direct quote, which emphasises what the club means to some of the parents: “If the Jeely hadn’t been here, there is a 99% chance my children wouldn’t be with me now.” Now, that is making a difference. A recent study by Stanford University, based on American statistics and an American pilot study, showed that early intervention and working with parents who need support and assistance, both during pregnancy and until the children reach school age, is among the most important tools that can be used to reduce crime. There was a 59 per cent reduction in child arrests by age 15 for children who had gone through the programme, compared to children who could have used the help but did not get it because of the limits of the pilot. That mixture of early intervention and play, which has had such an impact where it has been tested in America, is having a similar impact when used by the Jeely and other like-minded organisations. The Scottish Government has made a commitment to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up and we know that it is better for all of us if we invest in such programmes now rather than pay a far higher price later. It is also crucial that we move away from the belief that play has to be expensive, as has already been mentioned by a number of members. One of the parents who are quoted in the strategy noted: “I’ve learned kids are happy playing with almost anything, you don’t have to buy expensive toys.” We are all guilty, I suspect, of thinking that giving kids a happy Christmas involves spending a lot of money on them. As has already been mentioned, the truth is that often they will play more with the box than with the expensive gift that has been bought for them. We have a choice to make about what sort of country we want our children and their children to live in. There is a wealth of research out there that tells us that the best way to address economic inequality, poverty and crime is to invest in early education programmes, including our play strategy, and in coaching parents who require help. The play strategy is not a magic bullet, but it is a tool that we must use to fight the poverty that blights too many children and their families in Scotland today. The strategy will play a huge role in the years ahead as we work together to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in. I hope that the strategy gets the cross-party support that it deserves.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the additional seven-day wait for new claimants of jobseekers allowance will have on its welfare reform mitigation measures. (S4O-02465)

I thank the minister for that answer. Michael Gove, the UK Secretary of State for Education, has suggested that people use food banks because of “decisions that have been taken by those families which mean that they are not best able to manage their finances”. Does the minister share my view that that increased food bank use is caused by ill-thought-out welfare reforms, such as this reform of jobseekers allowance?

A people carrier.

I have been intrigued by the debate so far. I never realised that there were so many closet nationalists on the other side of the chamber; every argument I have heard has been an argument for independence. Members have talked about the evils of welfare reform, the low level of child benefit and the issue of energy controls, which are all things that are outwith our control. It is because Westminster controls those things that we are in the situation that we are in. Despite that, Jackie Baillie and her colleagues say, “Come on, Alex and Angela. Get your act together and get this sorted.” Let us get real. We will get the powers that we seek next year. The reality is that we are not obsessed with the referendum; we are obsessed with Scotland getting the powers that it requires so that it can be the country that it should be. I will move on to what Kezia Dugdale said, because if I do not she will never forgive me or Kenny Gibson, who did not manage to get to her. Everyone knows the work that Kezia Dugdale has done on payday loans and how passionate and caring she is on the matter—I also note the cross-party work that is being carried out on it—but I have to be honest and say that she was making the case for independence. I accept that there are some things that the Scottish Government can and will try to do, but the only way we can get rid of payday loans is to have the powers to do so.

I am sorry, but that is not an argument for anything. Kezia Dugdale is saying that things are bad at the moment, but let us just keep them that way. What we are saying is this: let us get the powers and then change things. We do not have the powers to change payday loan regulation just now, but we will have them after next September. [Interruption.]

The motion asks the UK Government and the Scottish Government to do what they can urgently to tackle the underlying issues that increase the cost of living, so I want to focus on specific measures that the Scottish Government is taking in reaction to the rise in cost of living. Although the costs of childcare, which have been mentioned a number of times, are rising far above the increase in inflation, the Scottish Government has already increased free nursery provision by 20 per cent since 2007, and our Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will ensure a minimum of 600 hours of free flexible learning and childcare for all three and four-year-olds and all looked-after two-year-olds. It will be the best nursery care package in the UK; it will benefit about 120,000 children in Scotland and will on average save families £700 a year. Where this Scottish Government has the power to make changes to ease the cost of living through changes to childcare, it is already doing so. I also want to touch on the introduction of the living wage. As my colleagues have mentioned, the Joseph Rowntree report notes that it is impossible to achieve a minimum standard of living on benefits other than pension credit, and that it is nigh on impossible to achieve that on the minimum wage and that a living wage would provide just the amount that would be needed to meet the minimum living standard. The Scottish Government cannot compel either the private sector or all the public sector to introduce a living wage—that power still rests with Westminster—but where it can, this Government has seen to it that a living wage is paid as a minimum. The SNP is committed to a living wage, although I note that no similar commitment was forthcoming from Ed Miliband in last week’s conference speech. As my colleagues have pointed out, the Rowntree report also touches on council tax rises across the rest of the UK as being one of the core reasons for the soaring cost of living. That is not applicable to Scotland, where the council tax has been frozen since 2007—since 2005 in Glasgow—and will continue to be frozen for the lifetime of this Parliament. The policy continues to benefit those who are in the lowest income bracket who are, because they have much less financial security and freedom, most affected by the soaring cost of living. Scottish Labour’s position on the council tax freeze—a policy that is having demonstrable benefits in the purses of ordinary working Scots—is, like most of its other policies, muddled. In fact, Drew Smith has this afternoon showed Labour’s confusion over the issue. Was he saying that council tax should rise? To be fair, such flip-flopping can be seen not only in relation to the council tax. One day, Labour clearly supports the bedroom tax—after all, it originally introduced it for the private sector—and the next it does not. Labour members were told that they could not say whether or not they support it, but now they have been told that they can say that they are against it. Who knows how long the current position will stick? I suppose that that will depend on Ed. As with the bedroom tax, many of the foundations on which the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition has built its harmful policies, which in turn are contributing to the astronomical rise in the cost of living, were laid by the Labour Party at Westminster between 1997 and 2010. That is why under Labour the gap between rich and poor increased more than it had ever increased before. Members do not have to take my word for it; they just need to look at Liam Byrne’s comments about the Tories’ latest bash the poor scheme, which Ken Macintosh alluded to when he was trying to attack the Tories in his speech. Mr Byrne quite rightly claimed that it is just a rehash of Labour’s jobs guarantee policy. We can see that we could get hardly a fag paper between the two main unionist parties. The coalition’s expansion of those policies is having a huge impact not only on the cost of living for people across the UK, but on their standards of living. We cannot look at one without looking at the other, and the Rowntree report makes it clear that standards of living will continue to fall for many people because of the proposals that have been outlined by the Conservative and Lib Dem Government.

When we get told by the rich Conservative minister Lord Freud that he cannot say whether the rise in people presenting at food banks is because of failures by the Department for Work and Pensions or because food banks provide an opportunity to get free food, we realise just how far removed from reality those who make the decisions about welfare are. The Scottish Government is clearly making changes to help people.

The Scottish Government cannot, however, continue to mitigate the situation indefinitely. I believe that the time is coming when the people of Scotland will look for change, and that they will vote yes to independence next year to ensure that Parliament has the power to make the policy changes that are needed to ameliorate the worst effects.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions ministers have had with local authorities regarding the community benefits that arise from environmental projects. (S4O-02437)

Does the minister agree that it is imperative that local authorities consider that any community benefits from such projects should support the local community first and foremost? In Castlemilk and Carmunnock, in my constituency, the community has been informed that most of the profit from the local wind park, which was originally to be used for local community benefit, will now be made part of central funding by Glasgow City Council.

I welcome the many visitors here tonight, including those from the British Deaf Association Scotland, West Lothian College, Inclusion Scotland, Renfrewshire Council and, of course, a couple of my Twitter friends, who are up in the gallery as well. It is nice to see you here. I thank those in the independent living in Scotland project—Pam Duncan in particular—for all the hard work that they have done in ensuring that people with disabilities have their voices heard loud and clear. I am delighted to bring to the chamber this members’ business debate on independent living in Scotland’s report “Politically (in)correct—representation of disabled people in Politics”. It is just one of the reports from independent living in Scotland’s “Solutions Series”, which is an initiative on pop-up think-tanks that bring people, including stakeholders and policymakers, together to discuss the solutions to specific barriers to independent living. Other reports in the series include “Personalisation and independent living” and “Rights to reality—implementing Article 19 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Disabled People (UNCRDP) in Scotland.” Both those reports are well worth a read and can be accessed online at the independent living in Scotland website at www.ilis.co.uk. However, we are here today to discuss specifically representation of disabled people in politics. I was delighted to take part in the think tank on that subject with a number of different representatives from political parties. The think tank was chaired by Dame Anne Begg and it included Patrick Harvie MSP, along with a number of Glasgow councillors, including my colleague Susan Aitken, as well as representatives from Inclusion Scotland, Glasgow Disability Alliance, the National Union of Students, the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament. I was hugely impressed with the pop-up think tank idea and I found the event to be incredibly useful and informative. Hearing at first hand of the practical difficulties that people with disabilities face while trying to be part of the political process makes one recognise just how determined people such as Dame Anne Begg and Dennis Robertson have to be to overcome those monumental challenges. However, most of the discussion was about how to make it easier for people with disabilities just to begin to take part in the political process. One of the clear themes of the think tank and the subsequent report is that disabled people are among the most disenfranchised people in society and can feel that decisions are made about them rather than in conjunction with them. That has never been more important than at this time when we are seeing the harmful impact that the welfare reforms that have been implemented at Westminster are having on disabled people. We can see it in the bedroom tax, changes to carers support and in the move from disability living allowance to personal independence payments. Those changes will mean that 90,000 fewer disabled people in Scotland will receive assistance for their care needs by 2018, and the cost of that loss in entitlement will be £272 million per year by 2018. I have taken those figures from Inclusion Scotland, so members can blame it—not me. It was strongly suggested at the think tank that it is less likely that policies such as those would have been implemented had there been more MPs with direct experience of disability. However, to be realistic, for the representation issue to be fully addressed it will take years of continued progress before we see the representation that we want. It is therefore crucial that we, as politicians, continue to support disabled people in the fight for fair treatment and a stronger voice. An issue that came up time and again at the think tank was that the main route into elected politics is via political parties. It is therefore important that parties have mechanisms and structures in place to support disabled people in getting involved. In my party branch, we ensure that all our meetings are held in places that are accessible to all. We are also currently asking all members whether they have any practical problems in accessing politics at branch level. That includes considering issues such as the timings of meetings, the geography of where meetings are held, whether members need written reports in specific formats and whether they need assistance in getting to branch meetings. We are also undertaking an audit of campaigning skills. Campaigning has moved on from the traditional door-knocking and leafleting, both of which could be barriers to political participation for some disabled people. We are working on a campaign strategy to ensure that all members of the local branch can make a contribution to political campaigns in a number of different ways, be it for Holyrood, Westminster or the local council, as well as for the independence referendum next year. However, although it is hugely important to ensure that the political party structure is as friendly as possible to all, we must also engage more disabled people in politics more generally outwith political parties. One of the initiatives that is mooted by Inclusion Scotland is an internship programme at the Scottish Parliament, similar to a programme that is already working at Westminster. As a member who has had a high school internship competition for the past two years to help to engage young people from my constituency in politics, I am supportive of such initiatives, so I have written today to the Presiding Officer to ask whether she will ask Parliament to look into the benefits of introducing such a scheme. In the interim, members could consider bringing about such a scheme through our own offices. I will look at doing something like that in the forthcoming year. I note that the access to elected office fund, which Westminster runs, assists disabled people to meet the extra costs that they incur in running for office. Will the minister investigate the possibility of introducing a similar scheme for the Scottish Parliament? It is crucial that we continue to consult organisations such as the independent living in Scotland project, Inclusion Scotland, Glasgow Disability Alliance and many others to ensure that disabled people are given all the help and encouragement that they need to access politics. One in five people in Scotland and the United Kingdom is disabled, but only a handful of members identify themselves as such. I believe that encouraging and assisting disabled people to take part in the political process would be good not just for the individuals concerned but for democracy as a whole. Our democracy and decision making are enhanced and strengthened when many different voices and experiences are represented in Parliament. I want a Parliament that allows the people of Scotland to say, “They speak for us.” For that to happen, we need to do all that we can to assist all sectors of society to participate. I look forward to hearing what my colleagues think about the report and how they are trying to empower more people—disabled or otherwise—to enter politics and ensure that decisions that are made in the Scottish Parliament have at their core the best interests and the experience of all our citizens.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress has been made in discussions with the UK Government on repatriating the annual £1.4 million of red meat levy income paid by Scotland’s farmers. (S4O-02352)

Given the UK Government’s negative response on this important issue, on which the Scottish Government has the support of Quality Meat Scotland and NFU Scotland, does the cabinet secretary share my disappointment at the Prime Minister’s unwillingness to change tack, although Scotland is so clearly losing out?

Voltaire famously said, “We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation”, and we can see why when we look at the extraordinary historic environment from the Athens of the north—that is Edinburgh—to the wilds of the Highlands. There is not a corner of this country that is not teeming with history. My Glasgow Cathcart constituency has a rich historic legacy. Much of it is connected to Mary Queen of Scots and it includes a long connection with the Stuart dynasty of Castlemilk. The battle of Langside marks the last act of Mary Queen of Scots on Scottish soil. As we know, the battle between Mary and the Earl of Moray, the ruler of Scotland until his nephew James VI was old enough to take the throne, was the last act of Mary before she sought refuge in England with her cousin Elizabeth I—and we all know how that worked out. The political, social and religious turmoil that ensued while Mary was in prison still has ramifications in Scottish society today. With Elizabeth I bearing no children, James VI of Scotland became James I of England, uniting the crown in 1603. Had the battle of Langside gone differently for Mary and her army, it is not an overstatement to say that huge swathes of Scottish history would have been different. The battle of Langside is well recognised in the area, and as well as Langside this part of Glasgow contains the communities of Battlefield and Queen’s Park and streets such as Queen Mary Avenue, Moray Place and Regent Park Square, all of which commemorate the big players in the battle. The Langside monument stands proudly in the area, the lion atop it looking in the direction from which Mary’s troops advanced. A local organisation in Battlefield, at Valeview Terrace and the Valeview lane, has put its own plaque on the railings. It is now quite a feature and a good number of people stop to look at where Mary is meant to have stood before the battle. It is nice to see local people getting involved. I was delighted to lend my support to a local campaign to have the Langside battlefield included in Historic Scotland’s inventory of historic battlefields—a campaign that I am delighted to say was successful. The inventory is just one example of the work that is being done to ensure that Scotland’s rich historic heritage is documented and maintained for future generations. It is extremely important that we continue to invest so that locals and visitors alike continue to learn about the role that the area played in Scottish history. There is not a corner of this great land that does not have a story to tell such as we have heard from many members, and we must do all that we can do to document and teach about those stories, making them and the places where they happened as accessible as possible. That is what the strategy will do. It says in the strategy: “Our vision for Scotland’s historic environment is that it is understood and valued, cared for and protected, enjoyed and enhanced. It is at the heart of a flourishing and sustainable Scotland and will be passed on with pride to benefit future generations.” There are examples of the strategy being put into practice throughout the country, such as the regeneration of the Castlemilk stables. The night before the battle of Langside, Mary Queen of Scots stayed with her family, the Stuarts, at the castle in Castlemilk. That beautiful house was a feature of the south side for centuries. It is unfortunate that in 1939 it passed to Glasgow Corporation, which demolished it in 1969 to make way for new houses. I was pleased to hear about the group that involves local authorities and COSLA. I hope that the group will also involve local housing associations, which have a role to play in ensuring that historic monuments become part of the community. All that remained of the castle were the stables, which fell into disrepair and were set alight by vandals in 1994. Thereafter, in essence, Glasgow City Council wiped its hands of the building and it fell to the local community to refurbish and regenerate it. The work was completed in 2007 and the stables are now the focal point of the Cassiltoun Trust. The highlight is a magnificent fireplace, which was found among the rubble. The fireplace shows what the castle must have been like and is a real party piece for visitors. The refurbishment of the stables acted as a catalyst for economic and environmental regeneration for the area, which has brought new services, training, employment and recreation opportunities for the community. The trust has won more than 10 regeneration awards since 2007, which shows that close work with others to regenerate communities and properly utilise historic artefacts can be achieved and can be far more beneficial to communities than the unfortunate acts of cultural vandalism of many local authorities over the decades. Cassiltoun Trust’s work can serve as a blueprint for how local buildings can best be utilised by the community in a way that ensures that our historic heritage remains strong. The approach is perfectly encapsulated in the strategy; we just need to ensure that implementation is not ad hoc. Of course, the creation of our heritage is on-going. The buildings and environment of today will be the historic heritage of tomorrow. We need to ensure that we leave a heritage of which we can be proud, by ensuring that when planning permission is sought the area’s heritage and future plans are in sync and that appropriate care and consideration are given to the historic environment, to ensure that future generations can enjoy it. I am passionate about Cathcart’s local history and about the heritage of the city of Glasgow, particularly the south side—that is why I was so disappointed to hear the cabinet secretary say that she is giving money to Kelvin; so much good work could have been done on the south side. Members should not tell Sandra White that I said that. I am working closely with local representatives and organisations from the south side to see whether we can put together a plan for an extension of tourist trips to that part of the city, so that the tourists who contribute so hugely to Scotland’s economy can have easy access to the many attractions in the south side—in my constituency alone we have Holmwood house, the Burrell collection, Hampden Park and Pollok house, to name but a few, and there are countless other attractions throughout the south side, in Govan, Pollok and elsewhere. I look forward to working closely with all sectors to help to enhance and promote everything that the south side of Glasgow’s extraordinary historic heritage has to offer. The motion will help us to do that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was part of the committee meeting that Mrs Scanlon was speaking about. This is not something that I would like to raise in the chamber, but I have to be honest: her comments were so rude that I had to disassociate myself from them at the first opportunity at the committee. I agree with Mrs Scanlon that respect is very important. It should be given to witnesses as well as to members of the Parliament.

I thank John Wilson for securing the debate on Oxfam Scotland’s “Our Economy” report, and I wish happy 50th birthday to Oxfam Scotland. As this important report says, “Poverty is unjust and unacceptable” and “there is nothing inevitable about Scotland’s level of poverty” particularly in the west of Scotland where, as has been noted by the World Health Organization, there is a 28-year gap in life expectancy around the Glasgow area. That is a frank manifestation of the poverty that blights areas of my home city. Oxfam’s report is clear in its belief that the quest for economic growth above all else is the main reason why the rich are vastly richer than the poor. Oxfam suggests that the theory of trickle-down economics has proved to be useless, and that creating wealth without adequate ways of redistributing it leaves the rich to get richer with no positive impact on the poor. In looking to combat that, Oxfam has developed the humankind index to assess Scotland’s prosperity in better terms than just GDP. The report recommends that the Scottish Government embed the humankind index in impact assessments and policy discussions so that the social worth of a project is considered alongside its economic benefits. In many ways, that is already happening in Scotland. Internationally acclaimed Nobel prize winning economist Joseph Stiglitz has commended the Scottish Government’s efforts to develop better performance measures, and notes that Scotland is a world leader in having wellbeing as a policy consideration. I have no doubt that there is a long way to go, but we have made a good start. That was echoed in the Carnegie UK Trust’s report, “Shifting the Dial: From wellbeing measures to policy practice”, which also notes Scotland’s leading international role in considering wellbeing at policy level. It is therefore clear that the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that people are at the heart of its policy decisions. The report also raises justified concerns about the amount of in-work poverty, which has skyrocketed during the past decade. Of the 700,000 people in Scotland who are living in poverty, 120,000 are pensioners, 300,000 are out of work, and 280,000 are in work but do not make enough to pay for life’s essentials. Just yesterday, we heard about the soaring number of people who are having to use food banks. That is, in 21st century energy, people and resource-rich Scotland, a scandal. In part, that occurs because the minimum wage is too low and does not pay even for a bare minimum standard of living. As Oxfam notes, that situation is being exacerbated by issues such as the bedroom tax and welfare reform, which it is clear have been pushed through by politicians who have little grasp of the challenges that are associated with their policies. That point was illustrated yesterday by my colleague Christina McKelvie, who quoted a response from Lord Freud saying that people with motor neurone disease could either take in a lodger or just work more hours in order to pay the rent shortfall that is due to money being taken off their housing benefit. It beggars belief, but it highlights the disconnect between some Westminster politicians and ordinary lives. Oxfam Scotland recommends moving to the living wage as a replacement for the UK minimum wage, which is £2 per hour lower. The Scottish Government has done all that it can, within its powers, to address the issue of low pay. In 2012, the minimum Scottish Government wage was a living wage of £7.23 per hour, which compares with a minimum of £5.63 when it came to power in 2007. However, we must ensure that we do all that we can to continue to exert pressure for the minimum wage to be raised to a living wage. That would lift thousands of people out of poverty, cut the benefits bill and help to kick-start the economy. At its heart, Oxfam Scotland’s call is for a transformative structural change that would embed Scotland’s economy as a servant of the people instead of its being the other way round. Clearly, key elements of that are that we have a truly progressive redistributive taxation system and that we actively challenge tax avoidance and evasion, which the report says cost Westminster £120 billion a year—or 40 times the cost of benefit fraud. Where the Scottish Government has had the power to introduce progressive taxes, such as the land and buildings transaction tax, it has been progressive. However, without proper tax varying and raising powers of our own, Scotland’s ability to transform remains curtailed by Westminster. Oxfam says that its vision is not limited by the delineation between devolved and reserved powers, and that is how it should be—

Oxfam’s blueprint is its aspiration for Scotland, period. I share that aspiration, but to me it is clear that only one Parliament will be able to use the blueprint to make a fairer, more just and more equal Scotland, and that is this Parliament, elected by the people of Scotland.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on its strategy for measuring wellbeing, in light of the publication of “Shifting the Dial in Scotland” by the Carnegie UK Trust. (S4O-02314)

The report supports the view of Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz, who commended the Scottish Government’s efforts to develop better measures of performance, and notes that Scotland is a world leader in having wellbeing as a policy consideration. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it would be better if all policy decisions that affect Scotland had the wellbeing of our citizens at heart? Does he agree that the best way to ensure that is by taking decisions out of Westminster’s hands and voting yes in 447 days’ time?

As a substitute member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have played no part in producing its report, “Having and keeping a home: steps to preventing homelessness among young people”, but I am delighted to take part in the debate on the report and to state how helpful it is. What struck me about the report was that there is clear evidence on how effective targeted multi-agency support can be in preventing youth homelessness in the first place. The work in Angus is a huge success—a young persons options service was implemented that saw a 75 per cent reduction in homeless presentations after its first month—and many local authorities could and probably should look to emulate it. It is clear from the report that one area that needs improvement is the mythology around young people moving into their first flat compared with what the reality often is. It came out again and again in the evidence that young folk thought that living alone would be great but quickly realised that they had glamorised it as a life of doing what they wanted when in fact it can be a lonely and very isolating existence. I therefore welcome the report’s recommendations and the Scottish Government’s commitment to look at supportive adult foster services that could offer the help and assistance that is often required for the transition into living alone for the first time. The aim of homelessness services should be to support everyone into appropriate housing that is suitable for their needs. The report refers to the issues around sub-standard housing, and we know that the Scottish Government is working on that area. I am sure that members support the new independent Scottish Housing Regulator, which is responsible for monitoring the progress of landlords in achieving the living standards set out in the social housing charter, which need to be achieved by 2015. A lot of good work is being done on supporting young people in their transition into a new tenancy or home and it is important that that momentum continues. The new curriculum for excellence looks as if it will be a good vehicle for teaching lessons on finance and budgeting and looking after a home. Stewart Stevenson, Linda Fabiani and others spoke about such matters earlier. In the report, the committee was keen to see more work on the role of education in schools. That idea had a lot of support from affected stakeholders, who suggested that the work should not be an add-on but should—as the convener said—be offered to all pupils in all schools, perhaps through personal and social education lessons. It is clear that the homelessness prevention programmes that are in place in schools are very successful, and that they should become the norm. It is also important that they are interactive and relaxed and give information on what the reality of becoming homeless is, as well as practical information about budgeting, the cost of housing and the cost of living. It is also important that support is given to young people whose education has had significant disruption. It was recognised in the report that disruption to education is an area in which more support is needed, because very often those who become homeless, particularly through leaving the care system, lack the social skills that would assist them in living alone. I am delighted that that will be looked at in more detail in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. It was mentioned in evidence that one of the barriers to accessing education at college level is that housing benefit is not paid to people in full-time education at college and that that disincentive to learn is a huge obstacle to overcome, particularly if someone can be paid to sit in a hostel all day but not for attending at college. That is an area of housing benefit that needs serious reform by the Westminster coalition Government. I support Citizens Advice Scotland’s call in its response to the report. It wants the UK Government to ensure fair, equal treatment of young people in the housing benefit system. I do not want to kick a man when he is down, but Alex Johnstone refused to take interventions earlier and I suspect that that was because of Iain Duncan Smith’s comments yesterday about removing housing benefit from those aged under 25. We are talking here about trying to get a solution to a problem in Scotland and we are being hit with that whammy from Westminster, so I can understand why Alex Johnstone did not want to take any interventions. It is clear that welfare reform is a barrier to continued progress. As the report says, “given welfare reforms, we are aware that the landscape is changing and that preventing youth homelessness may become more challenging.” The Welfare Reform Committee heard today from Professor Alan Miller, chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, on austerity and human rights. In his written submission he suggested: “Consistent evidence and testimony indicates that disadvantaged and marginalised groups ... will be disproportionately affected by the measures ... In other instances the measures may render people homeless or destitute.” We are already seeing the evidence of that, as a few members have mentioned. The welfare reforms were sold to us as a way to streamline and simplify the system to make it fairer and easier, ensure that work pays, and reduce poverty. In reality, they may—nay, will—render disadvantaged and marginalised people homeless. The draconian reforms to our welfare system have the ability to impact directly on the way in which the Scottish Government, local authorities, schools, charities and other stakeholders work to help the most vulnerable in our society. It is a sad state of affairs when the effect of a report such as this, for which the committee has taken on wide-ranging views and evidence and has found areas of good practice and areas in which improvements need to be made, is curtailed by welfare reforms that are being imposed on the people of Scotland by a Government that we did vote for and ministers who will personally be completely unaffected by the changes. A number of things came to me from the report. First, it is a very good example of what the Scottish Parliament committee system is capable of, and it includes thoughtful nuanced evidence and advice. It has asked pertinent questions of the way forward to alleviate what is one of the most serious problems affecting Scottish society, and it has recognised the needs of those most affected—in this case, the young homeless. Secondly, there is clearly still work to be done, but I am hugely encouraged by the Scottish Government’s response and commitment to work alongside stakeholders to get the best possible result. Thirdly, there has been recognition of the real impact, both at present and in the future, of the Westminster welfare reforms. Fourthly, the only way that we can fully alleviate the problems that come from those welfare reforms and make it easier to house all our young people is with the full powers of an independent country.

Although it is with no pleasure that I and other members come to the chamber this evening to debate the appalling attacks on innocent people across the world, I thank Sandra White for bringing the issue to our attention. Sectarian violence, murder and terrorism against a religious minority—in this case, the international Shia community, many of whom live in Scotland and most of them in the fair city of Glasgow—is an issue of grave importance that deserves nothing less than the full attention of the national Parliament. Sadly, sectarian violence is not a stranger to these islands, but no matter where it is found, sectarianism always has the same characteristics: prejudice, hatred, fear, ignorance and intolerance. The aim of sectarianism is to divide people and to punish those with whom it disagrees and hates. Wherever it happens, it is to be abhorred. No one should die because of the colour of their skin, no one should die because of their nationality and no one should die because of their religious beliefs. When I knew that I would be speaking in tonight’s debate, I googled “attacks on Shia” for a bit of background—I advise others not to do it—and found a depressing catalogue of man’s inhumanity to man. The scenes from Iraq yesterday showed innocent people being killed indiscriminately just for having the misfortune of being in the wrong place at the wrong time—in this case among the Shia community. The Shia community is not unique in suffering from prejudice, which also affects many other communities, but we must acknowledge the history of prejudice, violence and sectarianism that has been shown to Shia Muslims historically and throughout the world. Sometimes, such prejudice is even institutionalised. For example, under Lebanon’s constitution, a Shi’ite Muslim can never hold the office of President or Prime Minister, as only a Christian can be President, only a Sunni can be Prime Minister and only a Shi’ite can be Speaker. In a system that is known as confessional distribution, seats in Lebanon’s Parliament are allocated to religious communities and sects based on population using a census that is 50 years out of date. That system keeps Shia Muslims from two of the highest offices in the land. It is a sectarian-building-block form of governance that, when it was introduced in 1943, was supposed to be a temporary measure. It might have been right at the time, but it is wrong that it stands to this day. In the recent election campaign in Pakistan, the targeting of Shia candidates took the lives of nine people and injured more than 20. For what? It was for the crime of being a Shia Muslim and wanting to play their part in their country’s political process. Just today, I read of a Shia lawyer and his two young sons being killed for the crime of being Shia, which Sandra White mentioned. Such cowardly acts of terrorism must be stopped. I ask the minister in his summing up to outline what representations have been or are being made to the Government of Pakistan on behalf of Scotland’s Shia community. In Glasgow, many Shia Muslims, some of whom are personal friends of mine—I am delighted to see that the public gallery is dotted with them—are outstanding members of the community. There are businessmen and businesswomen, family people, political activists and citizens, who are proud to call Scotland their home. We are extremely fortunate that Scotland and—may I say it?—Glasgow, could be held up as a beacon to show how different communities can work together, socialise together and even celebrate their difference and similarity together. The evidence for that is twofold. This is a kind of good news, bad news story. First, when I was googling last night, I found a map of attacks on mosques across the UK. Clearly, that is the bad news. The map highlighted 13 or so such attacks, but none of them was in Scotland. The Muslim community seems to have built a relationship and is clearly an integral part of Scotland, just like the community who come from an Irish background, including me. The Muslim community is seen in exactly the same way. Secondly—I had better get this right—on 9 June, an event is taking place at Celtic park involving speeches from politicians and the Scottish Inter Faith Council to promote peace and community integration. If ever we needed an example of the part that the Muslim community—in which I include Shia and Sunni, although we are talking about the Shia tonight—has to play in Scottish society, that is it. Internationally, the people in the Shia community want peace and freedom; they want freedom to live their lives in peace, to celebrate their religion in peace and to live in their communities throughout the world without the overhanging threat of violence being brought down on them and their loved ones. I am sure that we speak as one on the issue. I whole-heartedly support the motion—and the Shia community.

It has been a great privilege to be a member of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee and to have worked closely with my colleagues Fiona McLeod, Jayne Baxter and Jamie McGrigor, as well as the clerking team, which has been of great assistance to committee members. My one complaint is that we never took the opportunity to go on a couple of visits. I also compliment the witnesses and all those who took part in the Reid review that Fiona McLeod mentioned, which is indeed a great piece of work. As I have said before, Scotland has some of the finest cultural and natural heritage to be found anywhere in the world, and protecting that for future generations is something that we should all strive for. The work of the National Trust for Scotland is integral to achieving that aim. Because that work is so important, it is imperative that the trust has a governance structure that works. In my view, the bill will provide that. It may surprise some to know that 43 per cent of the National Trust for Scotland’s work is undertaken in the west of Scotland. Recently, I met Robert Ferguson, who is the trust’s general manager for Glasgow and the west of Scotland, to discuss the trust generally and, more specifically, Holmwood house and Pollok house, which are the trust’s two properties in my Glasgow Cathcart constituency. Both those properties are real treasures. Holmwood house, which has been described as Alexander “Greek” Thomson’s finest domestic design, was built for James Couper in 1857 and is currently undergoing work to restore it to its former glory. However, today I want to concentrate on Pollok house. Based in the centre of Pollok park and just a stone’s throw away from the famous Burrell collection, Pollok house is regarded as one of Scotland’s grandest Edwardian country homes, although the building dates back to the 13th century. Pollok house is also significant for the National Trust for Scotland due to its long-standing connection to founding member and owner of Pollok house Sir John Stirling Maxwell, who served as the trust’s first vice-president and was later president from 1943 until his death in 1956. Pollok house also played an important role in the creation of the trust, the idea for which, I am informed, started there with Sir John Stirling Maxwell. He was a man who recognised very early the importance of green spaces within the city and, as early as 1911, took steps to protect Pollok estate and allow wider public access to it. Scotland’s first conservation agreement originated in Pollok house in 1939, when Sir John led by example in creating the first conservation agreement for Pollok park. It is no accident that the estate is surrounded by sports clubs, which have proliferated around its boundaries. Pollok house is now owned by Glasgow City Council as part of the estate that was gifted to the city by the daughter of Sir John Stirling Maxwell on his death. Since 1993, the house has been leased and managed by the National Trust for Scotland and is one of a number of properties across Scotland to follow that model of management. The house is now open 12 months of the year and receives more than 80,000 visitors annually. The trust has worked in partnership with others to make Pollok house more of a country house. To exploit the recent popularity of “Downton Abbey”, the trust has looked to create more of an “Upstairs, Downstairs” representation in the house—I know which part I would probably have lived in. Such innovative thinking is particularly important for buildings, such as Pollok house and Holmwood house, that are relatively off the beaten track for tourists. It is no coincidence that a large proportion of visitors to Pollok house come from the local area. Perhaps I might suggest, therefore, that to help Pollok house—and Holmwood house for that matter—to get some publicity and to attract more tourists, the cabinet secretary might come and visit it some time soon to see all the good work that is going on there. The change in governance structure will not only positively affect the properties that the National Trust for Scotland manages, but could act as an example of good practice for other stakeholders across the country to secure the future of places such as Pollok house, Holmwood house and many other culturally significant sites and properties across Scotland. As members are aware, I am extremely proud to represent my home constituency, which in many ways is the centre of Scotland’s political and cultural universe, as is seen in the fact that it hosts Hampden, the home of Scottish football, and was home to John Maclean, socialist and supporter of home rule for Scotland, and of course to Madame Ecosse, our very own Winnie Ewing—and her illustrious offspring, I hastily add. I am delighted to say that, thanks to my being a member of the committee, I am now aware of the importance of Pollok house and its history and, therefore, willing to add confidently one more item to that venerable list in respect of Glasgow Cathcart: original home of the National Trust.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the Save the Children report, “State of the World’s Mothers 2013”, will have on its early years strategy. (S4O-02134)

Will the minister join me in congratulating Finland on being named the best country in the world in which to become a mother? Does she share my disappointment that the United Kingdom has fallen from joint 10th to 24th? Will she outline what steps the Scottish Government can take with the powers that it has to emulate the work that is being done in Finland and other small, independent countries, so that we make Scotland the best country in the world in which to become a mother?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the Electoral Commission regarding campaign funding and donations in relation to the independence referendum. (S4O-02037)

In The Daily Telegraph of 26 September 2012, the Labour MP John Mann described Mr Ian Taylor’s donations to the Conservative Party as “dirty money” and was reported as demanding that the Tories hand the money back. The minister will be aware of the public concern about the donation and might have seen the petition by national collective about it.

I have signed the petition and urge others to do so. Does the cabinet secretary agree that Scotland’s referendum must be conducted to the highest possible standards and that therefore the no campaign should hand Mr Taylor’s £0.5 million back pending a full internal investigation of that dodgy donation?

I do not think that anyone would disagree that Scotland needs a court system that is fit for the 21st century—one that takes account of the changing nature of crime and the technological advances of the past decade. The plans that are outlined in the Scottish Court Service paper “Shaping Scotland’s Court Services” appear—by its own admission—stark at the outset but, as the report suggests, they are proportionate and much needed, and they will help us to move towards modifying our court systems for the better. Crime in Scotland is changing. Because of the commitments on crime prevention that the Scottish Government made and met, overall crime levels are at a 37-year low and the number of summary cases in sheriff courts across Scotland has fallen from 8,000 per month in 2008 to just under 6,000 per month in 2012, as Sandra White said. The fall in crime levels is coupled with a change in the types of crime that are committed. If we are to improve our ability to tackle new crimes, such as cyber-bullying, we need to utilise all our justice resources more efficiently. Those resources are under ever-increasing strain. The Scottish Government’s capital budget has been cut by 26 per cent in real terms by the Westminster Government. The Scottish Court Service estimated that it can save £1 million a year on running costs and £3 million on maintenance costs.

In my view, it is probably budgetary restraints that have brought us to this point. However, the modernisation of the justice system will certainly come out of the process. If the proposals are implemented, they will save money; they will also modify our court system to reflect the changing nature of crime and, just as important, the tools that we have to make the system even better. We need courts that are fit for the 21st century rather than wedded to the needs of a justice system that was conceived in Victorian times. The main bone of contention in the motion appears to be the proposals to close some sheriff and justice of the peace courts. The proposals are discussed at length in the SCS report, which noted that the main opposition to court closures was to do with the additional travelling that would be required for a small number of court users. There was also worry about a general loss of the local dimension in dealing with crime. That is an extremely important issue, which deserves the serious consideration that the SCS report gives it. In determining which courthouses to close, the SCS considered a number of factors, including the percentage of witnesses who would have a longer or shorter journey to court, if the proposals were implemented. Based on the evidence of the previous year, in the case of Stonehaven, which is mentioned in the motion, 44.1 per cent of witnesses would have had a shorter journey, whereas for 31.9 per cent the journey would have increased by more than 10 miles. In the case of Haddington, 37.8 per cent of witnesses would have had a shorter journey and for 22.3 per cent the journey would have increased by more than 10 miles. We need to face the stark reality that, with a decreasing budget, it will not be possible to keep local delivery in all cases, particularly where demand is low. The work that is undertaken in the courts that are proposed for closure is about 5 per cent of overall court business, and the SCS thinks that it could easily be subsumed into the work of other courts. The SCS noted that it would make little sense for the professional body that deals with Scotland’s courts to propose changes that would impact adversely on the people whom it represents. We should take the SCS at its word instead of accusing it, as some members have done, of doing the cabinet secretary’s bidding. It is important to remember that the court closures are happening against a backdrop of more technological and innovative ways of working in the courts. The SCS wants a time to come when most of its work is carried out online, over the telephone or by video, so that witnesses are not required to be physically present in court and can present their evidence in their local police station. We have the technology to make that happen, and pilot studies are being conducted across Scotland. The SCS envisages that, in the near future, the distance to our local court will be almost irrelevant, because much of the work will be conducted more locally. I appreciate that we are nowhere near that stage yet. However, the move to the sheriff-centred model is contingent on the development of increased use of video and other communications technology in court proceedings. The proposals will streamline the court system and make it more efficient, facilitate the use of technology that changes the approach to witnesses and victims attending court and save money in times of increasing austerity. Where could the money come from to maintain underutilised courts? Since the draft 2013-14 budget was published, Labour has called for almost £3.4 billion to be found to resource a number of spending calls, including £1 billion to reregulate the bus companies, although that was not done during the eight years when Labour was in power, and £500,000 to extend the concessionary travel scheme in Edinburgh to tram journeys—that is the scheme that the Labour Party seems to want to scrap. In a press release of 9 April on closure of sheriff courts, Jenny Marra called for spending of £5.1 million. When asked what exactly she would forgo to keep the courts open, she said, “Look, I’m not John Swinney. I don’t have the budget in front of me.” Perhaps that was a recognition, at last, that trying to fund everything from the ever-decreasing pot of money that is handed down from Westminster requires difficult decisions to be made. No one likes to see local services close. There is no doubt at all that difficult decisions are being made and I completely understand why local members are defending their local services—Mr Gray did so eloquently. However, we are under tight financial constraints and difficult decisions must be made. The justice secretary is dealing with the issue in the right way, and I ask members to support the amendment in his name.

Scotland has some of the finest cultural and natural heritage to be found anywhere in the world, and protecting it for future generations is something that we should all strive for. The work of the National Trust for Scotland is integral to achieving that aim. The influence of the National Trust for Scotland is clear in constituencies across the country. I am delighted that in my constituency of Glasgow Cathcart, the National Trust for Scotland helps to oversee two buildings of historical importance. The first is Holmwood house, described as Alexander “Greek” Thomson’s finest domestic design; and the second is Pollok house in Pollok country park, just a stone’s throw away from the famous Burrell collection. Pollok house is regarded as one of Scotland’s grandest Edwardian country homes, but parts of it date back to the 13th century. Pollok house was the ancestral home of the Maxwell family. Indeed, Sir John Stirling Maxwell, the 10th Baronet of Pollok, was one of the founding members of the National Trust for Scotland. He served as one of the trust’s first vice-presidents and was the president of the trust from 1943 until his death in 1956. He believed strongly in the important role that green spaces play in a city and he was determined to protect the Pollok estate and ensure that the people of Glasgow had access to it. That ethos is maintained through the work of the National Trust for Scotland. That is why it is vital that the National Trust for Scotland is governed appropriately and is sufficiently malleable to respond to the changing needs and demands placed on it, so that it can continue to protect our cultural and natural heritage in the 21st century. In that regard, I will therefore focus on the detail of one of the bill’s provisions that concerns the role of the president and vice-presidents of the trust. The 1935 order, which my colleague Fiona Hyslop mentioned, put the trust on a statutory footing and stated that the board of trustees must include the president and any vice-presidents of the trust. Those postholders therefore have liability as charity trustees. The Reid review recommended that the president and any vice-presidents should have an impartial role and take no part in decisions of the board of trustees. Accordingly, since the review, the president has adopted an impartial, ambassadorial role and no longer attends board meetings. Similarly, vice-presidents have been elected in an honorary capacity only, which ensures that their role is distinct from that of day-to-day management and decision making by the board. Sir George Reid spoke of the need for a neutral and impartial “guardian of the sacred flame”. He also stressed that “legislative change is needed to give effect to the proposals.”—[Official Report, National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, 12 March 2013; c 17-18.] Sir Kenneth Calman commented on the fact that the bill will remove the responsibility of presidents and vice-presidents to attend board meetings, which would have the benefit of releasing postholders’ time and removing conflicts of interest. In its written evidence to the committee, OSCR welcomed the proposal and considered that it would clarify who has responsibility as charity trustees. We understand that, should the bill succeed, the role of honorary vice-president will cease to exist and vice-presidents will be nominated under the new arrangements, free of the requirement to be involved with the board and from any liability as a charity trustee. The current workaround satisfies the immediate concerns expressed in Sir George Reid’s review, but it is not a satisfactory footing for the future. We are therefore supportive of the bill’s provision in that regard, which will secure more appropriate modern arrangements for the future.

Although I share the minister’s welcome for the improvement in attainment in Glasgow City Council, I believe that it was mostly at the lower end of the attainment scale. Does he agree that, for Glasgow’s young people to flourish, the city must improve attainment dramatically at the top end? Will he outline what action he can take to assist Glasgow City Council in achieving that objective? Does he think that the Government’s shift towards preventative spend and early intervention will help to raise attainment across Glasgow and Scotland?

Before I go on to say what I want to say, I will talk about the previous speaker. Graeme Pearson talked about the SNP causing fear and scaremongering, then went on to say that we brought in 1,000 extra police but sacked 1,000 police staff, and he said that all those police officers are now behind desks. I have spoken to a number of fairly senior police officers during the past few months, not one of whom has told me that police officers are working behind desks. As a matter of fact, they have told me that it would be illegal to replace someone who had just been paid off with a police officer to do the same job. The reason why the police can manage with fewer staff—although it is unfortunate—is modernisation of the service. He will find that most cases are in Strathclyde, and I suspect that the modernisation programme will now be taken across the rest of the country. Graeme Pearson continually goes on about what is coming down the track and he is right that it is terrible, but it was made in Westminster and continued by Westminster, and he is suggesting that we hold on to Westminster. The only solution that he is not willing to look at is our being given the powers to control finances, tax and the welfare benefits system for the people of Scotland. “I think that universal benefits which go across the population are an important bedrock of our society”. Those words of wisdom are not mine; they are the words of the leader of the UK Labour Party, Ed Miliband, and they were spoken during an interview on “The Andrew Marr Show” earlier this year. He is absolutely right, but unfortunately the leader of the Labour group in the Scottish Parliament, Johann Lamont, appears to believe that it is time to get rid of those universal services that are crucial to our vision of a just and fair society. Some people agree with Ms Lamont about the sustainability of universal services. According to one commentator, there is now a “consensus around cutting universal benefits”. Unfortunately for Ms Lamont and the Labour Party in Scotland, that cheerleader for their views is Peter Hoskin, who is an associate editor of the centre-right blog, “conservativehome”. I will not spend my time going over the Scottish Government’s record on universal services because we have already heard a lot about free tuition, bus passes, elderly care and prescriptions. Instead, I will focus on the impact that such services have and why Peter Hoskin, Johann Lamont and their colleagues are wrong in wishing to see them end. As many members do, I represent a hugely diverse constituency. In Cathcart, we have the suburb of Newlands, picturesque Cathcart village and Carmunnock, but we also have areas that are beset with real problems of poverty and deprivation, including parts of Castlemilk, Kennishead and Carnwadric, which border Johann Lamont’s constituency. It is also important to recognise that my constituency contains a number of areas that are filled with households that are just making ends meet. They are neither impoverished nor are they particularly well off, but have enough money to pay the bills with some disposable income left over. Many of those households would be hugely affected by the abolition of universal services that is envisaged by the Tories and Scottish Labour. I recently met some young people from high schools in Castlemilk who have the ambition to go on to university and get a degree. Many of them will be first among their families or friends to go to university. Imagine what it would do to that aspiration and desire to learn, to live independently, perhaps to travel abroad, to get a qualification and to get a good job if I were to go back to their schools and tell them that they will have to pay thousands of pounds for their education, either up front or through the back door. Johann Lamont once taught in Castlemilk and—dare I say it?—she knows how disappointed and disillusioned those young people would be to have confirmed once again their belief that university is not for the likes of them. What about the elderly couple, both of whom have worked and paid into the system for their entire lives, and who are now looking to enjoy their retirement? They do not have a huge pension, but their free bus pass and the fact that they do not have to worry about prescription bills certainly helps them to get about. No way can we accuse them of having “something for nothing”, as it has been so crassly put. It could be claimed that Johann Lamont was not referring to those people, but that she was referring to people who have an income, such as Fred Goodwin. As usual, we have just heard from Labour about him, but funnily enough it was not mentioned that the Labour Party made him Sir Fred Goodwin. About 1 per cent of people in Scotland earn £100,000 or more; how many of them are queuing up to get bus passes? I do not earn anything like that, although I am very fortunate to earn a very good salary. I know that if members were to look at me they would not think that I turned 60 the other week. I refused to apply for my bus pass. I suspect that most people would do exactly the same. It would not be the top 1 per cent of income earners who would suffer under Johann Lamont’s plan; it would be families from across my constituency and people in constituencies throughout Glasgow who work hard and pay their bills but have very little excess income. Is Johann Lamont really suggesting that they deserve to be penalised for having a little put by to help their sons and daughters to go to university, or to pay for that wee holiday that they can now afford because of free concessionary travel, or to live pain free because they do not have to decide what medicines they can afford? Yes—they have some disposable income at the end of the month, but they are not the millionaires that we hear about all the time from those who wish to make political capital out of people’s fears. The really depressing thing about this is that even if we went down the route that the Labour Party and its colleagues are suggesting, it would not save us any money. From a 2012 Fabian Society report, we hear about a 1998 report by Walter Korpi and Joachim Palme about the paradox of redistribution that states: “The more we target benefits at the poor only ... the less likely we are to reduce poverty and inequality” The report goes on to say that we are also less likely to save money. For economic reasons, it does not work. For reasons of sustainability of society it does not work. For reasons of common humanity it does not work; colleagues have touched on the fact that we do not want to stigmatise people. Nobody in the chamber should be going down that route. I ask members to support the cabinet secretary’s motion.

Will the member give way?

It would have been a magnificent line of irony, if only that were true. I did not say at any stage in my speech that the other parties want to end all universal benefits. If the member checks the Official Report later, he will find that that is the case.

Like everybody else, I thank James Kelly for bringing the motion for debate in the chamber. As a new member of the CPA, I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak on the subject. We have heard a lot about David Livingstone’s enduring legacy, and the worldwide celebrations commemorating the 200th anniversary of the boy of Blantyre’s birth are a clear testament to the impact that he has made. Events have been held in Zambia, South Africa, Westminster abbey—which I believe the minister attended—and all over Scotland, including in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Hamilton. That is testament to the impact of the work that Dr Livingstone undertook across Africa and to the mark that he has left on Scotland. His personal legacy endures in the many memorials to him and in the places that are named in his honour across the world, including the city of Livingstone in Zambia, Livingstonia in Malawi, countless streets and schools across the world and his statue standing near the base of the Scott monument not 10 minutes’ walk from here. I do not know whether anyone in the chamber saw it but, in the run-up to the anniversary of Dr Livingstone’s birth, there was an interesting article on the BBC website about the gentleman to whom Siobhan McMahon has just referred—the only person Livingstone managed to convert to Christianity in 30 years or so as a missionary in Africa. His name was Sechele, and he was the chief of the Bakwena tribe, which was based in what is now Botswana. Livingstone did not consider Sechele to be a full convert to Christianity, because he continued to practise polygamy after his baptism, but the article mentioned the huge influence that Sechele had as a missionary himself, after meeting Dr Livingstone. I was struck by the ripple effect at work. Livingstone affects one person, who goes on to make an impression on others and so on and so forth. We should take that as a lesson about the power that our actions can have. That is even more remarkable because, although Livingstone’s religion was hugely important to him and it was the original reason for his being in Africa, it appears to have become almost secondary to the role that he played in helping to improve the lives of the many people who crossed his path. That help was most stark in his opposition to slavery and the slave trade, as has been mentioned. As an explorer of Africa and the finder of the extraordinarily beautiful Victoria Falls, and as someone who was searching for the source of the Nile at the time of his death in 1873, he famously said in a letter to the New York Herald: “And if my disclosures regarding ... slavery should lead to the suppression of the east coast-slave trade I shall regard that as a greater matter by far than the discovery of all the Nile sources together.” Those who know me well know that I am not a particularly religious man. As was personified by Dr Livingstone and the many who have followed in his footsteps, however, we are continually shown the important role of churches in bringing aid and assistance and in offering comfort to people across the world including, perhaps primarily, in Africa. That was never more evident to me than during my visit to South Sudan and Uganda last year with the charity Glasgow the Caring City and one of its partner organisations, Emerge Poverty Free. The Caring City’s roots are firmly within the Church of Scotland but, although religion clearly plays an important part in its work in Africa, that was no barrier to aid, and anyone and everyone has benefited from the good works that it has carried out. I have never been to Malawi, although I hope at some stage to get there. Having listened to people who have been there, I think that it is clear that there are many similarities between Malawi and South Sudan. The people of those countries suffer from some of the highest infant mortality rates, and the women there have to put up with terrible conditions, as do many other citizens. We went to see some projects for which equipment had been delivered through the Caring City’s work in Africa. That included equipment for education facilities, ranging from nurseries to colleges, as well as agricultural equipment. Matthew’s farm was created, or rather paid for, by Ross Galbraith, a member of the Caring City, in South Sudan. It is very much a community-based facility, and it allows people to grow fruit and sell it on to the market. Help is also given to rehabilitate child soldiers. The breadth of the work that I saw the organisations doing took my breath away. It opened my eyes to the hardship that is faced by many people, but also to the great resilience and ability that people are imbued with. Jim Hume mentioned David Livingstone walking 8 miles to university, which registered with me, as I saw some kids who walked up to 5 miles, sometimes without shoes, to attend school every day. Livingstone was a man who worked to change the world, and who believed in the ability of one person to make the world a better place. His legacy remains as a continuation of work in that vein in Scotland and throughout the world. We all have a duty to do what we can to follow in his footsteps.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the European Union regarding the labelling of products since the discovery of horsemeat in other meat products. (S4O-01910)

I recently visited a local butcher—a Mr Lupton. It is clear that J Lupton’s feel that one of the big advantages of local butchers is that everything that they sell is quite correctly traceable back to the place of origin. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it would be a great comfort to the public and would help local producers if all meat foodstuffs, including pre-packed and frozen products, were clearly labelled to ensure the provenance of the product?

I thank you for that reminder, Presiding Officer, just before I got up to speak. Like most others, I welcome the Government’s plans to integrate health and social care. I am confident that the bill will help bring together the best that the NHS and local authorities, along with third-sector and independent bodies, have to offer to make life that bit better and to make treatment much more streamlined for those of us who will need it at some time in our lives. I suspect that, as Jim Hume just said, that time is nearer for some of us than it is for others. It is great to see the support from organisations such as the independent living movement, which speaks on behalf of the independent living in Scotland project, the Scottish Government’s self-directed support Scotland initiative, and Inclusion Scotland and agrees that disabled people must be at the heart of the decision-making process. I am delighted that there will be a strengthened role for the third and independent sectors in planning and delivery of services. The movement’s five asks are that the bill should support independent living, citizenship and human rights; that disabled people be considered and supported as key stakeholders and co-producers in the delivery and development of the bill; that disabled people should be involved in leading on principles and on how money is spent; that the bill should support and promote self-directed support in the community on leaving hospital; and that the bill should not entrench existing inequalities. Those are all reasonable requests and it is clear from the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks that careful consideration is already being given to them. I also agree with the British Medical Association that effective health and social care partnerships have the potential to reduce duplication, to ensure that appropriate care is delivered at the right time to the right people in the right place, and genuinely to break down some of the unhelpful barriers that exist between health and social care. I cannot see how we can do that without the integration that is envisaged in the bill. I have experience of working in an environment that is similar to what is envisaged in the bill, so I have seen the benefits of such a structure. In my time as a councillor, one of my most fulfilling roles was as a member of the Glasgow south-east community health and care partnership, which covered Glasgow Cathcart and Glasgow Govan constituencies, both of which include areas where there are huge problems and challenges. I will not deny that there were, when I joined the partnership, tensions between people from the health board and people from the local authority at committee level and—as we heard from practitioners and other front-line staff—in offices across the city. That was understandable; after all, we were asking people to rethink how they worked and to take into their consideration people from other services who had different work practices and, to some extent, different priorities. However, there was a commitment among most members of the CHCP to make it a success, and through hard work and commitment—driven by the human dynamo that is Cathy Cowan, whom many members know—things started to turn around. There were a number of staff away days—or greeting sessions, as they were called—at which people got to quiz directors about the reasoning and direction of the CHCP, and to voice general concerns, and at which they got straight answers from the directors who were present. There was great interaction with representatives of the users of the service and meetings were held in public. Things were turning around, and we began to see a real change in attitude. That was not so much on the part of the board—its attitude was already correct, in the main—but on the parts of the workforce and the users. Staff began to see the benefits of having someone from a related service across the room from them, or just down the hall, and users could see that the system was working with regard to, for example, home care for the elderly. Some of the work to alleviate bedblocking was really encouraging and the work on addictions was showing particularly good outcomes. However, as soon as the suggestion of devolving powers and, in particular, funds to the CHCP reared its ugly head, the shutters came up and all the head honchos moved into their silos. That is why I am supportive of the bill and why I think that it is—unfortunately, as Bob Doris said—necessary. Intentions might be good and results on the ground might be great, but when it comes to institutions sharing some of their power, none of that seems to account for anything. Therefore, legislation is undoubtedly required. That is also why I am disappointed with Labour’s amendment. I had to go and rewrite my speech today because I was going to speak about positive outcomes from the eventual bill and my experiences in the CHCP, but I do not think that we can let the amendment go by unnoticed. We should expect an attack on the Scottish Government in an amendment, no matter what the subject is that is being debated. That is fine; that is politics. However, the amendment is more than that. It is clear that, again, instead of looking for what is best for the people of Scotland, Labour is doing the work of what it considers to be its last bulwark of support: Labour-run local authorities. In this case, as it is so often, the authority in question is Glasgow City Council. I was there when Labour-run Glasgow City Council reneged on commitments to devolve funds to the CHCP, and it was that intransigence that eventually brought about the demise of the regional model in favour of a Glasgow-wide, Labour-controlled version, which was disbanded before it even got started. That was my shortest membership of any committee: I eventually got on it, but it was disbanded before its next meeting. That was quite an achievement.

Having been a councillor in Glasgow City Council, I have seen a payroll vote at work. I suggest that we have a jointly accountable officer, as per the proposals. Labour’s amendment mentions “a strong role for local authorities”, but the main thrust of Jackie Baillie’s opening speech was that it is important that local authorities have control. I have seen what happens in the biggest city in Scotland when the local authority has control of something that should be under joint control, and the people of Glasgow suffered for it. The CHCP that I was a part of was a huge success and would have gone on to much greater things. It was supported by everybody except Labour Glasgow councillors and executive directors, and they brought it to an end. Those are the facts. It was very unfortunate, and it is a shame that I am having to describe it in this debate, when we should be discussing the merits of CHCPs and not how to ensure that power stays with local authorities. If members think that I am exaggerating—for the sake of the successful CHCP—about Labour’s unwillingness to part with control, they should listen to the following comments in Glasgow City Council’s response to the consultation. It states: “The proposals are overly prescriptive on organisational arrangements.” That means, “We want to stay in control.” It states: “we consider the proposals as going too far in prescribing arrangements for partnerships”. That means, “We want to stay in control.” It states: “we would assert that the mechanisms for how these outcomes are met should be agreed locally.” This is what happened in Glasgow last time: nothing got done. As soon as we hit the slightest bump, Labour went into its silo and the whole thing fell apart. In response to the question, “Will joint accountability to Ministers and Local Authority Leaders provide the right balance of local democratic accountability and accountability to central government, for health and social care services?”, the council stated: “No, councils are accountable to the electorate.” It is saying, “Within the five year period”—as it is just now—“we can let the CHCP go, close down day-care centres and do whatever else we want in the hope that people have forgotten about it by the time the election comes round.” That is not in the best interests of the most vulnerable people in our society. There is much at stake; some really good work was going on. George Adam talked about the work that the social workers were doing, and the amount of great close work between social workers and health board workers was fantastic. The problem lies not on the ground, but higher up. It is vital that we ensure that the forthcoming bill is passed. As an aside, I know a doctor who works in Glasgow who says that she is terrified of what will happen if the local authority gets control, because she remembers what happened last time. She says that the money will end up going to pay for something else—something that is favoured by Glasgow City Council. It is vital that the work be taken out of the control of local authorities and that we have a jointly accountable officer. I look forward to the eventual bill being passed.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made by the early years collaborative. (S4O-01832)

I welcome the groundbreaking work that is being done in this policy area and the aspiration to create the best country in the world to grow up in. Does the minister agree that the early years are crucial in determining the future life chances of Scotland’s children and young people and that it is the responsibility of all of us in society to do what we can to ensure positive outcomes? Will she elaborate on the stakeholder buy-in for the new approach? Does she share my concern that, despite our best efforts on early years policy, much is being undone by Westminster’s regressive welfare reforms?

Is Hugh Henry saying that one of the reasons why we should vote no next year is so that we can continue to milk English and Welsh students?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government about devolving consumer-related powers in light of the UK Government’s plans to abolish Consumer Focus. (S4O-01792)

Does the minister share my disappointment about that grudging response and agree that it will have a detrimental effect on Scottish consumers, who are already suffering from the draconian decisions that the Westminster Government has taken? Does he agree that, if the UK Government is not willing to continue to provide a scheme such as Consumer Focus, it is incumbent on it to ensure that the Scottish Government is given the powers to do so, at least until March 2016, when we will have all the powers of an independent country?

I am delighted to be able to bring to the chamber a debate on the new Skills Development Scotland campaign called make young people your business. There is no doubt that youth unemployment is one of the most pressing challenges that currently face Governments on both sides of the border and throughout Europe. In Spain, youth unemployment has just hit 60 per cent, and in the United Kingdom a quarter of young people believe that the recession has permanently damaged their future prospects. While the UK Government continues to follow an austerity agenda that has been debunked by some of its most vociferous initial supporters, it has become clear that the Scottish Government is keen to take a different track. The opportunities for all scheme, which guarantees a place in education, employment or training for every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland, is an ambitious programme that is already achieving real results. A record number of pupils moved into positive destinations last year: 87.2 per cent of school leavers, up from 85.2 per cent the year before. Langside College, in the heart of my constituency, is at the forefront of training our young people in the skills that they will need to progress through the jobs market. It draws more than 60 per cent of its student population from the immediate local area, and 36.4 per cent of its students are from one of Scotland’s 20 per cent most deprived data zones. That figure is more than 10 per cent higher than the national average. The college also has a progression-to-employment rate of more than 90 per cent for students who specialise in engineering or care. The extension of the modern apprenticeships scheme—with 26,427 modern apprenticeships being delivered in the past year—shows commitment to ensuring that all youngsters get the best start in their working careers, whether from work or from further or higher education. The number of unemployed young people in Scotland has also fallen. Last week’s figures from the Office for National Statistics showed that there was a fall in youth unemployment of 23,000 over the period from September to November 2012. That is a 4.8 per cent decrease and is the largest drop since those records began in 2006. The work that is being done by the Scottish Government has led to Scotland’s unemployment rate being 19.9 per cent, compared to 21 per cent in the rest of the UK. Youth employment in Scotland is 55.1 per cent, which is higher than the rate of 51.8 per cent in the rest of the UK. Although I recognise that those statistics are encouraging, we cannot become complacent. The opportunities for all programme can become even more successful by working alongside the make young people your business campaign. I have spoken before about my belief that all members should do all that they can to help young people into work. In my own small way, I have done that by hosting a youth jobs fair and my high school internship contest—I always feel as if someone should sing when I talk about “high school internship contest”. I am in the process of interviewing for interns and was interviewing yesterday. Last year, I thought that I was fortunate with the group of young kids who came before me, but this year the standard has, if anything, improved. Young people’s academic standard and commitment not only to their studies but to their wider community are lessons to us all. I have no doubt that the winner of the contest will bring much to my office, just as Campbell did last year. There are many different ways that members can promote young people’s ability to work. I ask the Minister for Youth Employment to consider providing an information pack for MSPs to use in their constituencies, which could offer information on how to engage with local businesses to encourage recruitment of youngsters. It could also give further details of the make young people your business campaign and the employment recruitment initiative, which was announced in the draft budget and discussed in a previous debate. The make young people your business campaign seeks to change the perception of businesses that have been reluctant to recruit young people straight from school, college or education. I suspect that the most pressing reason for that reluctance has been that the high level of unemployment has generally led to there being many more qualified applicants, many of whom have three or four more years of work experience. However, the assessment of companies that have employed young people has been incredibly positive and most businesses have found that young people are well prepared for the world of work. That is a testament to Scotland’s great education and training system. It is important that we continue to publicise the fact that the involvement of young people in the workplace brings far more benefits than costs. That is apparent in the experiences of people like me and in the testimonials from businesses that continue to employ young people, including the John Lewis Partnership, a quarter of whose workforce is young people. It says that employing young people is “a win-win because our young partners bring so many benefits to the business. They help us to adapt quickly to the latest trends and give us insights into new markets.” Scottish Chambers of Commerce says: “Young people can provide real benefits to Scottish businesses, bringing knowledge and enthusiasm. We are working hard to ensure that they are aware of their career opportunities, even in the smallest business.” It is in small businesses that the benefits can be most seen. According to the Federation of Small Businesses, 94 per cent of all private sector enterprises in Scotland are microbusinesses with fewer than 10 employees, and they provide 29 per cent of all private sector employment. Recruitment causes difficulties for small businesses and could be greatly enhanced by the our skillsforce pack that SDS has launched, which offers companies a range of programmes and financial assistance to help them to plan for and to recruit a skilled workforce. It is a great tool that is to be used in conjunction with the make young people your business campaign, as it matches skills sets with employers. The our skillsforce initiative also provides access to training and learning opportunities, in order that we continue to foster lifelong learning in the current workforce. The young people of today will be the engineers, academics, joiners, electricians and—if they are unfortunate—politicians of the future. We have a responsibility to ensure that they continue to get opportunities to succeed. Within the framework of SDS, opportunities for all and the make young people your business campaign, the tools exist to help young people into work and to help businesses to employ and train them so that they can become the talented workforce of the future. I look forward to that vital work continuing and I hope for a positive response from the minister on my call for assistance for MSPs.

Will the member give way?

In the process of running down Glasgow, as the member says, does he agree that if councils are under such financial restraint it would be better for them to use the very precious money that they receive on services, rather than on huge payouts to Labour Party cronies?

I thank my colleague Bob Doris for bringing forward this debate on an important issue that unfortunately continues to raise its head in the city of Glasgow. We all recognise that, because of the financial situation, hard decisions need to be made and that we need to modernise care services where appropriate. However, we must also recognise that, as elected representatives, we along with our council colleagues have a responsibility and a duty of care to those who are most in need of assistance and that we must ensure that the service that is delivered is fit for purpose. I have no doubt that there is a lot of good in Glasgow City Council’s proposals. Anything that can widen options and opportunities for those with learning disabilities must be welcomed, including the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013, which we have talked about. If the council was starting from scratch and designing a new service for new users, there would be almost universal support for its proposals as part of that. However, that is not the case. We are being asked to support a scheme in which people with learning disabilities are not asked, but told that they have to give up the centres that have been an important part of their lives, in some cases for 40 years. Recently, I was asked to visit a number of carers of centre users. It came out loud and clear that the centres give users a sense of purpose and belonging. Many lifelong friendships have been created and, for many, waiting for the bus to pick them up in the morning is the start of the excitement of the day. The carers told me that, during a recent industrial action when their brothers, sisters, sons or daughters could not attend the centre, their health deteriorated. The carers say that the threat of closure of the centres is having the same effect on those individuals. I know that that is not Glasgow City Council’s aim, but it is one consequence of its actions. In my view, there are two main things wrong with the proposals. One is that, as I have described, no account appears to have been taken of the impact that the closures will have on individuals and their wellbeing, self-respect and relationships. The other issue is the risible consultation process. Many users and carers did not receive the consultation document until mid to late November when the deadline was 7 January, which, coincidentally, was the first day back for many council offices after the Christmas and new year holidays. No account of the holidays was taken in the consultation period. After my meeting, I contacted the then head of social work in Glasgow to ask him to put back the deadline, even just for two weeks, to allow people to respond. His response included the phrase, “Whilst I acknowledge that the timescales for the consultation are a challenge”. You know what? If even the head of social work concedes that the timescales are “a challenge”, why were they not pushed back? My suspicion—it is more a belief—which is backed up by the executive papers, is that the council has already taken a decision and wants the closures to be pushed through on its timetable. I am not the only one who thinks that. When discussing the consultation timescale, the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland concluded that “it is as if Glasgow has started with the answer first—close 3 centres—when they should have started with an assessment of people’s needs.” Moreover, the consultation document is inherently flawed. One question that was asked was: “Do you understand why a new model of day care services is required?” That is just not acceptable. There should not be leading questions in such consultations. I accept, of course, that change is needed and that we need to consider a cost-effective system. However, I do not accept that we should, to all intents and purposes, give some of the most vulnerable in our society, to whom we have a duty of care, a deadline to pack up their stuff and go. I suggest to Glasgow City Council that it postpones the process and talks to members of all parties, users, carers, support groups, third-sector organisations and others about how best to move forward in a meaningful way. By way of assistance, I suggest that the council consider a twin-track approach. It should think about introducing alternatives to the existing model over a longer period, perhaps giving users different options, introducing them to new models and not offering day care unless that is appropriate. I hope that the social work department, under new management, will delay the decision so that it can find a fairer way to support people with learning disabilities and give them the choice that is an integral part of self-directed support. I hope that it will put care, not cost, at the heart of the decision-making process.

Will the member give way on that point?

As far as I am aware, the councillor Patricia Ferguson is talking about decided that the meeting could not take place because the information was not laid before them until just prior to the meeting. Therefore, had it taken place, the meeting would have been held under a false premise.

12. To ask the Scottish Government who is involved in helping widen access to colleges for disabled people. (S4O-01690)

A number of cases have been reported in Glasgow, including in my constituency, in which local authority departments have claimed that it is not their responsibility to pay for the personal assistants who are required for students with a physical disability to attend courses at college. That has caused huge worry and concern for those prospective students, who wish to continue with their education. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is imperative that local authorities work to ensure that access to further education is open to all and is not limited by an unwillingness to provide the support that is necessary for students to attend?

Like other members, I thank Jayne Baxter for her thoughtful contribution, and I look forward to more over the next few years. Siobhan McMahon’s contribution was thoughtful and meaningful too. I did not agree with everything that she said, but at least she said it in the right spirit, which I welcome. I must also mention Neil Findlay’s intervention on Clare Adamson. It is not often that an MSP gets up in the chamber and proudly states that he knows what day it is, but I offer him congratulations anyway. There is no doubt that the issue of youth employment is one of the most serious challenges facing Governments on both sides of the border. Just this week the Prince’s Trust published its report “The Prince’s Trust Youth Index 2013”, whose headline figures are stark and which highlights the personal impact that unemployment has on the young. Just over a quarter of the young people surveyed believe that their future prospects have been permanently damaged by the recession; one fifth of young people who are not in education, employment or training feel that they cannot cope with everyday life; and over a third “always or often” feel “down or depressed”. The report also highlights that one third of the so-called NEETs did not have someone to talk to about their problems while they were growing up and that young people who have not grown up in a supportive family environment are twice as likely not to be in education, employment or training. It is important that we do all that we can for young people who have not achieved a positive destination, because not being in education, employment or training impacts heavily on health and wellbeing. According to the Prince’s Trust report, 49 per cent of NEETs are unhappy with their lives, compared with the 14 per cent of young people in education, employment or training who state that. That is why the Scottish Government’s commitment to its opportunities for all programme, which guarantees a place in education, employment or training for every 16 to 19-year-old, is important for the health and wellbeing of our younger citizens. It is important, too, because having young people in the workforce is beneficial not just to them but to us. It will help Scotland to achieve the modern, vibrant, well-educated and trained workforce that will be the cornerstone of our economic recovery. The testimonials included in the guide for the make young people your business scheme show that far more can be gained than lost by having young people in the workplace. I hope that members across the chamber will consider signing my motion on the scheme, which has been marked for a members’ business debate. I strongly believe that, as well as businesses working to make young people their priority, all members in this chamber should work to make them their priority, too. I held a constituency jobs fair last October that the Minister for Youth Employment came to. I thank her for the time that she took to speak to those who attended and to the exhibitors. I think that she will agree that the fair was perceived as a huge success. I thank, too, Langside College for hosting the fair and for publicising it within the college. We also publicised it externally through local papers, social media and so on. Ultimately, more than 500 people attended, and a number of large employers in my constituency, including the NHS, the Glasgow Housing Association, City Building and Asda, were there, along with representatives from Skills Development Scotland, Jobcentre Plus and a number of training organisations, who were able to give more general help, advice and assistance. Despite what has been said about the my world of work website, it was one of the things that seemed to attract people’s attention at the fair. Quite a number of people looked at it, including a lot of young kids—they looked like young kids to me, although they were probably in their twenties. However, they seemed to be attracted by the website and to see its benefits. The feedback that I have received on the fair from both organisations and participants has been extremely positive. The participants said that the opportunity to make contacts, find out more about training opportunities and get tips on how to structure CVs, apply for jobs and undertake the interview process, in a setting that was more informal and less intimidating than they are used to, was beneficial to them. I have since spoken to some of them who have gone on to get interviews that I hope will lead to employment for them. I am waiting for responses back on that. The organisations involved in the fair also saw its benefits. It was an opportunity for them to network with other like-minded organisations, to speak to people face to face who they would normally deal with only by email, to publicise their employment and training opportunities in a different way, and to have access to a pool of potential workers already showing how keen and committed they are to finding employment or training opportunities. A number of the organisations have been back in touch to pledge their support for future events. I am currently in the middle of my second competition for a paid intern. All high schools in my constituency, or where constituents attend, have been involved, and the interviews are taking place later this month. Last year’s intern, Campbell, was a great addition to the office, and I am confident that this year’s winner will be equally so. No matter what the predominant rhetoric of the UK Government is, we know that young people as a group are not the feral, feckless, workshy, lazy, computer-game-playing scroungers that they are made out to be. In the shameful common Westminster parlance, they are much more likely to be strivers than skivers. We are all aware at the local level of so much good work that young people do for their peers and the community at large, be it through youth groups, churches or any number of other ways. Indeed, the Scottish Youth Parliament played an integral role in civic Scotland in a number of key campaigns over the past year, including their love equally campaign for marriage equality, their one fair wage campaign on the implementation of the living wage, and their votes at 16 campaign, because being able to pay tax, get married, start a family, join the army and drive before being able to vote for who leads the country is both unjust and unfair. This Government is clear in its commitment to the next generation of Scots, and the make young people your business initiative is just the latest in a long line of initiatives that the SNP has taken to show that young people are an integral part of the common weal of Scotland. However, only full powers over the economy will allow us to have a Scottish solution to Scotland’s employment challenges and to ensure that, with welfare reform in Scotland, we have our own welfare system—one in which “welfare” is the important word, and not one under which those at the bottom of the wealth ladder are forced to pay for the sins of Westminster’s politicians, both past and present, and the greed and profligacy of bankers. I listened to the speeches that have been made during the debate, and I have pointed out the ones that I was taken by. One or two others were pretty much what we would expect, as my colleague Chic Brodie said. If we are going to have a serious debate about the future of our young kids, it is incumbent on Opposition members, and particularly those from the main Opposition party, to use it not as an opportunity to have a go at the Government but as an opportunity to put their vision of how they would help the young people of Scotland. I beg Opposition members to realise that it is incumbent on them, as an Opposition and as what they see as a future Government of this country, to come to the chamber with another plan and not just another plan of attack on the Scottish Government.

Until they do that, they are abusing the privileged position in which we all find ourselves as MSPs. Our young people deserve better.

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on securing this members’ business debate on the extremely important issue of the causes of addiction and our attitudes to it. The Scottish Government has introduced a number of key initiatives, including the road to recovery programme, which is the country’s first cohesive approach to tackling drug misuse, but addiction remains a huge problem in Scotland. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s addiction services alone are responsible for delivering addiction treatment and care services for 12,000 clients, and delivering such services costs the NHS millions of pounds a year. For too long, the common response from the public in Glasgow to the public health challenges that are faced in relation to addiction and its accompanying costs to individuals, their friends and families has been to say that that is just the Glasgow way and is part of who we are as Glaswegians, with our sick man of Europe tag. The approach has been more or less to leave it at that, deal with the issue as it arises and not look at the root causes. It remains the case that for many of Glasgow’s public health issues the silver bullet is to tackle the underlying deprivation and poverty, but that is a debate for another day. That is why I was very interested in the work that Mr Gibson’s motion mentions on the relationship between adverse childhood experiences and addiction. The study in question took place over two years and involved 17,000 participants. Each participant completed a confidential survey that contained questions about childhood maltreatment and family dysfunction, and gave details of their current health status and behaviours. The survey covered experiences such as emotional, physical or sexual abuse, emotional or physical neglect and growing up in a household where someone was an alcoholic, a drug user, mentally ill or suicidal, where the mother was treated violently or of which a member was imprisoned during the patient’s childhood. Information on any adverse childhood experiences was combined with the result of the patient’s physical examination to form the baseline data. Less than a third of the participants reported zero ACEs. When ACEs were reported, the link between them and addiction was found. As the number of ACE conditions increases, so do the chances of being a user of street drugs or of having problems with tobacco or alcohol abuse. The research found an interesting parallel with the problem of addiction being the solution to a much deeper problem—that is, one of the ACE conditions. That is why it is far more detrimental to addicts’ recovery to believe that their behaviour and subsequent addiction are always the result of poor life choices rather than what they often are—a mask to cover underlying issues. The masking link was further explored in research that was conducted by Sarah Nelson of the centre for research on families and relationships at the University of Edinburgh and supported by Health in Mind. For that research, a number of interviews were conducted with male survivors of childhood sexual assault. More than half the survivor group became addicted to drink or drugs in their teens and a quarter were addicted before they reached their teens. Half the group also experienced another addiction, such as a gambling addiction, compulsive eating, sexual addiction, compulsive self-harm or workaholism. One young ex-prisoner used drugs “to get rid of my problems”— other members have described that—and “to make my problems go away. They never did, they just disappeared for ten, fifteen minutes, half an hour, an hour, a day.” Another person said: “I know I used to drink ... to forget it all”. In talking about his addiction to food and his sexual addiction, one person said: “I think subliminally I wanted to make myself unattractive ... And then because I felt fat and ugly and horrible because I was putting on weight, I would think, right, I’ll go out and try and test anybody to see if they’ll have sex with me or not.” All the participants talked about their troubled and addictive relationships with alcohol, drugs, sex, food or work. The common theme is that such relationships are a mask to stop them thinking about what happened to them as children, which is where the origins of their addiction lie. Not everyone who has an addiction has had a traumatic experience in their childhood, but having an adverse childhood experience substantially increases the likelihood of addiction in later life. For that reason, we must continue to work to ensure that our children are safer than ever before from avoidable harm. If children grow up with a parent in prison, they must be given support from a young age to help them to deal with that in a less destructive way. Safe spaces must be provided for children where they can bring issues of emotional, physical or sexual assault to people who will be able to help them. We must continue to champion the work that is done in the third sector across Scotland by organisations such as Children 1st and the NSPCC. As well as trying to prevent an ACE from manifesting itself as an addiction in adulthood, it is important to change how we view addiction, so that we move to a system where we empathise with a person’s experience and do not just judge them for the choices that they have made without considering what the underlying causes of their choices might have been.

Will Graeme Pearson give way on that point?

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate and White Ribbon Scotland on its 16 days of action campaign. I am sure that many members have, as I have, had a number of cases in which we have seen the victims of domestic abuse and abuse by men against women. The victims are often not just the women, but the children of the women. The psychological fall-out from the initial behaviour can be long lasting. Housing, health and schooling issues can all stem from one act of senseless violence. I will talk about a couple of projects in my constituency that help people who are affected by domestic abuse. The Domestic Abuse Project, which was founded in 2000, is dedicated to alleviating the suffering of women and their families who are experiencing or have experienced domestic abuse. The service is based in a community centre and is provided in a low-key and easily accessed setting. As many such organisations are, it is run by a board of directors, all of whom are volunteers, and day-to-day support is provided by a small team that is headed by a project manager. The project’s ethos is to help its clients to make their own decisions—decisions that will enable them to live more safely. It does that by providing a community response to domestic abuse and by working with the most appropriate partners, whether they are statutory agencies or other voluntary organisations, to find accommodation, provide a bridge to other services, provide a support and advocacy service, accompany clients to appointments, and carry out risk assessments and safety planning. Clients are offered the assistance that is most appropriate to them and their circumstances. That might involve information, advice and guidance, personal development, one-to-one support or small group work. An exciting development for the organisation this year has been a pilot project that has created the opportunity to provide much-needed outreach and a one-to-one service, which was identified as an unmet need. In addition to working directly with women who have experienced or are experiencing domestic abuse, the project works to raise awareness of issues through training and speaking to other groups and agencies, including health, housing and education services. In the past three years, the project has helped about 400 people to regain control of their lives. Many of the women who use the services go on to become involved in the community through informal learning and volunteering opportunities, and some gain full-time employment. The project supports one of my favourite community organisations, which is WAVES—Women Against Violent Environments. I wish that there was no need for that organisation, but it does tremendous work. It is a peer-support group that is based in Castlemilk. Through it, women get together to discuss issues, and families are taken on outings. More important is that the group allows women to meet and chat in relaxed surroundings, which reduces isolation and aids the recovery process. Society still has a long way to go to deal with violence against women. Until we get there, organisations such as the Domestic Abuse Project, WAVES and others have a crucial role to play in supporting those who are affected by such violence and in helping them to move on from it positively. I thank Jamie Hepburn again for securing the debate. I also thank White Ribbon Scotland and wish it all the best in its campaign over the 16 days. I congratulate it on its continuing good work to protect women throughout Scotland.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what progress there has been with the implementation of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Act 2011. (S4O-01546)

Does the minister agree that local authorities must continue proactively to ensure that landlords are registered properly and that they understand their responsibilities to the communities in which they let properties? Will she assure me that the Scottish Government will continue to monitor the implementation of the legislation and take further action if and when required?

I welcome to the gallery Mary McLuskey, Jim Dorman, Helen Forrest and Stuart Callison, all of whom are from St Andrew’s First Aid. We will meet immediately after the debate in room TG.23 to discuss St Andrew’s First Aid’s work, and I am sure that they would be delighted if other members joined us. St Andrew’s First Aid has a long and glorious history in Scotland, primarily in my home city of Glasgow. It was formed in 1882 by a group of Glasgow doctors and businessmen who were concerned about the rise in the number of accidents that were being witnessed, and it bought its first ambulance in April that year, from which first aid was provided to victims of accidents and which, if necessary, transported casualties to hospital. By 1886, St Andrew’s First Aid had six ambulances stationed in towns across Scotland. St Andrew’s went on to play a critical role in the war effort at home in the first world war. Within 48 hours of war being declared, it was able to staff military hospitals in Scotland with volunteers, thus freeing the pre-war staff for other duties. It also assembled two foreign-service units, which served in France and helped on hospital ships, and staffed a military nursing service. It went on to open its first headquarters in Glasgow in 1929. When I was a young boy back in the 1950s—I know that people would not believe that to look at me—my next-door neighbour Mr Boath, who was a lovely and extremely well-dressed man, used to leave his house in uniform every Saturday and occasionally mid-week. As a kid, I did not understand why that was, until one day I went to a match at Hampden. It was then that I realised that Mr Boath, like many others, was a St Andrew’s First Aid volunteer who helped to keep tens of thousands of football fans safe every week. St Andrew’s continues in that role to this day. Its volunteers administer first aid at a whole host of events across Scotland: from T in the Park to the Connect music festival; from the Cowal Highland games to the Royal Highland Show; and from events at major concert venues to international, Scottish Premier League and Scottish Football League matches at Hampden. The importance of those volunteers in keeping us safe at events cannot be overstated. The role takes on even more significance when we consider the number of Scots who feel that they lack the knowledge of basic first aid that could save a life. One in 10 Scots says that they have witnessed a medical emergency in a restaurant, hotel or entertainment venue. Only last week, a member of my staff told me about an incident at a theatre in Glasgow where a woman in the audience collapsed. Fortunately for the woman, Kirsty was there with her sister, who is a trained nurse, and there were a number of other medical professionals nearby, including first-aiders, who were able to administer care and keep the woman comfortable until an ambulance arrived. I say “fortunately” because, by her own admission, Kirsty would not have had the confidence to administer first aid if she had been alone. That is why she is looking into signing herself up for one of St Andrew’s basic first aid courses. Each year, more than 20,000 folk are taught life-saving techniques at those courses by some of the most experienced and highly qualified first-aiders in the country. Some 77 per cent of Scots feel that they lack the skills and confidence to administer basic first aid. If we all had those basic skills, we could go a long way towards preventing some of the 34,000 cases of common household accidents such as falls, burns and choking from ending in a visit to hospital when first aid would have sufficed. An unintended consequence of that, of course, is the additional strain that is put on our dedicated front-line national health service staff and the resulting impact on budgets. Worryingly, research commissioned by St Andrew’s First Aid and undertaken by YouGov found that 45 per cent of Scottish parents would not be confident of knowing what to do if they had a 10-year-old child who was choking. Indeed, I remember when my kids were younger—again, this is going back a bit—being in that very situation one Christmas dinner when my son got a bit of meat stuck in his throat and the fright that I got until we managed to get it dislodged. Those are just some of the reasons why I am delighted to take this opportunity to highlight the work that the organisation does both generally and more specifically in Scottish first aid week. The week aims to highlight the work of St Andrew’s First Aid in training people in first aid. The week’s theme this year is “You kiss them every day. If you had to give the kiss of life, would you know how?” Using social networks and advertising campaigns—including the effective side-of-bus advertising that has been seen in Glasgow and across Scotland—the organisation has worked hard to get that message across. Scottish first aid week culminates in the Scottish first aid awards, which will take place in Glasgow this Thursday in conjunction with The Herald and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. The awards showcase some of the best that Scotland has to offer through the people who made a difference to the lives of others by administering first aid. For example, Elliot Aitchison resuscitated a toddler who got into difficulty swimming, while the baby’s terrified mother looked on not knowing what to do. There is no doubt that Elliot’s prompt action saved that baby’s life. When Felicity and Mark Brown came upon a car accident, they proceeded to make the area safe by removing the car’s ignition key and stayed to offer comfort to a dying woman in the last moments of her life. How many of us could have done that? In my view, those actions were nothing short of heroic, and Felicity, Mark and Elliot deserve the highest praise. During Scottish first aid week, some online guides to first aid have been published on the St Andrew’s First Aid website. The guides offer a wealth of information to parents about basic steps that they can take to prepare for any accidents that might take place. Such training can make all the difference, and I urge everyone to take a look at those great, informative guides. St Andrew’s First Aid asks for a number of things in the briefing that it sent me, and there are a couple that I would like the minister to have a look at. The briefing asks that “The Scottish Government endorse Scottish First Aid Week and permit the use of the Government logo on Scottish First Aid Week materials from 2012-2014 that reinforce the message that early intervention through even basic first aid can save lives and encourage individuals from across Scotland to learn First Aid to gain life saving skills.” It also asks that “The Scottish Government endorse the ‘Setting the Standard’ initiative and to permit the use of the Scottish Government logo on materials to show the business community that Scotland is serious about First Aid.” I ask the minister to consider those requests and to get back to me with a detailed response. I am delighted to have brought this debate to the Parliament. I hope that first aid week and the award ceremony on Thursday are a great success—I have no doubt that they will be—and that they inspire many more people to learn the basic skills that could mean the difference between life and death. As we prepare for the 2014 Commonwealth games and all the other events that will take place in that year, we should encourage everyone who can do so to take the necessary first aid training to ensure that, as well as being able to help their families and loved ones, they can be ready to help those who visit our beautiful country. St Andrew’s First Aid deserves our thanks and gratitude for its work and for highlighting the need for us all to begin to take on that important responsibility for ourselves.

Will the member take an intervention?

If the Government were trying to massage the unemployment figures by creating college courses, why would it have made the priority full-time courses and not part-time courses? That would have allowed it to massage the figures more than it could through the figures for full-time courses.

I thank John Mason for bringing the debate to the chamber. John is part of the reason why I am so happy to take part in the debate. When I first became a councillor, John was a council group leader. One of the first things that we did was discuss the outside bodies that we would like to be on. I was fortunate enough to get on to Glasgow’s culture and sport board. There were many benefits to that: I saw parts of Glasgow and treasures in the city that I did not realise that we had. I was fortunate also in my timing because I managed to meet a lot of the Commonwealth delegates. Every delegate I met was incredibly positive about Glasgow. They were positive about the facilities that we had and the legacy that we were looking for after the games but, mostly, they were positive about Glaswegians. They were positive about the warm welcome that they got and the enthusiasm from people in the city for the games, what they could bring to the games and what the games could bring to the city. I firmly believe that, if it had not been for that well-known warm and generous Glaswegian spirit, we may well have struggled to get the games to Glasgow in the first place. I cannot count the number of times that the delegates spoke to me about the welcome that they received. That is why I am so confident that the games will be a massive success. I want to speak about what the games will mean to my constituency of Cathcart and to the visitors to my constituency. I am fortunate to have three of the biggest events in two of the great venues in my constituency. Hampden, home of Scottish football and just a javelin throw away from my constituency office—which is not a suggestion, by the way—is hosting the track and field events and the closing ceremony, which I am confident will be something to behold. With its extraordinary panoramic views of the city, Cathkin braes—as has already been mentioned—will host the mountain biking events. It will be Glasgow’s first international-standard mountain bike course and will give the city a world-class venue to watch the sport in during the games and to have as a community facility for the rapidly growing sport once the games are over. Hampden is likely to see many of the Olympic champions that we were all feting after the recent games. Stars such as Jessica Ennis, Usain Bolt and our very own Eilidh Childs have committed to appearing. Of course, many years ago Hampden used to host athletics events. The great Eric Liddell’s last win on British soil took place here in 1925—no, I was not there. However, I suspect that this event will be of a slightly grander scale. While the welcome influx of visitors is in Cathcart, it could do worse than to spend time looking at all we have to offer. There is the last conservation village in Glasgow city boundary at Carmunnock, which dates back to the early Christian missionary St Cadoc and which passed to the hands of the Stuart family in 1700. The Stuart family also owned large swathes of Castlemilk. If visitors visit Castlemilk stables, as I believe the minister may have done, they will see some of the remnants of that and later periods. That place, which is now owned by a housing association and well used by the community, is well worth a visit. At the other end of the constituency we have Pollok park, which was Europe’s best park in 2008 and the United Kingdom’s best park in 2006 and is home to the magnificent Burrell collection. Just down from there is the A-listed Pollokshaws burgh hall, which was built and paid for by Sir John Stirling Maxwell in time to celebrate Queen Victoria’s jubilee. It hosts a magnificent Wurlitzer organ, which I saw just the other day on the 200th anniversary of Pollokshaws becoming a burgh. Close by is Sir John Maxwell school, which was built in 1854 and, much more importantly, is famous for the fact that the great John McLean used to teach Marxism there to packed night classes. Probably the most important part of Cathcart’s history lies in the battle of Langside. It is no exaggeration to say that if that battle between the forces of Mary Queen of Scots and her half-brother James Stewart had turned out differently and Mary had not had to flee to England to seek refuge from her cousin Elizabeth—we all know what happened then—many of the constitutional debates we have been having and will continue to have over the next two years might not have been necessary. Historic Scotland is considering whether to make the Battlefield area of my constituency part of its historic battlefields, which is a proposal that clearly has my full support.

Due to time constraints I have had to miss out so many great places to visit in my constituency, but I will say that if all someone wants from a visit is a nice meal, a quiet drink or an evening out, Cathcart constituency also has those things in abundance. I am confident that Glasgow is going to host a magnificent games and I have no doubt that my constituency will play more than its fair share in their forthcoming success.

On lowering the limit, I know from personal experience—I make it clear that the person was not me—at least one person who suffered justifiably because they had a couple of pints and their judgment was impaired. They thought that nothing would happen if they went down the pub, had a couple of pints and came back up the road, but they lost their licence and nearly lost their job and their house. The evidence clearly suggests that there is a really strong case for thinking about lowering the limit. Funnily enough, on a similar note, when I was young, drink-driving was never legal but was deemed to be acceptable. I remember as a young boy in the late 1950s and early 1960s people drinking at house parties, and the extremely rare person who had a car thinking nothing of driving it, despite the amount that they had had to drink. If I fast-forward 10 or 15 years, I shudder to think of the number of times when, as a young man, I was run home from the pub or driven to a party by someone who was clearly over the limit, sometimes by much more than a wee bit. When we are young we consider ourselves to be immortal. Unfortunately, I can think of at least two young men who, in their early to mid 20s—the prime of their lives—found out that that is not the case. Given that one in seven accidents on our roads is connected with drink-driving or drug-driving and that more than a third of those involve young drivers, we clearly need to do all that we can to protect those predominantly young men from harming themselves and others. As for the argument that it is okay to have just one, I believe that if people are not allowed or are scared to have one because it will take them over the limit and they might get pulled over, they might not even start drinking. A lot of the problems stem from people going to meet their mates, thinking that they will have one but then staying for three and four because they think that they can handle it. That is when something happens and somebody suffers. That is why I welcome the fact that the Scottish Qualifications Authority has, in conjunction with the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency, introduced a safe road user qualification to educate fifth-year and sixth-year pupils in responsibility in driving, and to foster among them an understanding of when they are fit and, more important, unfit to drive. Part of the course, which is being taught to great effect by campus police in Glasgow and across Scotland, encompasses discussion about and debate over what the drink-driving limit should be set at. Such discussions bring home the fact that we have a responsibility and duty not only to keep ourselves out of harm’s way but not to put others in it. Obviously the more we can do to target the most-at-risk groups—of which young people are certainly one—the better.

Yes, I will—if the intervention is about drink-driving.

We could be looking at a number of things, but I think that we should concentrate on drink-driving and then examine how we might improve safety among young drivers, which is certainly a major issue. Of course, such chances and risks were not—and are not—just taken by young men or only or even mainly by the poor, the unemployed or the uneducated. I know an eminently intelligent guy with a very respectable job and a lovely family who, every night on his way back from work, would go to his local club for two pints before heading home. Think about it: every night he took the risk of being stopped by the police and losing his licence and probably his job, just for the sake of a couple of pints. Of course, he could handle it. It is madness. In addition to the highly successful campaigns and education programmes that we have had over the years, we need the power of random stops. The person in the case that I just mentioned and many of the young male drivers we have been talking about are convinced by our infamous macho culture that they can handle their drink. Surely if they knew that it was possible and even likely that they might be pulled over to be tested it would make them think again. That is why I support the cabinet secretary’s letter to Patrick McLoughlin, the Secretary of State for Transport, asking for this power, among others, to be introduced by the UK Government or devolved to the Scottish Parliament. Any death as a result of drink driving is one too many, and it is clear that the permitted limit plays an important role. The Government’s consultation proposal that the limit be reduced to 50mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood has been approved by almost every country in Europe except—as the cabinet secretary has made clear—Malta and the UK. I believe that the Republic of Ireland has recently lowered its limit and that Northern Ireland would like to do the same. The British Medical Association says that people are six times more likely to die with a blood-alcohol concentration of between 50mg and 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood than if they have zero blood alcohol. What more evidence do we need to support the reduction? Times have changed. There is more traffic on the roads, more people are driving now than was the case 30 years ago and there has been a reduction of the age at which drivers can get their licence. Traffic is generally faster and there are more hazards for drivers to negotiate. However, there is no doubt that the culture has changed for the better. When someone who is out with their mates refuses a drink because they are driving, there is now much more acceptance of that and they no longer face pressure to have one. I put it on the record that I do not drink. I do not want people to go away thinking, “That guy’s never out of pubs.” Drink-driving offences dropped by more than a third across Scotland between 2002-03 and 2011-12. The number of fatalities caused by drink-driving has halved in the past 10 years and there has been a similar drop in the number of serious injuries. However, we are not there yet, because people continue to drink and drive and we continue to have fatalities and casualties, as a result. As the cabinet secretary said, too many people are still being found behind the wheel having taken a drink. Although there has been a sustained change for the better in attitudes to drink-driving, it is still a serious problem. We have heard about the number of deaths and serious accidents that are related to drink-driving that happen every year in Scotland. We need to adopt a multifaceted approach to tackling drink-driving. Until such time as we have the necessary required powers, we must use all the methods that are at our disposal. As has been said, the change needs to come through sustained education about the risks of drink-driving along with—which is, perhaps, most important—a change in culture so that society views it as being taboo to have an alcoholic drink and then get behind the wheel. A zero blood-alcohol level would be enforced not by the law but by peers, families, friends and communities. When I think back to 30 or 40 years ago, most people would not have thought twice about getting behind the wheel having had a few drinks. Today, the idea of driving my sons or, even worse, my grandchildren with even the smallest amount of alcohol in my bloodstream makes me shudder. As a Parliament and as a Government we have made great strides to make Scotland a safer place, but we still have a bit to go. I welcome the Scottish Government’s consultation, look forward to repatriating the powers that we require to make us an even safer country when we are on our roads, and urge everyone across the chamber to put aside party differences, take part in the consultation, welcome the cabinet secretary’s request of Mr McLoughlin for action and support the motion.

Was Richard Lyle caught under that legislation?

Before I go on to say what I want to say, I will touch on the Labour amendment. I cannot speak for every local authority, but I can speak for the one that I used to help to represent, and Glasgow City Council cut the road maintenance budget for—I think—five years in a row until we had the bad winter. It is now reaping the consequences of its inaction during that time. It is a bit rich for Anne McTaggart and others to stand up and tell the Government that it should be supporting communities and ensuring that the roads are fit for purpose when, in her city, it was her Labour-run council that put the roads in their current condition in the first place.

Local authorities have a bigger percentage of Government money than they have ever had. Labour members might not want to acknowledge that, but it is a fact. Let me get on to business. I think that it was Brian Adam who talked about Italian weather forecasters getting the jail.

That is right. I was just thinking that Michael Fish will be thinking, “I need to move.” It has been said already—I am sure that it will be said again—that Scotland is famous for its variable weather. It is not uncommon for us to have four seasons in one day.

I can beat that. Many years ago, I was at a Celtic v Falkirk game at Ibrox—it was a semi-final in the league cup—and we had four seasons in 90 minutes. It was a terrible day for me, and we were beaten in the replay. However, the past few winters have seen us experience some pretty horrendous weather extremes, which have only highlighted how important it is that we do all that we can to ensure that we are as well prepared as we can be. We have realised that, in extreme weather, we cannot rely on the provision of normal services. That might be because workers cannot get to work or because, once they are there, they cannot get out to provide their services. That is why I am encouraged by the minister’s comments about the additional two Raiko icebreakers, which will certainly help to keep important arterial routes open in the most extreme weather. Nonetheless, the difficulty in moving from one place to another is why it is more important than ever that we build on the local community organisations that are often at the coalface in delivering services when we are faced with extreme weather that disrupts our normal services. That is why I welcome the steps that the Government has taken recently to help us all to become that much more prepared for the extreme weather conditions that we could face in the coming months. Two years ago, when we experienced one of the most extended cold spells in living memory, it was heartening to see local groups and organisations work together to ensure that the elderly and vulnerable members in our community were cared for. In my constituency, church groups arranged for volunteers to check on their neighbours and deliver groceries, meals and medicines to the elderly, infirm and other vulnerable people. Organisations such as the scouts and Boys’ Brigade organised the shovelling of pathways to ensure that they were kept clear of ice and snow and would spread the salt from the bins, which the council replenished fairly regularly. I am pleased to learn that more salt will be stocked at the start of this winter than there has been in previous years to ensure that it is available if and when needed.

When it does it right, Hanzala, I will congratulate it. The people at the Castlemilk Pensioners Action Centre in my constituency, including ex-lord provost of Glasgow the indomitable Pat Lally, ensured that otherwise housebound constituents were still able to visit the centre and take part in a number of activities that the centre runs or attends such as trips to the ballet or theatre, day trips, exercise classes and so on and that they were provided with a hot meal and company. Although that sort of thing happens all year round, it takes on even more importance in the winter because it allows the elderly to get out during the dark months and minimises the feelings of isolation and despair that can occur in extreme weather. The centre also provides information on where people can receive help and assistance on fuel poverty and other issues. The recently announced initiative that was mentioned by the minister will greatly benefit those church and community groups and will help them to help the local community by providing ready and simple information about how we can all make life that wee bit easier for ourselves, friends, family and neighbours. I will not list the many helpful things on the ready Scotland website, as we have received the briefings and know what they are. However, I just want to note that we cannot simply rely on local care and interventions and that a national approach must be taken. Who among us will not welcome the £65 million that has been allocated this year to tackle fuel poverty and improve energy efficiency? That money will be most beneficial to those most in need of support during these difficult months and will help to ensure that the elderly and vulnerable are able to stay warm in their homes. Of course, some of the energy companies are doing much the same as the Government. Scottish Power, which has its headquarters in my Cathcart constituency, supplies electricity to more than 2 million people in the south and centre of Scotland. It produced an analysis of its response to last year’s hurricane-like weather and has ensured that lessons have been learnt from it. During that bad weather, 850 additional field staff were mobilised and Scottish Power employees worked for 40,000 hours to restore supplies to the affected areas. Those dedicated and conscientious workers deserve a huge vote of thanks for being out in conditions that many of us would fear to leave the house to go into. As has been said, fuel prices are of particular concern at winter time and Scottish Power has pledged to continue with its policy of no winter disconnections as well as continuing the warm home discount scheme, which gives a £130 rebate on fuel prices to all those eligible who are living in, or are at risk of, fuel poverty. That, coupled with the Deputy First Minister’s welcome announcement at the weekend of an extra £200 million to tackle fuel poverty over the next few years, will help to make a real difference to the lives of many of our constituents. As has been said and as we all know, Scotland’s winters can be harsh, cold, wet and snowy, with weather unfit even for ducks. It is critical that we have a sustainable plan to ensure that we are as able as possible to deal with that weather and I am delighted that huge steps appear to have been taken towards ensuring that such a plan is in place. It is incumbent on us all as parliamentarians to use whatever medium we can to make the public aware of available help and advice and I am sure that that is what we will do. I ask the chamber to support the motion.

I share the minister’s anger at this shambles and waste of public money. Is the minister concerned that the UK Government’s incompetence in its handling of the tender could discourage much-needed investment in infrastructure? How will the Scottish Government ensure that that does not affect Scotland?

I thank Liam McArthur for bringing the debate to the chamber and the Sunday Post for the campaign that it has been running. It is good that a problem that affects people in every constituency across the country, including my own, is being recognised. Nuisance calls can be broken down into three broad types. First, there are the persistent and annoying calls from people who are trying to sell something, which impact on our busy lives or valuable personal time. Then there are the alarming calls, when a caller tries to frighten people into buying something. For example, the call will start with the words, “This is an urgent message”, which is clearly meant to make the recipient believe that something is wrong. I have been contacted by a family in my constituency who complained that that had happened to them. They thought that it was bad news about a sick loved one, but, of course, it was about PPI, which did not affect anyone in the household. A number of companies now appear to be willing to spread fear and alarm if they think that it will end up in a sale. I find that astonishing and deeply depressing. Another form of call is the fraudulent call, when the caller is just trying to rip off the recipient. Such calls can take the form of claims of an entitlement to some sort of refund, but the person will have to purchase a voucher or code to redeem first. Citizens Advice Scotland has had a number of complaints about that type of call. For example, one client reported that his elderly mother had received a cold call to say that she was entitled to a tax rebate of £8,000. She was told that, if she wanted to get the rebate, she would have to buy a cash voucher and hand it over in advance. Another client received a cold call from a claims handling company, claiming that it could get her £500 in refunded bank charges if she bought a cash voucher for £200. The company told her not to speak to any bank officials. One of the disturbing aspects of such calls is that they often involve someone calling around to the person’s house. Not only can they contact people by phone; they might end up coming to the door, and the threat of that hangs over people. Two other forms of nuisance call claim that something is wrong. I recently received a call saying that there was a problem with the Microsoft software on my computer, and I stayed on the line—I don’t have a clue—and logged on to my computer so that the caller could help me with a serious problem. Of course, all that they were looking for was access to my computer and important personal information so that they could use it for their own nefarious devices. Then there are the calls that seek personal and banking information that would allow the caller to access bank accounts and take whatever they liked. There are a number of ways of dealing with nuisance calls, and some of them have already been mentioned. Numbers can be ex-directory, or we can have caller display and choose the calls that we want to answer. The TPS should stop unwanted sales and marketing calls but, as Maureen Watt said, that service does not cover them all. The police can deal with malicious and harassing phone calls, and people can contact myriad telephone service providers, each of which has a separate number—although approaching them can be too complicated for many people and does not always work. The people who are most affected by nuisance calls are often the desperate and the vulnerable—the same group that is less able to tackle the complex and confusing systems that currently exist to tackle the problem. That is why I welcome the idea of a single and simple point of contact where people’s concerns could be answered or where they could be given the correct number to contact to have the problem solved and their minds eased. More must be done to simplify the means of addressing a growing problem, and a single point of contact sounds like a good starting point. The other pieces of the puzzle are legislation and enforcement. Unfortunately, the Scottish Parliament does not yet have the powers to legislate to bring an end to these obscene practices. Until such time as we do, I ask the minister to contact the Westminster Government and work closely with it to urge it to bring in stronger legislation and ensure that any existing legislation is fully enforced.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress the detect cancer early initiative has made. (S4O-01315)

As the cabinet secretary said, the on-going advertising campaign fronted by Elaine C Smith gives women information and advice on how to check for early symptoms of breast cancer. Given that the expected upsurge in the number of women recognising and acting on early signs and symptoms will inevitably lead to more consultations at general practitioner surgeries, are there any plans to offer a renewal or review of GP training to reinforce the importance of early detection of breast cancer and to assist GPs in working with other health professionals such as practice nurses on detecting early signs of breast cancer as soon as possible?

5. I hope that you think this is worth waiting for, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Scottish organisations carrying out development work in South Sudan. (S4O-01193)

I have recently visited South Sudan and Uganda with Glasgow the Caring City, and I saw first-hand some of the inspirational work that it and other Scottish charities are doing to make life better for the children of South Sudan, many of whom have been orphaned because of the atrocities committed by Joseph Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army. Will the cabinet secretary join me in condemning those atrocities, praising the work of Scottish aid charities in South Sudan, who are making a significant difference to the lives of those in need, and congratulating South Sudan on the first anniversary of its independence on 9 July?

4. To ask the First Minister what support the Scottish Government gives to carers. (S4F-00776)

I know that the Deputy First Minister recognises the great work that is being done in both my constituency and hers by organisations such as the Glasgow south east carers’ centre. When working with carers and carers groups, I became aware that many of the voluntary organisations that support carers and those who require care in Glasgow face extra difficulty, due to the unique tendering process that Glasgow City Council has put in place. Given those challenges, would the Deputy First Minister consider using the change fund to further support the work of those important voluntary organisations?

Will the cabinet secretary say what part local authorities can play in encouraging communities to make a contribution to the climate change effort? Does he share my regret that Glasgow City Council’s obstruction over the Castlemilk and Carmunnock Community Wind Park Trust has meant that people in my constituency have lost out on years of potential benefit from the project?

How are local authorities performing in contributing to meeting climate change targets? In particular, how is Glasgow City Council performing? Following an Audit Scotland report in 2010-11, that council was shown to have the worst record of all 32 local authorities.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made by the no knives better lives campaign. (S4O-01142)

It is recognised that the Scottish Government takes knife crime extremely seriously, and is making great strides to combat it through initiatives such as no knives better lives, as has been seen in recent events in Castlemilk in my constituency. However, as has been highlighted by a number of recent attacks in Glasgow, there is clearly still work to be done. Will the cabinet secretary inform me of the further actions that the Scottish Government will take to combat this scourge on our communities?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council about unemployment. (S4O-01103)

I am delighted to hear that there are positive discussions between the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the council should seriously consider making strategic use of its pension fund to boost employment opportunities in the city?

The First Minister will be aware of the recent announcement that 90 job losses are planned at the ClydeUnion Pumps plant in my constituency. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with ClydeUnion Pumps about the job losses? Former owner Jim McColl, when he sold the company, said that he thought that new owners SPX “would be a good responsible owner of this business and would continue to support its growth”, and that he wanted to “see the ... employees go on and prosper”. Does the First Minister agree that, given the plant’s 125-year history in the community of Cathcart, new owners SPX should seriously consider Jim McColl’s wishes?

I thank my colleague Paul Wheelhouse for lodging this important motion for debate. We owe a huge debt to the service personnel who put themselves at great risk to keep us safe. The risk of death in the Army is 150 times higher than the risk for the general working population, and the loss of life in the armed forces is a debt that we will never be able to fully repay. Although a lot of good work is being done, we need a more concerted effort to ensure that when those in the armed forces return from the field, they are better supported in their transition back into civilian life. As the motion states, there is a wealth of evidence that links alcohol and drug misuse in veterans to self-medication for mental health problems, and we need to examine our attitudes and responses to both those issues. We know from the huge number of studies in that field that alcohol and drugs have historically been used by military personnel to cope with the intense stress of battle and as a way of mediating the transition from the heightened experience of combat to “normal” routine life, which is a transition that many of us cannot envisage. Coupled with that change is the culture of drink in the armed forces that existed in the 1980s and 1990s, when alcohol was used as an aid to team building and there was an element of the train hard, play hard mentality. It is no coincidence that the service personnel who were in the armed forces at the height of that culture are now the ex-service personnel who are seeking help. That situation is exacerbated by Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. As the motion mentions, the Inverclyde pilot scheme referred to Scottish veterans being at particular risk because of Scotland’s attitude to drinking. There are members in the chamber who are doing all that they can to ensure that Scotland’s relationship with alcohol changes. We are all aware that, too often, already vulnerable groups in Scotland are being drawn to alcohol misuse as a self-medication tool. While that culture exists, we as a society have a duty to help those brave men and women on their return to civilian life. There is evidence that that armed forces mentality has changed to some degree. There is far less tolerance of alcohol intake during the week than there was previously, and there is zero tolerance on tour. If the mentality can change within the armed forces, it can surely change outwith them. Whether we like it or not, there is still an underlying shame and stigma attached to the mental health issues that often go hand in hand with alcohol and drug misuse by veterans. That is highlighted by the fact that, on average, it takes 13 years from leaving the service to getting in contact with organisations such as Combat Stress, Veterans Scotland or—more locally to me—Glasgow’s Helping Heroes. However, although society could do more to break the taboo on mental health and not allow substance abuse to be so readily seen as the answer, there are groups, such as those that I have just named, that are working tirelessly to help veterans to acclimatise to civilian life again. Glasgow’s Helping Heroes is one such group, which acts as a one-stop referral service for serving personnel, veterans and their dependants or carers. Of the many areas in which it helps veterans, providing information on local services to treat the underlying issues causing substance abuse is an extremely important one. Interestingly, when the organisation was set up, it was generally those who fall into the combat stress average who were attending. They were male and in their mid-to-late 40s, and predominantly had been in the Army for less than 10 years and had undertaken at least one operational duty. Many of those self-medicating with alcohol were—and still are—homeless. Age is certainly a factor. Among the younger veterans who are now attending, there is a lower incidence of alcohol misuse—although the figures are still too high—which correlates to the change in culture in the armed services. One therefore hopes that the tide is turning. However, there is, and will continue to be, a huge demand for veterans centres. The Scottish Government has set up the Scottish veterans fund, which recently announced that more than £80,000 has been awarded to 11 groups countrywide to offer support and services to our veterans. The UK Government has also set aside money to help to provide and improve veterans services. In my constituency, Cathcart old parish church, led by the Rev Neil Galbraith, is working with Glasgow’s Helping Heroes and other veterans organisations to create its own veterans centre in the church to offer services to ex-service personnel in the south of the city. The minister has already visited the project. The venue is ideally placed, with the Territorial Army stationed close by as well as great transport links and a local college that is keen to get involved in supporting veterans. Once the centre comes to fruition—the group is meeting today to move that forward—it will be a huge resource that veterans can use to get the help and support that they might need. I am proud to serve in a Parliament for a party that has such close ties with its veterans. We must all work together to ensure that all the help and support that is needed is available. With great organisations throughout the country such as Combat Stress, Veterans Scotland, Poppyscotland and Glasgow’s Helping Heroes, that help is slowly but surely being provided.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance is used by a procurator fiscal in determining whether a case is tried on a summary or indictment basis. (S4O-00987)

In the recent case of Damon Brooke, who attempted to abduct a young girl last year, the sheriff commented that the fact that the case was dealt with as a summary prosecution meant that his hands were tied when it came to sentencing. Given that the nature of a crime is a highly significant factor in the procurator fiscal’s decision making, does the Solicitor General agree that there needs to be a review of which crimes fall into the category of solemn prosecution and which fall into that of summary prosecution?

I agree with Patrick Harvie that we are talking about people. I appreciate that local elections are coming up very soon and perhaps we are all going to be party political—although in discussing an issue such as this we should not be party political, and I assure members that I will not be. Patrick Harvie is right to say that we are talking about the effect and impact on people and our responsibility as MSPs to ensure that we represent the communities that we were elected to represent as well as we possibly can. We have all heard Labour’s political scaremongering before. Every time that a transport issue is raised, Labour members get out there and criticise the Scottish Government. Funnily enough, Labour MSPs are saying that the bus companies are making huge profits. If that is the case, why is Labour asking us to give the bus companies more money? Why does Labour not ask the bus companies to do what they should be obliged to do?

No; I am sorry, but we are very short of time. Instead of politically motivated scaremongering, let us talk about what is going on on the ground. I will talk about Glasgow because it is the city that I know best and I represent part of it. We have been working to protect bus services within the community and my colleague Bob Doris has been working to ensure the continued existence of his local community transport group, which is the North Area Transport Association—members will know it well—so that it can continue to work for those who are in most need in the community. Why is NATA at risk? Because the Labour-run community planning partnership decided to cut its funding by 100 per cent. That is the reality of Labour on the ground. Thankfully, the group is continuing but for how long and in what guise is anyone’s guess. Unfortunately, my constituency of Cathcart has seen a similar situation that had a much less happy ending. The Castlemilk community transport group, which had been running for 16 years and received no public funding, just payment for services, is closing down this week because a number of local organisations were persistently slow in paying their bills. Three quarters of the payments owing were from the Labour-run Glasgow City Council family; they should be ashamed of themselves. The knock-on effects of Castlemilk community transport group ceasing to exist are clear, because other local groups are no longer able to take advantage of the subsidised travel that was offered to them. There will be a huge knock-on effect in Castlemilk. Just this week, one local group, which was doing magnificent work for women and children who are victims of abuse, came into my office to see whether I could help to find alternatives to take those women and children on their annual trip to Largs. They look forward to that trip every year, but it looks as though it will be nigh-on impossible without that subsidy. I will take no lessons from Labour on the importance of bus services to the community and how to protect them. One Friday a few months ago, I received a number of phone calls and e-mails relating to the proposed termination of a bus service in the Hillpark and Mansewood areas of my constituency. If any members know those areas, they will know that they are hilly, fairly remote, and fairly heavily populated by elderly people. I immediately organised a public meeting for the following Thursday, which was attended by representatives from First as well as by more than 150 residents and local politicians from other parties. The massive negative impact of losing that service came across loud and clear. One resident said that without the bus service, she would become a prisoner in her own home. Another talked about simple things that are taken for granted, such as collecting messages, going to church or visiting friends, being made nigh-on impossible for some if the bus service was withdrawn. As I touched on earlier, there was a feeling that First, which is part of a multimillion pound, multinational, profit-making organisation, has a social responsibility to provide a bus service, particularly to those areas of the city that are not well served by other bus routes, and to those residents who have, for a long time, paid into that huge company’s coffers. At that meeting, I agreed to talk to First and Strathclyde Passenger Transport to see whether we could work towards a solution; to be fair, the SPT staff and officers were incredibly helpful during that process. After meeting them, I was much more confident that the area would continue to be served. Two weeks ago, it was confirmed that the bus service was saved. The purpose of my telling that story is that instead of putting up posters saying “Missing Buses”, which people cannot see for all the missing buses driving past, we worked on the ground with other local politicians, community organisations and transport organisations and we got a positive result. No one is pretending that money is rife and that there are any easy solutions, but if politicians do what they are paid to do and get out and help their communities, their communities will be much better served than they are by the political posturing that we have seen here today. I support the SNP amendment.

Not any more! [Interruption.]

16. To ask the Scottish Government what role it envisages housing associations having in tackling unemployment. (S4O-00814)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating local housing associations such as Cassiltoun Housing Association in my constituency, which constantly strives to provide work and apprenticeships for local people in house building and construction? Most recently, it has taken over a local nursery that is based in Castlemilk stables, which will be run for the local community’s benefit by employees who are mainly from the local area. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is an excellent example of a housing association acting innovatively and playing its part in building recovery, building communities and increasing employment opportunities?

There has been a lot of talk about the cost of alcohol and the culture of alcohol in this country. Unlike Gil Paterson, I am not a lifelong teetotaller. I used to be a typical west of Scotland drinker. I would go out on a Friday night with my mates, I would run football teams on a Saturday and I would go out on a Saturday night. I decided after one weekend that I was not going to do that any more. I reckon that for two years I was drinking as I always had for one reason only: because it was the culture and I was scared to stop. I was not scared to stop because I loved drinking, because to be honest I could take it or leave it. However, I wondered what I would do if I did not drink and where I would go on a Friday or what I would do on a Saturday. I just kept on doing the same thing until I thought, “I’m not doing this any more,” and stopped it. Afterwards, the biggest problem was how my friends treated me, because they do treat you differently until they get used to it. The first thing that they do when you come in the pub is ask, “What do you want? What do you mean Irn Bru? Here’s a pint”—blah, blah, blah. It takes a while, but they get used to it and you move on. That is the culture that we are up against in Scotland and which most or many of us have to face. There is no doubt that, if we really want to battle alcohol, we have to fight the culture. The bill is about minimum unit pricing, but a lot of the work that has been done by the Government, and even a lot of the work that Graeme Pearson and others have talked about today, is about changing the culture of Scotland. We have a very difficult task ahead of us and we should take it very seriously. On the financial cost of alcohol to this country, my partner is a nurse who has worked in general nursing. She used to work in the medical receiving ward in a hospital that I will not name. She said that she hated the weekends because 90 per cent of the cases then were alcohol related. It was not just the problems that people came in with, which might include injuries from violence or liver problems, it was the fact that many people who were already in the hospital and needed treatment were not getting treatment because of the emergency cases that came in with what were almost self-inflicted wounds. The health service did what the health service does and treated everybody according to their needs and gave people a great service, but there was a bit of resentment among staff because they saw for example, a suffering old woman in hospital who was perhaps not getting the treatment that she needed because somebody else needed it. We therefore have a real issue here and it upsets me to see politicians from a party that I used to support, which is meant to be based on looking after those who cannot look after themselves, who blindly refuse to support a position—I do not care what they say—only because it came from us. The cabinet secretary has bent over backwards to try to get the other parties on board. [Interruption.] I hear, “Rubbish!” from one of the Labour members. I suspect that that is because, if they close their ears, they will hear nothing. The Conservatives and the Lib Dems came along—Willie Rennie made a very good speech—and the Greens came along at a very early stage. The issue is important.

I am sorry, but we heard enough from Helen Eadie earlier on. [Interruption.]

This is an important part of the parliamentary process. Kezia Dugdale mentioned the smoking ban. That ban is, without a doubt, the Parliament’s greatest achievement, but let me give a wee history lesson. The smoking ban proposal started with Kenny Gibson; it then went to Stewart Maxwell, and then to Jack McConnell. I was working for Stewart Maxwell at the time. I assure members that the Labour Party did not support the smoking ban, but it saw the evidence, changed its mind, took the bill and strengthened it, and we got a better bill because of that. I would like the Labour Party to do that now. With the smoking ban, Labour members put aside the fact that a proposal came from us, took that proposal and made it theirs. The SNP and the Parliament supported the bill, and we got the best piece of legislation that it has ever passed. It is not too late. Kenny Gibson said 5 o’clock. Oh, dear—a missed deadline. It is just after 5 o’clock, and Labour members have an opportunity to get together and vote on another piece of legislation that will make us proud. The bill is not the end result. Graeme Pearson made a great speech, but his conclusion was madness. He took us right up to the line, and all that he needed to do was say, “All these things have to be in place plus minimum unit pricing,” and his contribution would have been perfect, and he would have been a credit to himself and his party. That is what we need. Tim Stockwell said: “without a shred of doubt” this will “save lives, reduce healthcare costs, prevent death and injury on the roads, prevent birth defects, and reduce public violence”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 786.] [Interruption.] Did Duncan McNeil say that?

That is good. Were you drunk at the time?

Alcohol misuse and violence go hand in hand. A World Health Organization paper reports that economic modelling strongly suggests that minimum pricing will work, and that a 1 per cent increase in the price per ounce of alcohol would reduce the incidence of intimate partner violence against women by 5.3 per cent. Surely Labour members should support that.

Yes, I will.

In that case, I will not. I am sorry. Labour members have, rightly and commendably, strongly condemned violence against women and anybody else. Surely anything that will tackle that problem should be supported. The cabinet secretary has done everything that she can. There are a few minutes to go. I beg members to support the proposal; we can then move on to stage 2.

Like other members, I am delighted to congratulate Humza Yousaf on securing the debate. I had a similar situation with a school in my constituency but, unfortunately, it did not have the time and ammunition that Gadburn has to ask the minister to call in the decision. If there is a lesson to be learned from that situation, it is for Glasgow City Council. If it wants to close down an additional support for learning school without getting into the current process, it should do so by making the decision on the last day of term—for both the school and the council—so that the parents are not allowed the opportunity to get together and campaign as the parents have done in the case of Gadburn school. Those parents should be congratulated. There is nobody in Glasgow who does not know about the parents and pupils of Gadburn school and the work that elected representatives such as Grant Thoms have done to defend the school. Humza Yousaf talked about some of the conditions that the kids have had to put up with in Gadburn. When I was dealing with St Raymond’s school, parents told us that one child had had to up his dose of antidepressants by three times since the threat of closure was made at the school. Parents at St Raymond’s told me that—as Humza Yousaf said about children at Gadburn—their kids were taken out of mainstream schooling because it would not work for them and it was a danger to their own health and that of others. There is clearly a process at play. I have been concerned for some time about the way in which Glasgow City Council education department has looked at ASL schools in Glasgow. It came home to me when St Raymond’s was affected, but I have known about Gadburn for some time and, in addition, nobody seemed to be very happy about a restructuring of schools that took place a couple of years ago. In the case of St Raymond’s, Glasgow City Council education department made the final decision to close the school just prior to Christmas and kept the parents in the dark at all times. The only time that the parents heard anything was when somebody from the Evening Times informed them or I managed to get information from a letter or whatever. The parents were not kept informed at all. The method of communication was to put a letter in a school bag of a child with special needs. How can that possibly be the right way to communicate with parents who must know what is going on at all times for the benefit of their children? I agree with Paul Martin that there must be a look at the way in which Glasgow City Council education department deals with such situations. It has a duty of care not only to its staff but to every child who goes through the doors of its schools and, in particular, to children who go to schools such as Gadburn or went to schools such as St Raymond’s. To some extent, the situation at St Raymond’s had a wee bit of a happy ending for some of the parents involved, because the ones who made the most noise got preferential treatment. Glasgow City Council education department went out of its way to ensure that their children got to go to the school of their choosing. However, what about the other parents who were not as voluble and determined? What about those who thought that such closures are just what happens and did not believe in fighting authority? Glasgow City Council education department has a crucial role in such situations, which should be to first and foremost look after the welfare of the children. I do not think that it is a coincidence that the Gadburn children are being moved to Barmulloch primary school when Barmulloch is only one third full; surely if it is only one third full, there is scope for a stand-alone Gadburn in that school. Like Humza Yousaf, I urge the cabinet secretary to call in the decision.

Since I was elected to the Scottish Parliament, I have had the honour of representing my constituents in the parliamentary chamber and in Glasgow City Council. Most of the time that has been a pleasure, but one of the occasional drawbacks is that I have to listen to the same tired debates from the Labour Party in both places. Unfortunately for me, today is one of those days. It is a real shame but no surprise that the Labour Party has wasted vital debating time on a manufactured, politically motivated and negative motion that has no basis in reality, as Labour members well know. One would have thought that, by this time, the Labour Party would have realised that scaremongering may get it the odd headline but is no substitute for policy. I suspect that Labour members will find that out, with devastating consequences, in May. It is clear that the motion was not lodged with the future of Scotland’s railways in mind, because it is about the future of Labour council colleagues throughout the country, but primarily in Glasgow, who are facing the search for a new career in the near future. Labour knows, I know and the public know that there are no closures of train stations in Glasgow—there never were and never will be.

I would love to, but I have only four minutes. Why does the Labour Party not bring something positive to the table? Where are its plans for the railways in Scotland? Does it have any? I thought not. It does not have a policy or a constructive suggestion. It has nothing. Richard Baker’s motion talks about “concerns expressed in Glasgow” about “the future of 11 railway stations”. The minister has told us that those 11 stations have been named because someone asked for the names. I am sure that we are all keen to know who that was and how it came about. It has come to my attention that, at a public meeting that was arranged by my local Labour member of Parliament, that mystery person asked the question. We all know him: he is the defeated Labour candidate who did not see his own downfall coming when it was staring him in the face. I am not suggesting for a moment that this is a set-up—heaven forfend—but it has involved a Labour MP arranging a meeting to discuss the consultation, a member of the public asking for stations to be named and, once they were named, Labour running its council election campaign around that. At the very least, it is political opportunism of the worst kind. As Labour scrabbles around for a bandwagon to jump on—or create—the SNP continues to invest in Scotland’s rail services. Our rail network receives a higher public subsidy than any network elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Indeed, the recent budget passed by this Parliament increased expenditure on rail services and on maintaining the current network. The SNP’s record on transport is one to be proud of, especially in Glasgow. That is demonstrated by our additional investment in the Glasgow subway and our commitment to fastlink, which will be an important piece of infrastructure when we host the Commonwealth games. The new Southern general hospital is another huge investment in Glasgow by this Scottish Government. There are countless other examples, which I am sure my colleagues will mention. We have even put on an extra five trains a day between Glasgow and Dundee. I realise that Labour members do not have much reason to visit Dundee any more, but they have to accept that that is not the behaviour of a Government that does not recognise the importance of railway services. Labour’s petition against the rail 2014 consultation states: “I am against many of the changes proposed to Scotland’s railway network.” It does not specify a single change, and I am sure that I am not the only person who read that and thought of Father Dougal standing outside the cinema in an episode of “Father Ted”, chanting, “Down with this sort of thing.” It is completely meaningless and shows the campaign for precisely what it is—an electioneering tool for May. Labour knows that there is no threat and wants to be able to claim the credit for changing the minister’s mind when he confirms that. That will not work. Presiding Officer, if you invited me to a party—I await that call—and I said that I had no plan or intention to turn up, but then did, your response would be, “You told me you weren’t coming.” No plans and no intentions means not happening—in this case, no station closures. Benjamin Franklin once said that the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. Clearly, the Labour Party is so desperate that it is willing to play the politics of the madhouse. It has no ideas, no vision and no policies, so all that it is left with is the politics of negativity, carping from the sidelines and spreading fear in local communities. I have—

At a meeting that I had in Kennishead, which has been affected by the threats and scaremongering, once I explained to the people there what the minister had said, they said that they were comfortable with it, and they were surprised about what was happening. Does the member accept that the scaremongering is affecting communities much more than the consultation is?

Will the member give way?

When the consultation document first came out and the fear of closures was raised by the member and her colleagues, councillors did what they should do: they contacted the people whom they should have contacted and got the reassurances that they required. They did not have to campaign further to save our stations or anything else, because they knew once the minister had said that there were “no plans and no intentions to close stations”—[Official Report, 26 January 2012; c 5884.] that no closures were going to happen.

If the member is so appalled by the welfare reforms from Westminster, why is he happier to be in a union that is run by Conservatives than to have an independent Scotland that would never be run by Conservatives but would be run by a left-of-centre democratic party?

I thank the cabinet secretary for confirming once again the importance of local government to him and the rest of the Scottish Government. That is shown by the £38 million extra in funding that they have found. As a previous leader of the opposition in Glasgow City Council and a sitting councillor, I consider local government to be critically important to our society’s wellbeing. That will hardly come as a surprise to members. We charge local government with responsibility for extremely important services, from the schooling of our children and grandchildren to the social care of our families and loved ones. We ask it to look after our roads and to regenerate areas that need a wee bit extra work to make them shine again. Its importance in the running of our communities cannot be overstated. Local government is the best-placed level of government to determine changes at a local level and it is strongest when it works in partnership with the national Government. Given its responsibilities, it is, of course, imperative that it is funded appropriately. It is clear from the cabinet secretary’s statement that the Scottish Government also holds that view. Even working under the draconian cuts that have been imposed by successive Westminster Governments, which have seen the Scottish budget reduced year on year since 2007, the Scottish Government continues to ensure that local government settlements are fair, affordable and at a level that is, despite the aforementioned Westminster cuts, higher than it was in 2007-08 when the SNP took power. In the coming year, Glasgow will receive per capita funding to the tune of £2,786, which is the highest of any wholly mainland local authority and £500 more than the Scottish average, although we would not believe that if we listened to the constant publicity-seeking, politically motivated greeting of the leader of Glasgow City Council. I am not the only one who thinks that Mr Matheson has got it wrong. The Edinburgh Labour Party agrees with me, as does the Edinburgh Evening News, which criticised Mr Matheson for having a go at Edinburgh when Glasgow is receiving, as Edinburgh Labour put it, £2,617 per head while Edinburgh gets £1,821. If a party is going to attack us, maybe it should speak to its colleagues before it decides to play party politics with the funding of local government. Glasgow has done well out of the small business bonus scheme, and I am delighted that Mr Swinney has reiterated that today. It will do well out of the £30 million youth employability money, which I am sure it will get more than its fair share of. The long-term commitment to the council tax freeze has saved families hundreds of pounds in these difficult economic times. Many projects are funded in Glasgow by the Scottish Government, such as the south Glasgow hospitals, the Clyde fastlink, the City of Glasgow College, the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme, and the recently completed M74, and tens, if not hundreds, of millions of pounds have been invested across the city in preparation for the Commonwealth games in 2014. I am proud to be from Glasgow, which houses magnificent public buildings, including stunning art galleries and museums, and the largest number of public parks of any city in Europe. Hampden Park, in my constituency, is the home of Scottish football. Glasgow has so much to be proud of, but its local government leaves a lot to be desired. Glasgow City Council receives the highest per capita funding settlement from the Scottish Government of any wholly mainland authority, but people who live in some areas of the city have the lowest life expectancy and highest infant mortality rates in western Europe. Those problems are connected to the high levels of heart disease and alcohol-related illness, which are associated with poverty. That is why I welcome the public health levy. Despite the Tories’ claims, it can only be a good thing. For all the investment in schools by successive Scottish Governments, some schools in Glasgow’s more deprived areas still have the lowest educational attainment rates in the country and despite, or perhaps because of, the fact that Glasgow City Council was the biggest landlord of social rented housing in western Europe until 10 years ago, far too many houses in Glasgow are still in a chronically poor condition that adversely affects the health of thousands of residents of the city. It is clear that money alone cannot solve every problem. The Scottish Government has to play its part in providing fair resources and funding for Glasgow, and it has done so.

We are facing the most difficult economic time that we have had since devolution, so local government has a responsibility to spend the money that it is given wisely and carefully. We expect local politicians who are responsible for administering the services to be more committed to spending tens of thousands of pounds on filling potholes than to paying for medals for bailies and portraits of the lord provost. We also expect them to protect the most vulnerable in our society instead of financing huge payoffs for council officers and chief executives of arm’s-length external organisations within the so-called larger council family. Sometimes the word “family” is very appropriate. We also expect our local and national Government to use methods of financing public projects such as schools and hospitals in a way that will not penalise our children and grandchildren for our incompetence. Shamefully, Glasgow pays in excess of £50 million per annum in repayments for the scandalous private finance initiative and public-private partnership projects that originated from the dead hand of Prudence Brown. That money could be spent on keeping additional support for learning schools open, fixing our roads and assisting those who are most in need. Thankfully, the people of Glasgow will have the chance in May to remove the incompetent Labour administration, which continues to hold Glasgow back, and to put in place an SNP administration that is full of innovative ideas about how to use Glasgow’s funding wisely to benefit Glasgow’s citizens in an open and transparent way, in contrast to the opaque, secretive and obstructive way in which Glasgow is run at present. I look forward to the day—it is coming soon—when Glasgow is run by an administration that would rather work with the Government of the day for the benefit of Glasgow’s citizens than cry wolf at every opportunity to make cheap political points.

Will the member give way?

I start by congratulating Derek Mackay on his ministerial maiden speech to the Parliament. It was a job well done. I will speak briefly about the motion, but the great thing about it is that it gives us an opportunity to talk about the elections in May, which will be the thrust of the main part of my speech. I welcome the hard work and joint effort from the Scottish Government, local authorities and others to ensure the implementation of the changes that flowed from the Gould report. Mr Gould should be congratulated on his full and frank report, which highlighted many of the shortfalls of the 2007 Holyrood election. We have heard from previous speakers examples of the problems and some of the work that the Government is doing to combat them. Unfortunately, there are a couple of areas in which we do not have the powers to do that—two of them being votes for young people aged 16 and 17 and the devolution of the powers to control local authority elections. The proof that the Scottish Government took recommendations seriously is in the smooth running of the 2011 Holyrood elections, and I am confident that the decoupling of the local authority elections from other elections will ensure another successful, well-run day in May. There are aspects of the Gould report’s conclusions that should leave some of the political parties in this chamber embarrassed—well, on this occasion, just one party as the other party has not even bothered to turn up. To be told that “the Scotland Office and the Scottish Executive frequently focused on partisan political interests, overlooking ... the voter” surprises few of us on this side of the chamber but must have come as a huge shock to voters across the country who previously put their faith in those political parties to make decisions on their behalf and not solely for political gain. We have moved on, and I look forward to the transparent, fair and smooth running of all elections, and referendums, in Scotland in the future. Of course, one way to ensure that is, as the motion says, to devolve the power for the running of all Scottish elections to Scotland. I am sure that I am not alone on this side of the chamber in saying how much I look forward to the forthcoming local elections.

I point out to Mr Findlay that I was leader of the opposition in Glasgow City Council. I know all about unfairness in local authorities.

As opinion polls continue to show growing support for the party, which has a great record in local by-elections and a track record of success in administration, and given the record of hard work and commitment of SNP councillors across the country, I am confident that the people of Scotland will elect our candidates as their local authority representatives in great number. We have talked about the process of local elections and how we can try to make it easier for people to vote in May; now we must enthuse people about coming out to vote. The main reason to come out and vote in Glasgow in May is that the elections give people a chance to throw the dead hand of Labour control off our beautiful city. For far too long the citizens of Glasgow have had to live under the complacency, arrogance and incompetence of an Administration that would rather fight with the Government for political reasons than work with it to make life better for the people that it is meant to represent—present company excepted, of course. While the SNP Government completes the M8, builds a brand new hospital and funds numerous new schools, the local administration group penalises the poorest and most vulnerable in society by closing down day centres for the disabled and schools for pupils who have additional support needs and, worst, by using the admirable self-directed support system to cut funding from the people who need it most, leaving many people without any way to live life as fully as they have been used to doing. It is thought that Glasgow City Council will face a legal challenge on how it is trying to implement the policy. I would not bet on the council’s being able to defend its approach.

I did not realise that there are set words that we have to use in our speeches—[Interruption.] I am trying to explain why we should get people out to vote, not just how people should vote. The two issues are closely connected. Glasgow Labour is ripping itself apart, after the most inept selection process that I have ever witnessed, with more than 20 councillors deselected for not being up to standard, one of whom was city treasurer just a few months before and another of whom was convener of the licensing board. When was it realised that those people were not up to the job? If that is the case, why were so many of them in extremely important positions in the first place? We are putting forward a record number of high-quality, committed council candidates to fight for Glasgow—double the number that we put up in 2007. While Labour supports the continual privatisation of the national health service, the SNP continues to protect the NHS in Scotland from the worst ravages of the Westminster cuts.

And while Labour has a number of councillors who thought that their only responsibility was—

I think that that is highly unfair, Presiding Officer, but I am happy to go back to talking about how we should encourage 16 and 17-year-olds to vote for the SNP. I have given some of the reasons why they should be able to vote for the SNP when it comes to the local authority elections on 3 May. I did not realise our speeches had to be okayed—particularly by Mr Findlay—before we made them, but if I have touched a nerve I do apologise. We have an opportunity, thanks to the work of the Government and local authorities, to ensure that more people vote on 3 May. I hope that they will vote for the SNP.

I start by thanking Margaret Burgess for bringing the debate to the chamber. I also offer my apologies because I will have to leave once I have spoken. I have already explained to Margaret Burgess that I have a prior engagement. Following on from what Gavin Brown said, there is no doubt that there is a place for companies who serve those who are unable to get credit in the normal way. I remember every summer going to a large store next to Glasgow Cross to get my school uniform, which was paid for by a fixed sum every week over the course of the year. I have no doubt that my mum paid much more for that uniform and those of my two brothers than she would have if she could have paid cash, but the extra cost was literally a price worth paying for her to see her three boys dressed well. I also remember a cool 16-year-old—use your imagination—buying his first pair of hipsters at Dee of Trongate with his shopping cheque. It was more expensive but members should have seen those hipsters. We shopped like that because, back then, access to credit was nigh on impossible and ready money was tight. For me, that is the more acceptable face of higher-interest credit. It is more expensive but the cost is payable. What is not acceptable is the surge in outrageous pay day loans. It comes as no surprise to learn that the R3 report found that 68 per cent of the people who were polled who had taken a high-interest pay day loan had done so because they could not get access to credit elsewhere. That information should form the basis of any debate on regulating such loans. Lack of appropriate identification, having a court judgment, being on benefits or even having a part-time job are all factors that can exclude people from accessing mainstream loans and, coupled with economic depression, are leading to a huge increase in the number of people who apply for pay day loans. It is true that most of the people who take out such loans know what the interest rate is, but the accessibility of the loans often gives people a last chance to access credit that would be denied to them anywhere else. Of course, problems arise when the high-interest pay day loans cannot be paid back. Threats and worry start to hit families and we see the repercussions that Kenneth Gibson talked about earlier. Scottish Financial Inclusion Services highlights the case of one 34-year-old from Castlemilk, in my constituency, who borrowed £493 from one of these creditors. He paid back £400 but only £60 of that counted towards the principal sum. The other £370 paid the interest. That client will remain in the debt trap because of the extortionate interest rates and the unwillingness of the lender to freeze or waive the interest. However, help is out there for people who find themselves in that sort of financial trouble. Again in my constituency, Castlemilk Budgeting Service supports individuals in making payments to their creditors and supports vulnerable people in paying their on-going debts while, as far as possible, preventing legal action and eviction. I know that there are similar services elsewhere across Glasgow and, I imagine, across the rest of the country. The citizens advice bureau is also an important point of contact for those who are burdened with debt. It can offer advice on the range of choices that are available to help people to cope with their debt burden. Of course, there are also organisations out there that offer affordable and responsible lending opportunities. Margaret Burgess has already mentioned the 1st Alliance (Ayrshire) Credit Union in Kilwinning. In my constituency, the Castlemilk Credit Union has 4,000 members and gives out loans totalling between £3 million and £4 million a year. Those loans, regulated by the Financial Services Authority, have their interest rates curbed at 24 per cent per annum, compared with the 4,000-plus per cent interest rates that high-interest pay day loans sometimes offer. Credit unions definitely offer a better way to borrow money. Unfortunately, despite all the problems that accompany them, such high-interest loans have become a popular way for people who have been denied more mainstream, responsible loans to access money quickly. As long as such lenders continue to exist, parliamentarians have a responsibility to regulate them as best they can. The Westminster Government could—and probably should—start by curbing the level of interest that any creditor can charge. It should also do all that it can to encourage the formation of more credit unions and responsible lenders who will help those who are in financial need, and we should do more to publicise the alternatives to high-interest pay day loans. Affordable credit for all is a difficult aim, but we should all strive to achieve it.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her speech and welcome the measures that she outlined. I was particularly pleased to hear her talk about giving people priority over organisations. As has already been stated, Scotland faces huge demographic changes over the coming years, particularly with the 38 per cent increase in the 65 to 74-year-old population by 2031. Already, £1.4 billion is spent on unplanned emergency admissions to hospital. Indeed, we know from clinicians, care managers and older people themselves that unplanned emergency admission to hospital is often distressing and leads to poorer health outcomes than might have been achieved by a package of primary and social care in the community, and lead commissioning can help us achieve that.

Already?

Some work is already being done to ensure that the number of emergency admissions is lowered. Clearly, we should be focusing more on outcomes than on processes and looking for creative ways in which different levels of government can work together. As a great man once said, we have “no monopoly on wisdom”, and that is why we should listen to what others have to say about the proposals. The chair of NHS Highland, Garry Coutts, said: “I am convinced that staff will be much more able to organise services that best meet the needs of the people they are caring for if the artificial barriers between health and social care are broken down.” The chief executive of NHS Tayside, Gerry Marr, said: “The closer integration of social care and healthcare is the next step that we must take to ensure we can provide the best care for our older people into the future.” Although the Association of Directors of Social Work has concerns about the move, its president, Andrew Lowe, said: “We consider the announcement represents significant progress and we support the clear emphasis on making better use of joint resources.” I know that there appears to be cross-party consensus about where we are heading—I will deal with the differences later on. The ADSW already works closely with the NHS on many fronts and the approach is something that it can build on. As it says, it is the norm across Scotland for joint teams to operate in learning disability, mental health and addictions services. Joint service approaches in older people’s services are now being developed further as the result of the implementation of the change fund. I am a former member of the south-east Glasgow community health and care partnership. I thoroughly enjoyed being a part of the partnership before its unfortunate and untimely demise. As the cabinet secretary knows, although there were difficulties, it managed to do to the best of its abilities what it was tasked with doing, and it enabled politicians, medical practitioners, social workers and, most important, members of the community to work together to deliver better outcomes for the people of the south-east of Glasgow. So, what happened to it? I believe that, although those at the ground level were keen and worked co-operatively, after initial difficulties and a lot of effort and commitment, the desire to hold on to power—and budgets—was too great for those higher up the food chain. I am not making a political attack; my comments are based on my experiences. As I was part of the executive committee that discussed the matter, I know that Glasgow City Council was not willing to devolve money to the CHCP to deliver services and was much more interested in protecting its social work silos. I doubt that that was untypical of councils and health boards across the country. Members should not just take my word for it, though. The BMA says that resource transfer to community health partnerships “has been a source of tension between the NHS and councils.” It has also said that “the barriers that exist within and between health and social care need to be broken down and replaced with greater collaboration, both financial and cultural.” I was delighted to hear the cabinet secretary say that what is important is not where the money comes from but how it is used. If that approach had been taken with regard to the practical application of the CHCPs, we would not be in our current situation. At this stage in the process, there are a number of questions. Bob Doris mentioned the issues around carers. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on her positive comments on the third sector and carers in particular. Where do carers fit into the policy, and how will the Government ensure that carers and carers organisations are directly involved in the planning and delivery of the legislation and the new partnerships from the outset? As has been said, if we do not ensure that the carers are on board, it is hard to see how the approach will work. The challenge for the Scottish Government, local authorities and health boards is to ensure that we deliver the changes that are needed to meet the challenges that we face now and in the years ahead. However, those changes need to be flexible in order to accommodate the differing needs of communities across the country. Close co-operation is vital, and joined up thinking is crucial, but a one-size-fits-all approach would be wrong. We need to get local authorities and health boards to work together and then give them the space to meet the needs of their patients or clients. That is why, faced with all the evidence and statements welcoming the integration of health and social care and a joined-up approach across all sectors of local government and stressing the need for flexibility, I do not support the Labour amendment. In my view, a national care service is not the answer to Scotland’s care challenges. However, it is coming up to Christmas, so I will be more charitable than I normally am. I am honestly in no doubt that all members sincerely want Scotland to have a first-class health and social care system that is fit for the 21st century, that has the people at its heart, that is publicly accountable, that involves partnerships across all areas and levels of government—where that makes sense—and, most important, that delivers for the people of Scotland. It would be a very good sign if the Parliament sent a message as one, and I therefore ask the Labour Party to support the motion.

18. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with colleges about future budget settlements. (S4O-00476)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his kind comments. I know that, as was highlighted by yesterday’s announcement of £15 million to assist colleges, the cabinet secretary recognises the important work that takes place in colleges throughout the country, none more so than in Langside College in my constituency, which recently became the only college to have won the Scottish Qualifications Authority’s pride o’ worth award for a second time. Given the importance of the college sector to many constituents in Cathcart and throughout Glasgow, will the cabinet secretary agree to meet me and members of the federation of Glasgow colleges to discuss the future of the college sector in Scotland’s largest and best city?

I, too, welcome the statement, which clearly shows that, despite the Westminster-imposed financial squeeze, Glasgow City Council will still receive the highest level of funding per head of mainland local authorities throughout the spending review period. Given that Scottish Parliament information centre figures show that between 1999 and 2007 the percentage increase in funding that Glasgow received was lower than that of any other local authority in Scotland, and given that the cabinet secretary confirms that all parties in COSLA support the settlement in principle, does he agree that any of the usual fake outrage from council leader Gordon Matheson or Labour Party colleagues opposite is just politically motivated bluster to cover their own failings in running Glasgow City Council before next May’s local authority elections?

I stand here today as a member of a party that not only aspires to government but actually is in government. It is with a somewhat heavy heart that I take part in the debate. A substantial part of me wishes that I was outside, supporting those hard-working public servants who have been so harshly treated by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition. It is beyond my ken why that coalition thinks that the best way to deal with an economic crisis created by bankers and speculators and exacerbated by the actions of the previous Labour Westminster Government is to penalise the workers on whom we will most heavily rely during the fallout from the welfare cutbacks imposed as a result of that right-wing coalition’s dogma. We normally expect cutbacks such as these from the Tories—they are almost their raison d’être—but even I, as someone who does not have a particularly high opinion of the Lib Dems after my experience on Glasgow City Council, am surprised by the enthusiasm with which Moore and Alexander have become the gofers of Cameron and Osborne. No one who comes from a background such as mine crosses a picket line easily. My dad was a docker, as were his brother and his cousins and my granddad. We are steeped in the traditions of the labour movement, and I am extremely proud of that. Unfortunately, none of them is with us any more, but I have no doubt that each and every one of them would support my being in here today to debate the reasons why those public servants feel forced to take such drastic action. As a matter of fact, they would see it as a dereliction of my duty if I did otherwise. Being an MSP is not a job; it is a responsibility that the people of our constituencies and regions honoured us with in May, and they expect us to fulfil our responsibilities even in the most difficult of times. I will take no lessons from those kiddie-on socialists who think that they can treat the people like fools by taking a duvet day today and calling it solidarity. The trade unions know who is really on the side of the workers. Despite the rhetoric of Balls and all, the Labour Party had pretty much the same things planned for us if it had got into power. A wee bit less hypocrisy and a touch more honesty would be welcome. For goodness’ sake, even Labour’s own leadership sees through Scottish Labour. Miliband does not support the strike, and Gordon Brown is leading a debate today—not one on the issue of public sector pensions, I might add—in only his third appearance since his humiliating defeat at the hands of the Tories.

No. Although we are on the side of the workers and are using this full day to show our anger at the actions of the coalition, it is business as usual for Labour at Westminster. Of course, it was Gordon Brown who scrapped tax relief on pension dividends in 1997, taking out £5 billion from pension funds each year against official advice and penalising pensioners for decades to come. While Labour members posture and pontificate, while the Tories salivate about taking on the unions and while the Lib Dems do as their masters bid them, the SNP Government continues to fight for the rights of public sector workers. While the Tories are making this naked cash grab, the Scottish Government has put in place a no compulsory redundancies guarantee for public sector workers. While the coalition is determined to make low-paid workers pay the price for the bankers’ incompetence and worse, the Scottish Government has helped those same low-paid workers by putting in place a council tax freeze, scrapping prescription charges and freezing water bills. While the Tories and Lib Dems are happy to have moved from the retail price index to the consumer price index as the basis for calculating pension and benefits annual increases, the Scottish Government has put in place measures to help to protect low-paid workers from the worst of the effects of this latest attack on their pensions. Under Scottish Government proposals, no-one earning less than £15,000 a year will face any increase at all, as has been discussed. Members: Those are Conservative proposals. They are different from the Tory plan. [Interruption.] Yes, they are. [Interruption.] Members have already heard it from Christina McKelvie. The proposals are in keeping with the other actions that the Scottish Government has taken to protect low-paid workers, such as guaranteeing public sector workers the Scottish living wage of £7.20 per hour even at a time when it has had to constrain public sector pay. The Scottish Government will not impose the increases on the local government pension scheme. Many of my constituents have already benefited from the Scottish Government’s actions. As I represent a constituency with one of the highest numbers of public sector workers in the country, I will do all that I can to ensure that we continue to do all that we can to mitigate the worst of Westminster’s decisions. It is a tragedy that things have got to this stage. It is clear that workers feel that they have run out of options and that the Tory-led Government intends to do to the low paid what Tory Governments have done in the past. I understand why people feel that they have no option. However, it is pretty clear that today is what the coalition Government wants. This is Cameron’s Maggie moment; this is where he gets those right-wing back benchers, who are a wee bit unsure of his Thatcherite credentials, to fall in behind him. He knows that, as long as the ministerial cars are there, the Tories have nothing to fear from their junior partners. John Swinney has made it clear on a number of occasions that the Scottish Government fully recognises the need to face up to the difficult financial period that we are in and have ahead of us. He has recognised the need to look at public sector pensions, but, more important, he has made it crystal clear that this is not the way to go about it. How can there possibly be any trust between the trade unions and UK Government after such a draconian imposition on pension reform? Although the Scottish Government is doing all that it can to alleviate the worst of the fallout for the lowest paid, the UK Government has made it almost impossible for it to take unilateral action here in Scotland. [Interruption.] I will pass, if the member does not mind. When John Swinney wrote to the Treasury suggesting a deferral of the changes—changes that we clearly do not agree with—until after the public sector pay freeze, he was told in no uncertain terms by Mr Moore that the consequences would be huge for the Scottish budget, amounting to more than £550 million. No Scottish Government could possibly agree to such a cut to its budget, especially during a period in which its budget has already been slashed by the UK Government. If the coalition is determined to go ahead with its reforms, all that we can do under the existing constitutional settlement is mitigate the effects. As I have previously outlined, that is what the Scottish Government is doing. However, the only way in which we will truly be able to improve the pensions of the people of Scotland is if Scotland becomes an independent nation that is responsible for both raising the moneys for the pension and setting what people should be entitled to. As has been said, according to the 2010 “Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland” report, pensions are more affordable in Scotland than in the UK as a whole—that has been the position for the past five years. In an independent Scotland, we would be better able to afford current pension levels than the rest of the UK. At the end of the day, it comes down to ideology. Everyone recognises that there is a major financial problem and that pensions, pay and expenditure have all got to be looked at, but it is how we go about doing that that is important. The coalition has decided that those at the bottom should pay the highest price for the sins of some of those at the top, while the Labour Party has decided to stand on the sidelines and shout abuse without getting involved. Only the SNP has made a serious effort to show that there is indeed a better way. Today was a great opportunity for the vast majority of the Parliament to send the coalition a message and to say loud and clear that this is not how we do things here in Scotland. It is a shame that some of our colleagues would rather make political attacks on the SNP Government than take the fight to the real enemy down in Westminster. It is time for the Labour Party to support the Scottish Government in its fight to delay or scrap the cuts, to target the coalition and to stand up for those hard-working public sector workers who are being targeted by the right-wing coalition Government.

The minister made it clear in his speech just how much the Scottish Government recognises the debt that Scotland owes to its carers and the huge role that they play in the economy and the wellbeing of the country. I was particularly delighted to hear him talk about short breaks and the £2 million fund that has just been announced. The carers and young carers strategy is all about ensuring that our carers are recognised as equal partners in care, that they are fully engaged in the planning and development of the delivery of care, and that they are not disadvantaged in any way by virtue of being a carer. That is a bold vision, but it is the right one. There are around 657,000 carers in Scotland, which is an eighth of the entire population. That is a huge number that surprises us until we start to think of all the people we know who look after their mother, husband, wife or child without thinking about it or recognising that they are a carer. In my family, an elderly relative was looked after by her daughter. It was only when someone in the care home in which that relative eventually ended up described her daughter as a carer that she recognised that she was indeed a carer. I am sure that that is not an uncommon story. Through their sacrifices, carers save the public purse a massive £10.3 billion each and every year, which is almost the equivalent of the entire NHS budget for Scotland. What would we do without them? That is why we must get the strategy right, and I believe that the Government has done that, although it will not be without its challenges. The number 1 challenge is to ensure that the partners play their roles. Let us consider the change fund, for instance. I understand that ministers cannot demand that local authorities reach agreement in a particular way, but the challenge now is for those local authorities with their partners to revisit their local carer strategies, adapt them as and when necessary, and fully involve the third sector throughout the process. I am pleased that the Scottish Government said in its report that it will produce a list of key points that local strategies should address to assist local government and its partners, not least because the feedback that I have received from concerned organisations is that Glasgow City Council has proved reluctant to engage in any meaningful dialogue with third sector partners. I have also been made aware of real concern that a substantial proportion of the £7.9 million that has been made available to Glasgow through the change fund has been used on statutory services that perhaps should already be provided. Those are vital services, but that is not what the money was meant to be spent on; it was meant to ensure that carers throughout the city had greater resources available. How the change fund is used and how it makes the lives of Scotland’s older people and carers better should be of great concern to all elected members in Glasgow, no matter what party they are members of. I know that that greatly concerns carers themselves, who already think that they have not always been consulted properly when it was being decided how the money should be spent. Given that, will the minister reaffirm in his winding-up speech—I know that he has already touched on this—what he can do to ensure that there is clear accountability for how the change fund is being used and how he can ensure that the promise that has been made to carers about 20 per cent of the change fund money being made available directly to unpaid carers will be delivered on the ground through local organisations? I am extremely fortunate to have in my constituency the fantastic Princess Royal Trust Glasgow south-east carers centre, which is run by Julie Young and her small but perfectly formed team from the Castlemilk office. They currently receive just less than £300,000 from the local authority to deliver the services that they provide. From that, they generate an incredible £3.26 million in social return and investment. Therefore, for every £1 that Glasgow City Council gives that centre, it gets a return of approximately £11. That is important, but from my visits to the centre I can vouch for the most important role that it plays being in giving hope and support to some of those in our society with the heaviest burdens to carry. On my most recent visit to the centre, I met more than 20 carers who were there to tell me their stories. Some of them were heart-rending, yet not once did I hear any self pity or any sense of people asking, “Why me?” Time and again, they told me, “We wouldn’t have made it without this place.” Like several other members, I have had the pleasure of spending time with a couple of carers in my constituency. I decided to do that because, although I had met carers, those who need the support of carers and those who represent them, and had even spoken in the chamber about carers, I still had not seen for myself at first hand what their day-to-day existence is truly like. I accept that we cannot find that out by spending just one day with a carer, but what an eye-opener it was. Spending time with Linda Stoddart and Linda Hamilton was immensely humbling and informative and a surprisingly entertaining experience. Meeting those two intelligent, successful women, who put the care of their loved ones first, was remarkable. Their decision involved putting their career on hold, accepting the inevitable drop in household income and often seeing less of the rest of their family, as well as accepting that their social life would be massively curtailed and that precious me time would be a luxury. It was a huge price to pay, but both those remarkable women accepted it. That is the what the reality of life can be like for a carer. I was blown away by the sacrifice that the two Lindas had made. They play extraordinary roles in our society that require 24/7 commitment, dedication and a charitable spirit. However, I was most struck by the fact that they do not view their role as a service, but instead see it as the natural and obvious thing to do when someone so close to them requires the support that only they can provide. It is heartwarming to find that a sense of loyalty to one’s fellow human beings is alive and well. In their case, it is a family loyalty, but we all know people in our society who care for friends, neighbours and others. Scotland’s army of carers are a shining example of all that is good about this country, which is why it is important that we do what is right for them and ensure that we get the strategy and the change fund right—we owe that to them. This is not the time for party politics. I ask members please to support the carers and the motion.

As has been recognised across the chamber, the regeneration of our communities is one of the most important aspects of any programme for government. In my view, being the minister responsible for the national regeneration strategy must be one of the most exciting jobs in Government and I am sure the chamber will recognise and welcome Alex Neil’s determination to deliver a national regeneration strategy fit for a 21st century Scotland. Clearly, regeneration is about more than bricks and mortar; it is an opportunity for local and national Government to work together with partner agencies, such as housing associations, schools, colleges, community councils and health boards. It is also an opportunity to bring about growth in the local and national economy by boosting investment and creating jobs, all to make life better for our constituents. One of the most challenging issues that regeneration can address is the social problems that we have here in Scotland—drug and alcohol abuse, crime, antisocial behaviour, poor educational attainment, unemployment, health inequalities and low aspiration. All those things have been touched on by previous speakers, but it is important that we reiterate the high correlations that are found between living in deprived areas and a range of those negative outcomes. Although a person’s community cannot be claimed to solely determine life outcomes, it clearly plays an important role in shaping them. Just look at the statistics—in justice, 62 per cent of prisoners previously lived in 25 per cent of Scotland’s most deprived areas. In health, between 2001 and 2004, the rate of hospital admissions related to alcohol misuse per 100,000 of the population was just over three times higher in the most deprived areas than in less deprived areas. In education, the exclusion rate in the 10 per cent most deprived areas of Scotland is 91 per 1,000 pupils, compared with 12 per 1,000 pupils in other areas of Scotland. As a Glasgow MSP, I recognise those statistics. We need to do what we can to change that for the better. Sustainable regeneration of our communities is hugely important, and investment in the new generation of community organisations that will develop community cohesion and resilience is vital, especially in these tough economic times. However, it is about not just providing financial support but allowing genuine community ownership of projects that benefit our communities. I was interested to read the SCVO briefing for the debate, which highlights the importance of community ownership of energy projects. Members will be aware—they are probably sick of me talking about it—of the on-going dispute with Glasgow City Council about allowing the Castlemilk and Carmunnock Community Wind Farm Trust to develop a community-owned renewable energy project, the profits of which would go into the community to combat many of the social issues that have been highlighted in the debate. The project would contribute to single outcome agreements set by the Scottish Government and COSLA, make life better for local residents and ease the burden on council tax payers, yet the council refuses to grant a lease for the land unless the trust surrenders the management of the project and the profits, which were meant to benefit the community, to the city chambers. While there is hope that the Government’s planned community empowerment bill will address some of those issues, I would appreciate it if the cabinet secretary would tell me when he sums up what is in the regeneration strategy to combat the obstructiveness of councils such as Glasgow on issues such as that. The debate has touched on housing a couple of times. I would like to talk about two housing associations, one of which is slightly bigger than the other. The first one is Glasgow Housing Association. I declare an interest, in that I am still on the board of the GHA. When the GHA came into being it was not universally greeted. It has had six or seven years of a bumpy ride, and it is only over the past two or three years that it has really pulled itself together and done the job that it was meant to do. Recently, the GHA has played a big part in the regeneration of the city of Glasgow. It has invested more than £1.1 billion in existing stock transfer, £150 million of which has been ploughed into new housing construction, community facilities, additional environmental schemes and 59 new and improved play areas. The report of an independent evaluation of the GHA’s investment programme concluded that “given the ‘multiplier’ impact of capital investment on the wider economy, GHA’s £983 million capital expenditure is likely to have generated an additional £923 million in benefits to the UK (mainly the Scottish) economy.” It goes on to say that £682 million of that would have remained in the Glasgow area. Those are encouraging figures, but there is more to it than that. Such initiatives play their part in the environment. For example, 90 per cent of demolition material from high rises has been recycled by the GHA. John Mason talked about the M74, much of which is made from those old buildings. The GHA should be congratulated on that. While we all blame different people for the financial situation, we all accept that there are difficulties. It is not about throwing money at the difficulties—the money is not there to be thrown—but about using the money that we have wisely. That is one of the best things that the GHA has done. The Government has approved a bid for £1.1 million from its innovation and investment fund towards the cost of redeveloping a block of surplus multistorey flats at Ibroxholm Oval. From the point of view of cost and the environment, that is a good example of how we should be using what is there and the money that we have instead of always looking for fresh money and to build again. The second housing association is much closer to home. I was delighted to see in the SCVO briefing that Cassiltoun Trust, which is based in my constituency in Castlemilk, was used as a model of success in how asset transfer and community ownership can drive urban regeneration. In a recent visit to the project, I was mightily impressed by Castlemilk Stables. I have known that area of Castlemilk for the best part of 50 years and it was a completely different place before Cassiltoun took it over. Back then, the houses could not have been given away and people could not even have been paid to move into them. Now, the waiting lists are enormous. The trust has done a magnificent job of regenerating the area and of ensuring that the community wants to be part of what is happening. It takes on local apprentices and is looking to open up a community-owned and run shop that will deliver groceries to those with mobility problems in the area. There are community facilities in the stables block. The trust is not the only organisation that is regenerating the area, but it is a perfect example of what housing associations should be doing. Our job as policy makers is to ensure that the tools and mechanisms are in place so that such organisations can spend the money that they have. They know that they are facing difficult times and they accept that there is not as much money as there has been previously, but they have cut their cloth accordingly, they are using their money wisely and they are investing in their communities. That is what all organisations such as housing associations and others should be doing, and I applaud them for it. I welcome the new regeneration strategy and commend the Government for bringing forward the consultation on developing the strategy.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve employment prospects in areas of high unemployment in Glasgow. (S4O-00347)

Following the publication of the recent report from the House of Commons Transport Committee about the possibility of the high-speed rail link coming to Scotland, will the minister outline what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the United Kingdom Government on that issue and what employment benefits he believes it could bring to residents of my constituency of Glasgow Cathcart?

We are eternally grateful to every Scot who, in serving in our armed forces either in war or in peace, has assumed huge risks on our behalf. On remembrance Sunday, Scotland will join as one to give thanks for a debt that we can never fully repay. I welcome the fact that we have a Scottish Government minister with responsibility for veterans affairs. After all, although defence matters are reserved, it is only right for our Government to reflect the fact that many aspects of our lives fall within the Scottish Parliament’s remit. As members have pointed out, the Scottish Government has made huge efforts to improve the lives of veterans across Scotland. I do not intend to go over those efforts again, but I do want to mention the Glasgow Housing Association, which Elaine Murray referred to in her speech. As a member of the GHA board, I am delighted by what it is doing to make veterans’ lives easier. I will focus on communities’ great work in supporting our veterans and, in particular, concentrate on my Glasgow Cathcart constituency. Cathcart is blessed with many beautiful churches that are full of people determined to make a difference for those in the community who are most in need and, at this time of year, their minds turn to our veterans. Nowhere is such effort highlighted more than in Cathcart old parish church, which is not only a place of worship led by a minister who teaches the faith but a church in the traditional manner that takes on those in our society who are less well off, who require a bit more help and support and who need someone to champion their cause and provide for them when no one else can or will. The church is extremely fortunate to be led by the formidable Rev Neil Galbraith, moderator of Glasgow presbytery of the Church of Scotland. He is a man who embodies the spirit of Christianity and humanity and who cannot rest as long as someone, somewhere, needs his help. The Rev Neil Galbraith’s charity—Glasgow the Caring City—will be known to many members across the chamber, particularly Linda Fabiani. It has been working to make the world a better place for some time. Among the many overseas disasters that it has been involved in was Kosovo between 1999 and 2004, when it delivered millions of pounds’ worth of aid. It was one of the first aid agencies to land in Pakistan during the floods, and it was also in Haiti after a dreadful earthquake shattered the island. That is just a part of its overseas work, but we are here to talk about what it does for veterans. Over the years, Glasgow the Caring City has supported children and the military in both Afghanistan and Iraq, worked with the navy to provide food for children in Sierra Leone, and been involved in the Help for Heroes charity. In 2002, we saw the creation of the peace garden and community cairn in the church grounds. They have become a well-loved feature of the Cathcart area and are generally recognised as Cathcart’s official place to remember our fallen. Back in 2006, the Caring City produced a CD single called “The Light That Brings Us Home”. I am not convinced that the Rev Neil Galbraith sang on it, but it raised money for the families of marines who died in action but who were not eligible for pensions as the marines and their partners had not been officially married. That had a huge impact on a huge number of people, both partners and children. In 2009, I was fortunate enough to attend the church when, in an extremely emotive service, it put in a beautiful stained glass window as an official memorial for the Royal Marines. In 2011, the Rev Neil Galbraith took on the marine chaplaincy, and the colours of the marines were laid in the kirk. The church offers an on-going support service to the families of the fallen, helping them with travel needs and legal support and providing toys for children at Christmas time. I am sure that members will agree that those practical means can make a huge difference to our veterans and their families. The charity and the reverend should be warmly applauded for their work. In a recent discussion, the Rev Neil Galbraith and I talked about a number of things. One was the fact that remembrance Sunday seems to be making a comeback in terms of popularity. It was touched on earlier that there seemed to be a spell in which people veered away from commemorating remembrance Sunday, but the situation has changed over recent years. I wonder whether that has to do with the fact that we unfortunately have seen on television the dead and wounded coming back from places such as Iraq and Afghanistan. There seems to have been a recognition of the debt that we owe to those who go abroad and fight. As was mentioned earlier, they are perhaps doing that for causes that we do not fully support, but we recognise why they do it—they do it for us. In the discussion, the Rev Neil Galbraith also mentioned the fact that we should try to put in place a leaving support service—Richard Simpson touched on that, too. If we know that the time is coming for people to leave the services and we know that they might have difficulties, it may be possible to identify those who need the most support before they leave. I accept that we cannot really deal with that issue in the Scottish Parliament, but we may be able to put forward some ideas. The practical thing that the Rev Neil Galbraith is looking to do is create a drop-in centre for ex-armed forces personnel—somewhere they can come for a cup of tea, a break or a friendly face to chat to. I am confident that my fellow local politicians will join me in assisting him to make the hope a reality. Again in a practical sense, Glasgow the Caring City has been working with City Building in Glasgow to place a small number of wounded soldiers as mature apprentices. That is a fantastic idea that both the charity and City Building should be highly commended for. I hope that many other companies will follow that outstanding example. I know that the Government has identified the issue as one to address, and I look forward to hearing how that develops. The Deputy First Minister, Linda Fabiani and I recently attended an extremely moving service at Cathcart old parish church to commemorate those lost due to the events of 9/11. It was clear from those attending just how close the relationship is between the community and the armed forces personnel, both serving and retired. I am sure that that will be reinforced when I lay my wreath there on Armistice day. The Scottish Government has shown its commitment to veterans across Scotland. To highlight the support for the work of communities such as Cathcart for veterans, I invite the minister to visit the Cathcart old parish church and see for himself just how close the relationship is. I look forward to a positive response and then a visit.

20. To ask the Scottish Government when it last had discussions with Glasgow City Council about the provision of additional support for learning in schools. (S4O-00327)

I thank the minister for her answer. She will be aware of the closure of St Raymond’s ASL school in my constituency. It appears that a number of the families affected would agree to the move only if their children were allowed to attend another stand-alone ASL school. Given that the rationale behind the closure was to move the children into mainstream schooling, does the minister agree that it is clear that Glasgow City Council must learn the lessons from the previous experience of the closure of ASL provision, in order to ensure that any future closures are done with the full support of those affected?

I thank Paul Martin for securing the debate. Like other members, I congratulate the campaigners on what has been a magnificent campaign. Strangely, this is coming across as a pro and anti debate, but that is not what it is at all. I do not think that there is anybody in the chamber who does not support the campaigners and wish them all the best, and who does not see the difficulties that the closure may well cause. As has been said, the problem is one of finance but also one of politics. I hate to bring it up, but I am the only politician in the chamber who has previously voted to keep the hospital open. When I was on Glasgow City Council the council leader moved a motion to support the health board’s move to close Lightburn hospital—with, I accept, a couple of provisos based around transport.

I have not signed Mr Martin’s motion because it is completely politically expedient. The closure of the hospital was mooted in 2002. We were not in power in 2002. The Labour Party was in power when the proposal was first made. The issue went to the Labour-controlled executive in 2010 and it voted to close the hospital. Paul Martin gives the game away when he says, “I have in my hand a piece of paper that Gordon Matheson signed.” As George Adam said, signing the charter was very much a political ploy, given that Gordon Matheson was the guy who possibly helped to ring the death knell for the hospital. If the council had supported my amendment, we would not be where we are now. For the health board to go ahead at that stage, the council had to support it. We asked for a delay so that further consultation could take place to ensure that people could get their message across to the health board and to Labour politicians. Instead, you waited until the boundaries changed and you needed to start supporting the campaign, because the hospital is in your constituency. This is a very important issue. We support the work that the campaigners have done and we congratulate them on that work, but let us not kid ourselves: this is not a motion on the future of the hospital; this is a motion for some of you over there to save face.

It is not outrageous; those are the facts. The facts are that if you had stuck to your principles, we would not be having this debate.

We know who will take the ultimate decision: the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy. The problem is that she would not have to take that ultimate decision if your party had taken the proper decision last November. I have faith that the cabinet secretary will take everything into account and will come to the proper conclusion when she gets the evidence in front of her, but please stop trying to evade your responsibilities. You are trying to pretend that you are a champion of these campaigners when your colleagues have led them down this path. Your colleagues should have stood up for these campaigners 10 months ago and before. Your colleagues should not have supported a move that has brought us to where we are now. As far as I am concerned, we will leave the matter in the hands of the cabinet secretary. I am sure that she will take everything into account and make the proper decision when the time comes.

I start by thanking the British Medical Association for putting together its “One Day” alcohol motion briefing, and much of what I am about to say comes from that briefing. As the motion says, on one day in April 2011, 5,500 consultations took place with a general practitioner or practice nurse in which alcohol was a factor. Over one fifth of those consultations, 1,200, took place in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, which covers my constituency and home city. Those statistics extrapolate to 1.4 million consultations a year in Scotland in which alcohol is a factor, which cost in excess of £28 million and account for around 6 per cent of all consultations in general practice. Hundreds of thousands of lives are affected by alcohol, countless families are destroyed and many communities are torn apart in a nation that I believe has struggled for far too long to face up to the demon in its midst that is our love affair with alcohol. There is no silver bullet to kill off the disease that is alcohol abuse. To defeat it, we need to use all the weapons at our disposal, including education, early intervention and labelling of alcoholic products. However, we would be fighting with one hand tied behind our back without the introduction of minimum pricing; other measures just tinker around the edge of the problem. Without it, we will continue to have the fastest-growing liver cirrhosis rates in western Europe. In addition, conditions such as chronic pancreatitis—my mispronunciation of that shows that it affects language as well—diabetes and heart disease are made much worse by each sip of alcohol. On any given day, alcohol will cost Scotland £97.5 million in terms of health, and crime and violence. It will kill five people and cause 98 people to be admitted to hospital with an alcohol-related condition and 23 people to commit a driving offence. It will lead to 450 victims of violent crime perceiving that their assailant is under the influence of alcohol. That does not include all the problems that low-level drinking can cause, such as breast cancer, colon cancer and so on. We do not need to be a raging drunk to suffer from the effects of alcohol. Regular imbibing can do it for us just as well. Sometimes we are so caught up in the headline killers associated with alcohol that we forget that there are other dangers out there, such as the mental effects of drinking too much. I am sure that I am not alone in the chamber in having lost friends I grew up with to liver failure, heart disease and many other of Scotland’s killers that are all alcohol related. Many of those people were lost at a disturbingly young age. I have also seen childhood friends grow from being the life and soul of the party to being insecure loners because of their love affair with the bottle. We have all seen the changes that it can make to people’s personalities and we should keep that in mind during this debate. Since the mid-1990s, the affordability of alcohol has increased in leaps and bounds to the ludicrous stage now where, in some circumstances, cheap, powerful cider can be bought for less than the price of water. How can that be right and how is that good for society? That is why I welcome the Government’s Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010, which comes into force this week. There are a lot of useful measures in it, such as banning quantity discounts on off-sales purchases and banning the supply of an alcoholic drink free or at a reduced price when purchasing another drink. The measures will help to make alcohol more acceptably priced. However, for us to have maximum impact, we need minimum pricing. Too often, the opponents of minimum pricing have claimed that they are against it because of a lack of international evidence to stand alongside the Sheffield study. Well, no longer can they use that shield. Let us take the experience in British Columbia, where Professor Tim Stockwell completed a study that shows categorically that a 10 per cent increase in the minimum price of alcohol resulted in a 3.4 per cent reduction in the consumption of alcohol. If we accept that world-renowned expert’s findings, surely we can accept that his research shows that a similar action will result in a similar drop in consumption here in Scotland. Just think of the gains that such a move could bring to Scotland: a drop in hospital admissions, a reduction in liver disease, a reduction in alcohol-related crime and huge social benefits for our hard-hit communities. Let us remember that, although alcohol abuse knows no boundaries and can affect anyone in any social class, most of its victims are from less well-off areas. We do them a huge disservice if we refuse to accept scientific evidence for some specious political reason. Members may be interested to know that Professor Stockwell has been researching alcohol misuse problems for most of his academic career. He has seen and heard it all from all over the world. However, such is the extent of Scotland’s drink problem that even he was surprised and shocked not just by the volume of alcohol consumption but by the pattern of drinking that has become culturally acceptable here. I am sure that we all agree that the fact that we can shock a leading international academic in that way is not something that Scotland should be proud of. Jack McConnell once said that he believed that his duty as First Minister was to leave Scotland better than he found it—and he was right. His willingness to change his position on a smoking bill was the act of a big man—I think he is big but, for most of you, he is probably not. He brought forward the best piece of legislation that the Parliament has passed to date. My proudest act in politics is to have played a small role in the passing of the Prohibition of Smoking in Regulated Areas (Scotland) Bill. I worked for Stewart Maxwell when he proposed his member’s bill on smoking, which the then Executive took and strengthened into the act that we now have. Jack McConnell should be rightly proud of what he did. I know that Stewart Maxwell is proud of what he did, and even I, who had such a minor role to play, am proud of what I did. We now have another opportunity to be proud of ourselves in this chamber—let us be honest, we do not get many of those. I am extremely encouraged that there are strong signs that we may achieve cross-party consensus on the issue in this parliamentary session, although I suspect that Ken Macintosh’s figure of 75p per unit came as a shock to everyone. Let us, as the old saying goes, seize the day and agree to support minimum pricing when it comes to the chamber, and let us make our country proud. Sláinte.

18. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council about the provision of additional support for learning in schools. (S4O-00171)

Does the minister agree that the welfare of the child should be paramount and that every play area in an ASL school should have adequate space to assist the child’s development? If so, will she endeavour to write to Glasgow City Council to urge it to look at the play areas in all its ASL schools and to enlarge them if that is required?

This debate should not be about how the Scottish Parliament would use corporation tax powers; it should be about whether we believe that it should have those powers in the first place. After all—believe it or not—we might not be in power forever. In almost any Parliament in the world, members of all political hues would enthusiastically support the call for more powers—particularly tax-varying powers—for their Parliament, but I am afraid that that is not the case here in Scotland. Across the Opposition benches, a stream of Scottish parliamentarians tell us why our having tax-varying powers would be harmful to us Scots. Of course, we all know that their position is based on a combination of two things: subservience to all things Westminster and their political masters; and the instinctive oppositionism that worked so successfully for them in this May’s election. Patrick Harvie rose— Jackson Carlaw rose— Oh! I touched a nerve. I just don’t know who to pick. I think I’ll have you, Pat.

I doubt that there is any member of the SNP who supports the idea of multimillionaires not paying tax in this country, but if they do not pay tax in this country at the existing rate, they will not pay tax in this country at any new rate. Corporation tax, whatever rate it is set at, will make no difference to that. Those are two different arguments, which the member continues to conflate. It appears that you can change your name and your leaders, but that you will never, ever change your spots. This is not a case, as some would have us believe, of needlessly picking a fight with Westminster. It is about trying to help the communities that we were elected to represent. It is about putting into place a structure that allows Scotland to better compete with other world economies for the benefit of those in our constituencies who are crying out for jobs. I want to focus on two detailed aspects of the debate. The first is the issue of implementation and administration of corporation tax. The Scottish Government’s paper makes it clear that it thinks that there are two options for the administration of corporation tax post devolution. One option would be to contract HMRC to administer the system on Scotland’s behalf. The other option—which is the one that I favour—would be to establish a Scottish tax collection agency. That strikes me as the obvious option for a number of reasons, not least because it would mean that we were directly responsible for control and administration of the corporate tax regime and would demonstrate our desire to be a more autonomous Government. The second issue, which has been widely discussed in Northern Ireland’s case, is state aid and the need for the devolution of corporation tax to be compliant with EU rules and regulations. Members will be will be aware of the European Court of Justice judgment in the Azores case, which concerned an autonomous region of Portugal. The court ruled that, for a different business tax rate for a region or country within the borders of an EU member state to be compliant with EU rules and regulations, the devolved Administration must have a distinct political and administrative structure from the central Administration—in our case, Westminster; the devolved Administration’s decision to set or change the tax rate must be taken without interference by the central Government; and the fiscal consequences that flow from a reduction in the tax rate must not be offset by aid or subsidies from central Government. The Scottish Government’s proposal for the full devolution of corporation tax—with responsibility for the rate, base and financial implications—is consistent with the ruling on the Azores case. Indeed, Her Majesty’s Treasury has concluded that devolving corporation tax to Northern Ireland would fulfil the criteria set by the Azores case ruling. The UK Government’s acceptance of devolving corporation tax to Northern Ireland shows how much it has moved on in the debate, although I take on board the fact that the final decision has not yet been made. The UK Government seems willing to accept that corporate tax rates varying across these islands can be a good thing and that they should be managed by a devolved Administration, but it appears that, when it comes to Scotland, it is a different matter. We have already heard about the ludicrous estimates from HMRC, which has conveniently come up with a funding gap of £2.6 billion, based on a tax rate of 12.5 per cent. However, as has been pointed out, that is the tax take at the present rate, so go figure. It appears that the Whitehall mandarins were so desperate to scramble together something to present to George Osborne that they did not even bother to get their sums right. Could those figures have come from the same fag packet as Calman’s 10p tax rate?

I would much rather leave that to the two fiscal geniuses that we have in the Cabinet, particularly the cabinet secretary.

Yes, okay.

That is not what we heard yesterday. Being able to vary corporation tax to suit Scotland’s economic circumstances and not those of the south-east of England can only benefit the people of Scotland. After all, that is who we are here to represent—well, at least some of us. Maybe I am the only one, but I tend to support proven businesspeople who have argued for lowering corporation tax rather than organisations such as the STUC and CBI Scotland, whose support for Labour’s position is akin to a mother saying that her son was the best player that day—quelle surprise! There is no magic bullet. Nobody has suggested for a moment that corporation tax is a magic bullet, but it is a useful weapon in the armoury. My constituent Jim McColl, previously of Clyde Blowers—[Interruption.] He stays in Carmunnock as well. Jim McColl said in The Scotsman on 11 December 2010: “People need a reason to bring their businesses to Scotland, and full financial responsibility with control over major fiscal levers, such as corporation tax, would provide the chance to create such incentives.”

Oh!

On 14 August 2011, Jim McColl said: “Corporation tax would provide a significant fiscal lever to provide necessary incentives providing a major boost for the Scottish economy at a critical time.” That man knows his business and he just picked up £750 million to prove it.

Scotland must not be left to languish behind other economies.

We must be able to implement policies that can benefit us and we must not be disadvantaged in comparison with other nations.

In these difficult economic times, it is important that we have financial leaders we can trust to do all they can to keep the economy and employment growing while keeping unemployment down. Thankfully, as we have just heard, in John Swinney we have such a leader. As has been said, thanks to his stewardship the recession was both shorter and shallower in Scotland than it was in the rest of the UK. Although global economic activity may have slowed, the Government has been doing all it can with the restricted powers at its disposal to move Scotland towards recovery. As today’s figures show, Scotland has higher employment, lower economic inactivity and lower unemployment rates than the UK as a whole. That clearly indicates that the Government’s approach to strengthening recovery and boosting economic activity is working. Scotland’s recent figures for job creation paint a positive picture. We intend to continue in that vein. The small business bonus scheme leaves around 114,000 businesses better off and, along with a number of other forms of relief available, such as empty property relief and renewable energy relief, it means that Scotland has the most generous business rates relief package in the UK. As Christine Lagarde, managing director of the IMF, recently said at a conference in London, “countries must act now—and act boldly” to move our economies into recovery. Clearly, here in Scotland, we are acting—and acting boldly. Scotland’s economy has many new opportunities that were not open to it five, 10 or 20 years ago. Indeed, in my home city of Glasgow, we have massive opportunities ahead of us. We have capital investment coming to the city in the shape of the new Southern general hospital and the Commonwealth games, as well as investment in research, science and engineering. Of course, we have also just finished the M74, ahead of deadline and under budget, which it is estimated will bring many thousands of jobs to the west of Scotland. The benefit that Glasgow will receive from the Government’s commitment to 125,000 modern apprenticeships over the next five years means that it is one of the most important measures that will help us to rise to the challenges ahead, so that Glasgow can be a vibrant, modern, industrialised city once again. However, huge projects such as those mentioned, important though they are, are not the only way in which Glasgow and Scotland can grow. Small community projects have a vital role to play in the economic growth of the country—especially in the low-carbon economy. In my constituency of Glasgow Cathcart, a community trust called Castlemilk and Carmunnock wind park trust was one of the first of its kind in Scotland. The trust was created to own and operate a small urban wind park, the profits from which would go into local community projects and the local economy to benefit the residents of Carmunnock and Castlemilk, an area that would benefit enormously from such funding. The trust has created a model that communities across the country want to follow—not only because of the positive environmental impact that it will have but because it will help to create local jobs and be an important part of a local sustainable economy.

I do not really like to tell my colleagues what to do. However, I would like Mr Findlay to listen to the rest of what I was going to say. The trust is a perfect example of local people working together to see how they can make a sustainable contribution to the local economy and local community, and they are to be applauded for doing so, and doing so successfully. This is the bit that Mr Findlay should listen to. Sadly, Labour-run Glasgow City Council appears to have reneged on previous commitments and seems to be doing everything in its power to prevent the people of Castlemilk from benefiting from the trust going ahead with its project. However, that debate will be had another time. I have huge reasons for optimism as far as Glasgow is concerned, and I know that other local members will share my ambition to see Glasgow as a key economic hub of northern Europe. Through the new opportunities for all programme, we will create a framework in which Scotland’s young people—our future generations—can make a successful contribution to their society. We have heard plenty on that over the past week. However, we should always remember that a successful economy is not only about putting money into people’s pockets; it is about reducing inequalities and bringing together our communities to increase economic participation and reach out to those who are most disenfranchised in our society. That is the kind of Scotland that people want to be part of, a Scotland where people do not care about a person’s race, religion, sexuality or gender but care about the contribution that they make to society. One thing that Opposition members will not be surprised to hear from me or from any of my colleagues is the reiteration of the need for full control over the economic levers that are required to take our economy forward. Even Alex Salmond and John Swinney can do only so much under the current constitutional settlement. The Westminster Government’s refusal to devolve one of the most basic levers, corporation tax—we will hear more about that tomorrow—demonstrates that, despite searching for new names, new leaders and new direction, all the Opposition parties still fail to understand Scotland and its needs.

We would much prefer it to be from two organisations other than CBI Scotland and the STUC, so I suspect that we would be coming from a slightly different angle. We can look at recovery models from as many countries as we like, but our opponents must accept that, so long as we are dependent on another Parliament, Scotland can progress only so far. It is time to move Scotland forward out of the age of dependency and into a new era of growth and sustainability. I want independence, but I want independence to give us the tools so that we can better tackle poverty, improve our communities and make life better for all Scots. To have an equal economy—an economy for all—we must be on an equal footing as a nation. We must heed the advice of Christine Lagarde and be bold. This is a bold and ambitious economic strategy and I hope that members will endorse it as we seek to move Scotland forward.

Scotland has many things that distinguish it from the rest of the British Isles: our education system, our history, our culture and, of course, our independent legal system, which was so cherished by us Scots that we ensured that its independence was enshrined in the act of union in 1707. Surely on this issue we can all agree that we lose the independence of our legal system at our peril. However, here we are more than 300 years later debating why a decision made unanimously by seven Scottish bench judges in a Scottish court is being overturned by a court outside Scotland—the UK Supreme Court—where the majority of judges are not experts in Scots law.

It is very difficult for me to answer such hypothetical questions. We have heard the background. Prior to 1999, the judiciary of Scotland were the final arbiters of all things criminal in Scottish law. Even though the Supreme Court was written into the Scotland Act 1998, it was never meant to be able to take on the role that it appears to have taken on. It is my view that the electorate put us in this chamber for two main reasons: to stand up for our constituents and to stand up for the interests of our institutions and the Parliament. The way that the Supreme Court has behaved recently is a blatant attack on both. Scotland is not some region of England to be dealt with under English law; it is a proud nation with a long history of a unique and treasured legal system and it deserves to be treated in the same way as every other legal jurisdiction across Europe, with the Strasbourg court as the final option for judgment when required.

No, sit down. By now, members will have had the chance to familiarise themselves with the findings of Lord McCluskey’s interim report. He rightly points out that the High Court of Justiciary—the highest court of appeal in Scotland—should be seen as equal and not subordinate to its counterpart south of the border. Yet, since 1999, the Supreme Court has overturned the decision in a Scottish criminal appeal in nine cases and upheld the Scottish decision in six cases. It is important to stress that Strasbourg cannot quash convictions so, although the two courts have similar remits, they are not the same. How can it be right that a court where the majority of judges are not experts in Scots law should have the power to overturn a decision that is made by seven eminent judges who are experts in Scots law?

What I do not think is acceptable is that Scotland is unique among all the legal jurisdictions in Europe in that it has to ask its big brother for permission before cases can go to Strasbourg. What we are asking for is parity for the people of Scotland and for the Parliament. Quite simply, the current situation is not right. Clearly, I am not alone in that assertion. Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, a former Tory MP, who has already been quoted, said: “Mr Salmond is spot on ... There is a perfectly adequate system within Scotland for criminal justice appeals to be taken in Edinburgh.” I know that Lord Wallace is seeking to amend the Scotland Bill with regard to the Supreme Court, but he does not go far enough to protect the integrity of the Scottish judiciary. It should concern him, as it concerns some members of this Parliament, that the High Court can be challenged in a way that was never possible before devolution and was never intended to be possible after devolution. We all know the background to the Cadder affair. Peter Cadder appealed his sentence on conviction, because the evidence that had been used against him was collected before he spoke to his lawyer. That was common practice in Scotland, although I never heard anybody from the Labour benches complaining about it. When the UK Supreme Court found in favour of Cadder, Lord Hope gave the lead opinion, saying: “It is remarkable that, until quite recently, nobody thought that there was anything wrong with this procedure.” What I find remarkable about it is that Lord Hope was Lord President from 1989 to 1996. We might have thought that, during that period, such a supposedly glaring deficiency would have come to his attention. There have always been other safeguards in Scots law, of course, including corroboration, but Lord Hope and his colleagues clearly decided that that was irrelevant. This issue is of huge importance to the Scottish legal profession and to members of the public, particularly the victims of crime. The Cadder decision alone is thought to have affected up to 40,000 detentions a year. Some of the people who were charged with the most serious of offences have had those charges dropped. How is that good for Scotland? Scotland deserves the right to be treated as any other ordinary country. We do not need big brother keeping an eye on us in case we get it wrong. I accept that, as long as we are part of this union, which has far outlived any usefulness that it might once have had, the Supreme Court has to be dealt with. I therefore strongly support the McCluskey recommendation that, as happens in England, no appeal can be dealt with by the Supreme Court unless leave is given by the original court of appeal. [Interruption.] When it comes to being treated as equals, I will believe that when I hear about the Supreme Court dealing with a case where someone in England believes that their human rights have been abused because they were not given the safeguard of corroboration, such as we have here in Scotland. However, I suspect that we will be waiting a while for that. I urge members to support the Government on this crucial issue.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the possibility of a high-speed rail link with Scotland. (S4O-00087)

Does the minister agree that a high-speed rail link would greatly benefit Scotland’s economic growth and would do so far more than the proposed tram system in Edinburgh, which is a shambles, or the hugely expensive Glasgow airport rail link, both of which were supported by all the main Opposition parties in the chamber?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how much council tax payers in Glasgow will save through the ending of paid director positions on arm’s-length external organisations. (S4O-00034)

Given yesterday’s announcement that some of the council’s ALEOs are being closed down, amalgamated with other ALEOs or possibly brought back into council control, does the cabinet secretary agree that it is clear that the primary purpose for the creation and continuation of those bodies was to reward and control Labour councillors and not to benefit the council tax payers of Glasgow? Does he share my view that the money, possibly running to millions of pounds, would have been much better used to protect Glasgow’s charities and carers, and that a full independent investigation should be carried out into Glasgow’s misuse of public funds to ensure that the people of Glasgow are never ripped off in such a fashion again?

Hubert Humphrey, Vice President to Lyndon B Johnson and defeated presidential candidate in 1968, once said: “the moral test of government is how that government treats those who are in the dawn of life, the children; those who are in the twilight of life, the elderly; those who are in the shadows of life; the sick, the needy and the handicapped.” The debate focuses on just one part of that moral test, but it is an incredibly important part. How we treat our elderly is a mark of what kind of society we are. High-quality and compassionate care that protects their dignity is a must if we are to call ourselves a civilised society and a progressive nation. Although I recognise the horrific recent events that have been mentioned and I share the concerns that have been raised, I am proud of the fact that the Parliament has always risen to the occasion. When Scotland introduced free personal care for the elderly, it was something that the previous Liberal-Labour Administration could justifiably be proud of—indeed, the whole Parliament could be proud of it—while the whole country could delight in the fact that we clearly recognised the debt owed to those born before us. However, the introduction of free personal care was not just about doing the right thing and ensuring that older people received the care that they deserve; it was about demonstrating to others the values that we hold dear. A decade on, more than 77,000 older people across Scotland are benefiting from receiving personal care services free of charge. As has been said, one of the biggest challenges that we face as a nation is planning for the increase in our older population over the coming years. Clearly, doing nothing is not an option. Given that, as many members have said, there will be a 38 per cent increase in the over-65 population in the next 20 years, and given that at present we spend £4.5 billion on services for the elderly, it is clear that new ways have to be found to deliver such services. As a councillor on Glasgow City Council, I was a member of a community health and care partnership before the sad demise of such partnerships, which, in my view, was brought about by the unwillingness of senior personnel at the council—both politicians and officers—and the NHS to devolve responsibilities to the local level, to share accountability for and control of services and, sometimes, to hand over control to the other partner of what they perceived to be their service.

As I will go on to say, the principle is sound. There is no reason to do things at a national level; they could quite easily be done at a local level. The partnerships could have worked at a Glasgow level, but that did not happen because of the intransigence of people within the organisations involved. Those on the ground did a magnificent job in ensuring that the number of delayed discharges was drastically reduced, that adequate care packages were in place when required and that the elderly who were treated by social work and health board staff were given the respect, care and attention that they deserved. I was extremely sorry to see the demise of Glasgow’s CHCPs and I whole-heartedly support the proposal by the Government to integrate health and social care. It was never the principle that was wrong, just the inability of some to let go of control. I hope that councillors of all parties in Glasgow and managers in the NHS will engage with the process positively and constructively to put in place a fit-for-purpose care system to replace the one that was sadly lost. The Government’s plan to integrate health and social care for adults will give people quicker access to care as well as continuing to reduce the number of delayed discharges, and it was backed by Lord Sutherland in his report. I am delighted to see the establishment of a new lead commissioning integration fund that is backed by £2 million of funding to support integration. It is right that the focus should shift to the needs of people and away from the basis of who used to do it traditionally. Cutting through red tape and improving joined-up working can only be a good thing. The pilot work that has been taking place across the country has been making progress over the past 18 months and I look forward to its extension nationwide. Labour’s proposal to introduce a national care service may have some merit but, as George Adam has said, the truth is that we just do not know. It is unclear where the idea has come from other than from the UK Labour Party, as there appears to be limited, if any, public support for it.

I do not have time. I am sorry. The idea that creating a new nationwide bureaucracy will address the poor integration of health boards does not add up at this stage. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has announced a £70 million change fund in the draft budget to support better integration of older people’s services that are delivered by health boards, councils and the third and independent sectors. That money will act as a catalyst for more radical design of services for our older people. Like others, I want to mention the unsung heroes of our health service—Scotland’s army of carers—about whom Fiona McLeod spoke eloquently. As we know, without Scotland’s carers our national health service would be crippled and the quality of life of many of our elderly people would be greatly reduced. The care that the carers provide often comes at great cost to themselves financially, physically and emotionally, and they themselves are often elderly. I know of 70-odd-year-olds who are looking after their 90-odd-year-old parents, which is some achievement. It is clear that the Government recognises and is ready to take on the serious challenge that we all face. That challenge is not one that can be shirked by any of us, and I welcome the recognition across the chamber that change is required. I hope that, on this occasion, we can put party differences aside and unite behind the common cause of protecting and looking after those who are in the twilight of life, who deserve our respect and our care when required. I am confident that, once again, the Scottish Parliament will rise to the occasion and pass Hubert Humphrey’s moral test.

As this is my first opportunity to do so, Presiding Officer, I congratulate you on your new position and the ministers on their new positions, in particular Michael Matheson. It is always nice to see a local boy done good, so well done, Michael. I will touch on a couple of things that Drew Smith mentioned in his wish list for Glasgow City Council. We should put some facts into the debate. The roads in Glasgow are so bad because Glasgow City Council cut the budget for them for five years straight, until two years ago. If the council had not done that, the roads in Glasgow would have been much easier for us all to drive on and it would not have been able to blame the Scottish Government, as the council has done for everything else that it has got wrong over the past few years. Let us be honest: Drew Smith will find that it was a Labour Government that decided that high-speed rail was not coming to Scotland, so some of the responsibility lies there. This debate is an extremely important one that can define how we move forward to improve the lives of all our citizens and, most important, the lives of those who are most difficult to reach. In my speech I will concentrate on those people, primarily from my city of Glasgow. I spoke last week about the opportunities that the Commonwealth games will bring to Glasgow to tackle poverty, health inequality, unemployment and the self-esteem of people from all across the city. However, the Commonwealth games is not our only opportunity to take Glasgow forward and to break the cycle of infant mortality, low life expectancy and the on-going feeling of despair and worthlessness that affects far too many of its citizens. This debate and how we move on from it can greatly benefit a people who are known for their resilience, but who now see far too many of their fellow residents flinging in the towel and retreating to alcohol or drugs. Most of us will have seen a recent high-profile BBC programme. I refused to watch it, because I did not want to take part in “poverty porn”, as Pat Kane so memorably called it, but last week I succumbed and watched it on catch-up TV due to domestic pressure—that is, “I’m watching it, so you're watching it.” I found watching it extremely uncomfortable and at times disturbing, but it was always thought provoking. Unfortunately, I never found it particularly surprising. I have seen too many nice young kids who, in primary school, were great young boys. They were polite, with a keen sense of fun and full of energy. Although many of those kids grew up to be model citizens—some travelling halfway across the world to make a living and raise families and some making a success and a difference to society much closer to home—many of them are drunks, druggies, in jail or dead. What happened to them? Why them and not the others? Those are the questions that we should all ask ourselves, because we can see the same thing every day in our communities, if we care to look closely enough.

I am happy to look at the motion after the debate. The BBC may well have focused on the most damaged and difficult people, and there may be a case for saying that the programme should not have been aired, but one thing it did is highlight again the deplorable and soul-destroying way in which some members of our society, a few but too many—they are strands in our tartan—live their lives. Yet even in that skewed view of residents, there were glimmers of hope and aspiration. However, this debate is not about a wee scheme on the outskirts of anywhere—it is about a problem that affects every town and city in the country, but particularly, unfortunately, the great city of Glasgow. It is incumbent on each and every one of us, as politicians, to find out just how society got to the stage where some people feel that it is not for the likes of them, and to find out how they got to the stage of despair and despondency where the only thing to look forward to is oblivion. We must then use every method at our disposal to try to break the cycle of poverty, lack of aspiration and lack of respect for themselves and others that contribute to people’s feelings of hopelessness and worthlessness. I said that it is incumbent on us all and I meant it. However, the primary responsibility for leading this charge has to lie with the Government of the day. That means us—the SNP—and I know that it is a responsibility that the Government takes extremely seriously. We have been in power for four years, albeit as a minority Government, and will be in power for the next five as a majority Government. My view is that, despite our being in the middle of the worst economic crisis of our times, which was brought about by the careless handling of our finances by those down south, we will have failed as a Government if we do not see substantial improvements not only in the life chances of the most deprived people in our society, but in their lives. Chances are one thing, but we have to educate people to recognise and to grab with both hands opportunity, when it finally arrives. I am confident that the Government will not let me or—more important—them down. The evidence for that is clear and the appointment of Nicola Sturgeon to her new position illustrates the importance that we place on improving the economic and social wellbeing of the cities where, as I said, the most disenfranchised people live. The focus has to be on bringing investment to the cities and on using that investment as a means of changing for the better the social problems and conditions for those who are most in need. Our record is strong, as this Government has acknowledged the need to keep people in work during these hard financial times. Thanks to the good stewardship of John Swinney, we have also ensured that more people have been kept in employment in Scotland than in any other part of the UK, which has benefited Glasgow greatly. Of course, under the SNP Government the council tax has been frozen for four years with the promise of its being frozen for another five; the keep well programme of health checks, which is targeted at our most deprived communities, has been extended; and prescription charges have been scrapped, which greatly benefits those who are most in need of our support. That is the mark of a progressive Government that recognises that it has a duty of care to all people in Scotland. The Government not only recognised the incredible and long-term damage that alcohol was doing to communities, but decided to take on the vested interests of the licensed trade and supermarkets by introducing a number of measures to fight alcohol abuse, such as ending special offers in shops and continuing to educate our young people about the dangers of alcohol. Unfortunately, the one measure that I suspect all of us recognise was likely to have had the greatest impact was delayed by craven politicians desperately scraping around in the gutter for a vote, like a drunk after a weekend on the booze looking for a half-empty bottle of wine—tonic or otherwise. I am thankful that the people of Scotland saw through that shameful display of blatant politicking and called “time up” on those opportunists. I have referred to the SNP Government’s primary responsibility. I trust it to do the right thing and ask the chamber to support it.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that local authorities have a duty of care and responsibility to the most vulnerable in society. (S4O-00008)

Does the cabinet secretary share my disappointment at Glasgow City Council’s decision to scrap the concessionary rent scheme, which has benefited hundreds of charities across the city? The move leaves many of them facing the possibility of closure. Will she join me in urging the council to put a moratorium on the decision until its own grants integration scheme comes into force next year to give these charities, which deal with the most needy in our society, a chance to put in place an alternative funding mechanism to ensure their survival?

It will come as no surprise that, as the member for Glasgow Cathcart, the home of Scottish football, I am delighted to speak in this debate on the contribution of sport to Scotland. Not only does Glasgow have a fantastic sporting history; we are, as members have said, privileged to have ahead of us a magnificent sporting future with the Commonwealth games coming to my home city in 2014. That is a huge opportunity to showcase what Glasgow and Scotland have to offer. More important, it is a great chance for us to persuade young people up and down the country to get involved in one of the biggest sporting events in the world. This could be the optimum time to take massive steps towards combating our appalling health record and the ever-growing problem of obesity among our young people and to sell the benefits of a healthy, active lifestyle to those youngsters who think that social activity consists of playing with their Xboxes or sitting in front of the television. It is a chance to persuade them to participate in sports, with all the social and health benefits that that can bring. Over the past few months, we have heard a lot about the nasty side to the game of football. However, like my colleague, Humza Yousaf, I want to say a few words about the positive side of football and sport as a whole—about its ability to unite people from all communities, backgrounds and walks of life. I am delighted to be the MSP for the constituency where the first ethnic minority footballer in Scotland made his career. Born in Demerara, which was part of British Guiana, in 1857—no, I did not see him play in person—Andrew Watson was a successful player at Queen’s Park Football Club, the top Scottish team of the day, whose home ground is, as we all know, Hampden Park. He represented Scotland three times and was the first black captain of an international team when Scotland played England in 1881 and—wait for it—Scotland won 6-1. Glory days. He was also the first black player to win a major competition, the Scottish cup, also in 1881. He is an example of what sport has the potential to be. Sport can help to blur perceived differences, unite us behind a common cause and bind us as a society. South Africa is a good example of that. Under apartheid, black South Africans were not allowed to compete for their country. That is one of the things that exposed the nature of apartheid to the wider world and became a focal point for opposition, through the sporting boycott. After apartheid, South Africa hosted the rugby world cup and, as we all know, Mandela’s endorsement of the national rugby team, although it still had only one black player, meant that for the first time ever black South Africans felt able to support their national team at any sport. That world cup became a powerful symbol of the new, democratic rainbow nation and of Mandela’s ambition to bring South Africans of all nations together. The Commonwealth games give Glasgow and Scotland the opportunity to make a huge difference in 2014, if the country unites and works together to make this event all that it can be. The games can boost participation in sport and promote healthier lifestyles, they can create huge employment opportunities to tackle the problem of poverty in many parts of the country, particularly in Glasgow, and they can challenge head on some of the huge health inequalities that face the nation. That is why I welcome the moves that the Government has made to make the games a success. In the new Government, Scotland has for the first time a dedicated sports minister. Shona Robison, who did a great job in the previous Government, will take charge of ensuring that Scotland is fully prepared to deliver a world-class Commonwealth games and—more importantly, for me—that we have the lasting legacy that I mentioned earlier. I am sure that all members will join me in welcoming the fact that the 2011-12 budget allocation for sport is now at £66.5 million, which is twice the amount that was allocated to sport before the SNP came into government in 2007. It is the mark of an aspirational society that we create the opportunities for our young people to release their potential and realise their dreams. That is why I also welcome the £50 million that has been allocated to the young Scots fund, a project that will focus on sport, creativity and enterprise. Our young people can be sure that this Government will do all that it can to protect their future. That money represents an investment of confidence in them and I am confident that they will not let us down. I am sure that the chamber will also welcome the Government’s commitment to community sports hubs. Indeed, our manifesto recognised that community sports hubs are a key legacy component for a healthier and more active Scotland. Only by making participation in physical activity more accessible for everyone will we succeed in our ambition to have a more active and healthier population. I am delighted that the Government has delivered 35 community sports hubs in eight local authorities and aims to deliver 100 of them across all of Scotland’s 32 local authority areas by 2014. I was delighted to hear the minister touch on the field of traditional Scottish sports earlier. I was honoured to be asked to be the chieftain at the Carmunnock highland games last Sunday—I assure members that that would not have happened before May. I was struck by the wide variety of ages and nationalities of the people who were taking part in the various events and was delighted that, at the end, after seeing off challenges from England, Iceland and Poland, the overall champion was Gregor Edmonds, a local young man with an outstanding record in traditional Scottish sports. He has been world, European and Scottish highland games champion and a world’s strongest man finalist and has twice been a runner-up for the British title. He is a credit to sport and should be held up as an example of what can be achieved through hard work and dedication. Of course, he also comes from a family of athletes, and one of his forebears was one of that gallant band of nationalists who plotted to bring home the stone of destiny, so naturally I am biased. However, for me, it was clear that this is an area of sport that should be encouraged in our children from all parts of the country and, I hope, included or adapted to the school physical education curriculum. It is well recognised that Scotland has a number of serious social and lifestyle issues that we must continue to tackle head on. The Commonwealth games give us a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to move on from those decades-old problems and give our young people and our future generations a chance to live in a fit and healthy Scotland. That is something that we all desire, and we must work together to ensure that Scotland’s legacy is that those future generations of kids from Castlemilk, Shettleston and other areas of our dear green place have the same life expectancy as those from the leafier suburbs of Scotland. What sets this Government apart from its predecessors are the concrete steps that it has taken to make that happen. I applaud its determination, aspiration and vision for the people of Scotland—old, young and those yet to be born—and I am proud to support the motion to take Scotland forward.

It is with immense pleasure that I take part in the debate as the constituency MSP for Glasgow Cathcart. I pay tribute to my predecessor, Charlie Gordon, as other members have done to their predecessors. Charlie and I had political differences, but I am thankful to him for the mature way in which he conducted his campaign and any dealings that we had in the period when he was in office and I was a councillor in his constituency. I wish him and his family well for whatever the future holds. The debate provides the Parliament with the opportunity to reflect on what the election result means for the future of Scotland. The people of Scotland voted for an agenda of positivity and aspiration. They returned to government, as the only majority Government in these islands, the party that focused on what we can do as a nation and on what our potential would be if we were on an equal footing with every other nation in the world. The title of the debate is “Taking Scotland Forward”, and that was the theme of our election campaign. We went door to door and spoke to people about how all of us can live in a better land. The challenge for all members in the Parliament is to ensure that we deliver on those aspirations of the vast majority of the 5 million Scots. This is an exciting journey and a time of great opportunity for all of Scotland. We have a responsibility to live up to the challenge. As a new member of the Parliament, I fully intend to do so. My constituency is home to one of the gems of our national health service and a perfect example of it: the new Victoria hospital, which is known locally, along with its elder partner, as the Vicky. It is a thriving and modern hospital that provides first-class healthcare to those in my constituency and beyond. I am delighted that the SNP Government will not only reject the right-wing privatisation that the Tory-Lib Dem Government is pursuing down south, but will invest heavily in our NHS and protect its budget. We are also blessed to have in the constituency Langside College, whose students are being protected by the SNP Government, and Hampden Park. Under an SNP Government even the Scottish team is getting better; last night was one of the very few occasions on which we have come from behind to win. Glasgow, like all major cities, has a number of serious and difficult problems, which is why I particularly welcome the Government’s commitment to introduce a minimum unit price for alcohol. Alcohol abuse is a huge issue in my constituency and other constituencies in Glasgow. We as a Parliament would be guilty of sheer negligence if we were not to tackle that issue head on. Minimum unit pricing will not solve everything; it is not a silver bullet but a bold first step to ridding Scotland of one of its biggest social ills. The health and wellbeing of the nation must be a high priority for all parties in this chamber. I look forward to working with members to ensure that that is the case. This is not an issue on which to have party politicking. The First Minister and others have already talked about sectarianism—another major issue that has had a lot of public attention over the past few weeks and which, unfortunately, affects Glasgow more than any other area of the country. I know that all members of the Parliament and the majority of decent Scots want to see sectarianism gone from our society. The vile hatred that is on display during some football matches and elsewhere has no place in a civilised society and I welcome the commitment from the Government to cast the remnants of a troubled past to the confines of history. However, the main challenge that we all face is jobs and the economy. There is not a street in my constituency where someone has not been affected in some way by these tough economic times. Iain Gray said during the election campaign—he has reiterated this on a few occasions in the chamber over the past couple of weeks—that the main focus of the next Government should be jobs and the economy. I agree with him—and clearly so does the Government. I look forward to seeing the progress that this Government makes as it takes on that challenge over the next few years. I also look forward to working with the Deputy First Minister, with her new responsibility for cities, to ensure that Glasgow fulfils its economic potential in the years ahead. I hope that she can put in a decent word for Glasgow when it comes to funding and so on. Our relationship with local government will be key to that. As a councillor in Glasgow City Council, I acknowledge the work that John Swinney has done to build relationships with local authorities of all complexions. It is important that the Government now builds on that work to achieve the goals that it has set on job creation and infrastructure investment and to ensure that the delivery of public services is the best that it can be. I also acknowledge the fantastic work that Alex Neil did in and for Glasgow as Minister for Housing and Communities. He is spoken of very highly, not just by the Glasgow Housing Association but by other housing associations throughout Glasgow and organisations such as Croftfoot housing action group, which I know he has met in the past. I welcome the new house-building project that started under the previous SNP Government and I look forward to some of that new housing coming to my home city in the near future. For Scotland to move forward to independence through a referendum, Glasgow has to move forward. Four years ago, we began that forward movement and on 5 May it took a massive surge forward, based on the SNP Government’s outstanding record of delivery for Glasgow: the M74 finally being given the attention and funds that it requires; the east end to Edinburgh rail link; the new Southern general hospital; modernisation of the Glasgow subway; funding for the new fastlink; new schools all across the city; and a fully funded council tax freeze for the past four years, which is being extended for another five years—all good news for Glasgow and all delivered by the SNP. Glasgow has a political history like no other—a history of radical politics, where it led from the front for social and political change in this country. Back in 1919, at the famous battle of George Square, the coalition Government at the time was so concerned about ordinary Glaswegians demanding better living and working conditions that it sent tanks and troops to George Square—surely not. Thankfully, it will not take tanks and troops to get those better living and working conditions next May—just the introduction of an SNP administration to the city chambers through the votes of the people of Glasgow. Then comes the referendum. When I was a young man, I left my family home to make my own way in the world. I got a job, got married, raised a family and did all the things that an independent, normal adult would do. I left my home not because I did not like, or love, my family but because that is what adults do. When we leave the union, it will not be because we dislike the English, hate the Welsh or despise the Northern Irish; it will be because we have now reached that stage of maturity when it is time to leave the hoose, stand on our own two feet, deal as equals with our friends and be a free and independent nation again. I look forward to that journey.