As many colleagues have said, the issue is complicated, and we are all a bit wiser thanks to the briefings that we have had from a number of organisations. However, certainly on a personal level, I still feel that I have but scratched the surface of the information that is out there. The SDF told us that NPSs—I will just use the shorthand at this stage in the debate—or legal highs are a potential danger to users. I very much enjoyed Kezia Dugdale’s speech and I agree that it is important that we use the terminology of legal highs. As Dennis Robertson said, I do not think that many users of legal highs are likely to be listening to the debate or are likely to view it or read the Official Report subsequently. That issue about information is perhaps one that we have to address. The key words are “legal” and “high”. I suggest that it is difficult to second guess people. It is the fact that people get high from alcohol or legal drugs that attracts 17-year-olds to taking them, albeit that alcohol is illegal for them to consume. I do not think that the word “legal” necessarily has the attraction that the word “high” has in the scheme of things. However, even that small point shows that we need evidence. It is vital that such evidence comes from the appropriate source. We need a balanced response to the issue and, at the head of that response by a country mile, I would like to see education. The SDF, Crew and the harm reduction teams are clearly involved in that. The motion talks about law enforcement and the challenges of enforcement. At the risk of being out of kilter with all previous speakers, I point out that there is a debate to be had as to why there should be enforcement on legal issues, and certainly with regard to legal highs. The police’s role in the choices for life scheme is important. Clearly, the police wish to have more powers to deal with the issue, but what are the implications of the law enforcement agency seeking more powers on the issue? Where would that stop? Around the globe, people take a range of substances to stimulate themselves. We need to be cautious that we are approaching this properly. I asked a couple of young folk about the issue, and they had a totally different attitude from me and perhaps other members. Indeed, the swift response that I got from someone was that we should legalise cannabis. I do not propose that we do that, but we can learn from experience in other jurisdictions, most recently Uruguay, about the implications for new psychoactive substances of that particular act. We must also consider the consequences of turning something that is presently legal into something illegal. We know that law enforcement and legislators struggle to keep up with the pharmaceutical people, but our approach needs to be entirely evidence based. Drug users are the informed consumers. My colleague Alison McInnes said that consumers do not know what they are buying. Members might think that that is terrible, but some folks think that it is a bit of a lucky dip. They think, “You never know—it might be good or it might be bad.” That is why some folks end up buying dog worming tablets. Head shops have been talked about a great deal, and there has been collaborative working on that issue. Much has been said about packaging. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is looking at issues of reckless conduct. I was grateful to be invited along to the meeting that the minister talked about. A trading standards officer who was there was puzzling with the thought that, if someone is content with spending £22 on bath salts, how do we approach that? Kezia Dugdale talked about bulk purchases, and our briefing was helpful in highlighting the free sample issue and self-funding dealerships, which I would describe as pyramid selling—that is capitalism; it works well in that field, just as it works well for Governments as they trade in their drugs of choice, alcohol and tobacco. The SDF briefing also talks about alternative lifestyle choices, and we know how alcohol advertising promotes lifestyle choices. If anyone is listening to the debate, they might therefore get a whiff of hypocrisy from what we are saying. I heard a lot about quality control, although I do not think that everyone talked about support for testing. The initiative in Wales was mentioned, and I support such an approach. It is hugely important that people can make informed choices about everything that they do. Injecting is a small part of the picture, we are told. In a previous debate, which has been mentioned, I talked about supervision of injecting, which is a significant way of reducing harm, not just for individuals but for communities. The SDF tells us that in the vast majority of cases no issues are reported. Labour’s amendment talks about promoting understanding, but will we get all the knowledge or just the downside? If examination of drugs shows that there are no ill effects, does that mean that they are okay? There are challenges for the police, who at operational level have not always been supportive of approaches to harm reduction such as needle exchanges and searching people as they leave premises. I urge that there be no tokenism or quick publicity-seeking fixes to deal with head shops, which are a small part of a much bigger issue. Let us be pragmatic, not patronising.

Does the member acknowledge that key to dealing with the problem is using the correct terminology? In a lot of communities in which FGM takes place the words “female genital mutilation” mean nothing, because the communities use euphemisms. For instance, I understand that one of them refers to a child being taken to a party. It is key to communicate in people’s own language, in every respect.

Does the member accept that intemperate language has been used on both sides of the debate? Does he condemn its use on both sides, as I do?

Will the member accept that it should be the quality rather than the quantity that matters when it comes to amendments?

I thank the various groups that provided briefings for the debate. One line in the Equality Network briefing said that it would make Scotland fair and more equal if we agreed to the bill, and I agree with that. The Parliament has an important role in serving the people of Scotland, and we know that the people of Scotland have different genders, races, sexualities and localities. The committee structure plays a key role in our scrutiny of legislation. Much has been said about the Equal Opportunities Committee. I thank our convener, Margaret McCulloch, for her comments and her résumé of the work that took place. I also thank our valuable committee staff, who were tremendously helpful in providing support to enable us to scrutinise the bill. A lot of evidence was taken and, like many, I have had a lot of communications. Some of them have not been particularly measured and others have clearly indicated that they have not read the proposals, which is a bit disappointing. Of particular interest was a line of emails that I got. As someone who has spent all but a handful of years in the Highlands—I was born, was brought up and live there—I found being told that I could not possibly be a Highlander or I would not support the bill to be quite dismissive of an entire population and, indeed, the geography of the place. In many locations around the globe—sadly, 21st century Scotland is no different—people choose selective tracts from a book of their choice to support various things. That might be girls not being educated; women not being allowed to be doctors or to drive motor vehicles; the mode of dress that can be worn; boys and girls not being allowed to be educated in the same room; the races being segregated; children being beaten; interfaith and interrace marriages being banned; goats being thrown off towers to their deaths; and people who love each other not being allowed to marry. There have been many entirely reasonably expressed views. I do not go for the hierarchy. We either believe in equality or we do not; there is no hierarchy within that. I will quote two of the communications that I have had. One is from a monk in an abbey in the Highlands and Islands, who concludes by saying: “Of course the main victims in your favoured legislation will be children—but they don’t vote, so obviously can be safely ignored”. I have to say that I will be safely ignoring that gentleman. I commend the approach to children that is taken by Stonewall Scotland, which says: “Existing law already states, rightly, that all decisions on adoption or fostering must be based on the best interests of the child. Stonewall Scotland agrees that prospective foster carers and adoptive parents should not be rejected solely because of their views on same-sex marriage. We do believe, however, that potential adoptive parents or foster carers should be assessed on whether they have a range of skills to support looked after children, including those who may grow up to be lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender or may be experiencing homophobic or transphobic bullying.” What a contrast between the views of that proponent of faith adherence and the support that we have had in the way of briefings from equality groups. Similarly, like other members, I have received a communication from a Free Presbyterian minister, who says: “If you ignore this warning”— the warning not to support the bill— “I am clear from complicity of you dying in your iniquity.” He adds that his “conscience will be purged from any involvement in the national sin.” I have news for the Rev Campbell: I am going to die, and my death certificate will not state that the cause of death was iniquity or involvement in the national sin. To those sadly loveless communicants, I say that I, too, can quote from a book. The book that I will quote from says: “A new command I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another.” A lot has been made of statistics, and Jackie Baillie has alluded to the social attitudes survey. To me, it is not about who can get the bigger gang together but about which group values equality more. We have heard about the civil registrars and the contrast with the faith adherents, but who would want to get married in a situation involving duress anyway? It is quite clear to me that one person’s morality is another person’s prejudice. I am sad to say that we have heard a lot of prejudice in relation to this bill. As I have said before, I do not think that there can be any caveats in relation to equality. We have an opportunity to make history. Not many people get that. There have been vital votes on franchise and slavery, and the future analysis of that has been important. James Dornan will be seen to have acted to make a difference. I have one final quote—

Martin Luther King Jnr, said: “I have decided to stick with love. Hate is too big a burden to bear.” I ask others to facilitate the love that would allow people to marry, and to support this legislation.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it does to support shared or common housing registers for local authorities, housing associations and housing co-operatives. (S4O-02857)

I have raised a number of issues about dwelling houses that are owned or are under the control of the Scottish Government. It has been suggested that there is no central database for those properties. Would the minister undertake to consider the opportunities for those properties to be made available to local authorities, housing associations and housing co-operatives, rather than having them disposed of on the open market or, worse, to property speculators?

9. To ask the Scottish Government how many authorised police firearms officers there are. (S4O-02815)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that reply. Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary’s 2009 report said that the Police Scotland aligns itself with the Home Office forces and complies “voluntarily with these standards”. The standards that are referred to are those that are laid out in the Home Office’s 2003 “Code of Practice on Police use of Firearms and Less Lethal Weapons”. Can the cabinet secretary advise—either now, or later in writing—whether that is still the case? In particular, with regard to the Independent Police Complaints Commission’s advice to Scotland Yard on the “hard stop” tactic, has the advice been acted on in Scotland? Also, will the cabinet secretary join me in calling for a review of police firearms tactics and of the number of officers who are deployed carrying Taser guns but are not authorised firearms officers?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a member of Amnesty. I thank members from across the Parliament for supporting the motion, and I thank Oxfam for its briefing. In that briefing, we read that Oxfam’s vision is “a just world without poverty”. I do not think that anyone would take issue with that. It wants “A world where people feel empowered to improve their own lives, so they can in turn help others in their communities, setting in motion a chain reaction of change.” We know that Oxfam enjoys considerable support across the country through its network of shops and its volunteers. A recurring theme of the approach that it takes is to encourage self-help. As it says, “It’s about more than just delivering aid.” It is about creating that chain reaction. It would like to see, as I hope we all would, “grassroots action” resulting in “global decision making” that effects “lasting change.” Oxfam has a history of involvement in campaigning. It has been involved with the make poverty history and enough food for everyone if campaigns. The lift lives for good fundraising campaign is the start of an ambitious new drive to tackle the root causes of poverty in 2014. Oxfam makes clear in its excellent briefing and the report that it has compiled, “Lift Lives for Good: Actions to Tackle Inequality and Climate Change” that it sees the two biggest threats as being the growing gap between the richest and the poorest and the damage that is caused to poor people by climate change. Although there have been some economic gains in middle-income countries, they have not resulted in lifting many people out of poverty. In the report, Oxfam mentions the political leadership in the United Kingdom. I hope that members of the Scottish Parliament and the other devolved institutions will see that there is a clear supporting role for them, too. With regard to equality, Oxfam mentions the need to “Put tackling inequality at the heart of decision making”, “Address the unfair UK and global tax rules that fuel inequality” and “Promote universal free public health care and education services to tackle inequality”. There are other points, but I will move on to climate change, given the limited time that I have. Oxfam encourages investment in a low-carbon future, which I hope that we would all support. It refers to the UK, but that is for Scotland, the UK and the planet. Oxfam asks us to invest in climate resilience and low-carbon development overseas and to “Promote ambitious global agreements on climate change” and “sustainable energy access”. Positive moves on that have happened in the Parliament, but we should not be complacent. The world produces enough food for everyone, yet one in eight people—840 million people—go to bed hungry each night. It is estimated that climate change could increase child malnutrition by 20 per cent, which would eliminate improvements that might otherwise occur through campaigns such as this one. A damning statistic is that, for every $6 of subsidy for fossil fuels, renewable energy enjoys only $1 of subsidy. Oxfam is talking about, for example, an innovative dairy programme in Sri Lanka, a revolutionary rice-growing system in Liberia, and seed-growing co-operatives in Nepal. All those measures are designed to be catalysts to lift entire communities. Oxfam talks about smart aid and says that a concerted effort is needed to achieve the ripple effect of such good work. The important thing is to empower communities. Oxfam talks about reappraising how aid works and seeing it as having transformative power rather than as a single short-term action. Aid helps people to build skills and help themselves. That approach is at the heart of what Oxfam does and has done for many years. We have all been involved in gifting a goat, a hen or bags of seeds and the like. Oxfam believes—it is rather harsh on itself—that it has not communicated that model of growth particularly well. Oxfam notes that, in the past 10 years, 50 million more children in Africa have benefited from education, which is at the root of all our potential for improvement. It refers to how the global fund to tackle HIV, which blights the continent of Africa, is saving 3,000 lives a day and how debt cancellation has released millions of pounds for positive work in the countries affected—although many of us feel that countries could go a lot further on debt cancellation. Oxfam does not just work abroad. There are fine examples from its work across Scotland. Govan features a lot in that—it is where Tea in the Pot; the GalGael Trust, which builds the wonderful traditional sailing boats that we have seen; and Sunny Govan radio are based. In my part of the world, Lochboisdale Amenity Trust is undertaking an interesting project to fund the purchase of trees for crofters to create shelter belts on fenced crofts and common grazings and for amenity planting. Oxfam is involved with partner agencies in making grants. The mother appeal will give mothers worldwide the lift that they need to use their power to change the future. I think that we all agree that mothers are a powerful motivating group not only in their families but in their communities. The hope is to raise £10 million, and the UK Government has said that it will match up to £5 million donations that are made before 31 March and sales of items that are donated before then and sold before the end of April. I do not often praise the UK Government, but it is to be complimented on that and on retaining the overseas aid budget. A new vocabulary, certainly for me, is associated with the campaign. There is shwopping—I hope that I have pronounced that correctly—which means bringing an old item of clothing into a Marks and Spencer store each time that something new is bought. All such clothing goes to Oxfam. I am told that items are placed in a shwop drop box. I am sure that adequate instructions will be available for anyone who wishes to help. The appeal is targeting projects in Bangladesh, Tajikistan and Zambia. We all understand that there is a range of problems there and that it is important that we provide assistance. Oxfam has a wide community and it is well known across Scotland. It provides statistics on and a breakdown of income from its shops. I am delighted that the shop in Oban town, where I used to live, features in the top 10 of shops. Oxfam has a breakdown of its record shops, clothes shops, bookshops and the like. Oxfam quotes an interesting survey from last year, in which people said that supporting a charity uplifts their spirits. I hope that we will all take the opportunity to have our spirits uplifted in coming years and that we will all support this good campaign.

In the small amount of time available, I intend to concentrate on the land maintenance issue and commend some of the evidence that we heard, which I will read to you: “Our mission is to champion an industry committed to improving the quality of living in Scotland by providing this and future generations with properly cared-for open spaces where people want to live, enhancing the value of homes, and adding to the recreational and general amenity in each development.” That came from Greenbelt, a company that has been mentioned a few times and a company—I will be generous—with which there was some confusion when initially I contacted it. I successfully made contact via the recorded delivery system of the mail, to broker a meeting with a constituent that was to take place with the site manager. Of importance there was familiarity with the site. My constituent, whom I contacted yesterday, told me that it was not particularly successful, given that the site manager had difficulty finding the house. That in itself suggests that there may be a lack of familiarity with the area. From conversations with neighbours and others, it is clear that there are non-payment issues, performance issues, cases of people not being billed and uncertainty over ownership. Part of that, I think, comes down to what we might call performance management, and the issue of subcontracting also features. At its outset, the committee report says: “The Committee recognises the value in having in place an effective system to keep the country’s housing stock properly maintained.” It is important for people to have avenues of redress and, in that respect, the Homeowner Housing Panel and the committee’s suggestion of mediation have both been mentioned in the debate. This legislation has been called complex—indeed, I believe that the convener called it “a bit tricky”—and, as a result, I went to the layman’s explanation as set out in the explanatory note to the 2003 act. It says: “The Act achieves greater clarity in the law” because it implements “the recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission”. Given Rod Campbell’s comments about the specifics of section 53, it is interesting that the issue will return to the commission. In fact, it is not only section 53 that requires to be clarified. We had discussions with and heard differing views from some of Scotland’s leading academics. I also note the heavy caveat attached to Consumer Focus Scotland’s legal opinion, which says: “we have reached the conclusion that it would be preferable in the consumer interest to clarify and simplify the legal position by amending the existing legislation.” I do not have much time to cover other matters but I want to comment on John Lamont’s point about the Government’s response to recommendation 8, which Alison McInnes also mentioned in her speech. In that recommendation, the committee recognises “that green space has a wider benefit to communities and that there is a role for local accountability.” I want progress to be made and am pleased that the Government agrees that one option is for local authorities to adopt and maintain the land. I commend Clackmannanshire Council’s approach in that respect, but I am disappointed that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is not going to act on it. I would certainly favour such an approach. Indeed, I can think of a particular area in Inverness where, on one side of the street, there is a long-standing estate where the council is doing an excellent job of maintaining properties; on the other side, where residents are still paying their council tax, that is not the case. I am not being critical of Highland Council—it has been very supportive of the residents in the area—but I think that people should be able to look to their local authority for support and that there should be continuing involvement from authorities. Indeed, that is how I want this issue to be progressed.

I am grateful for the cabinet secretary’s support for amendment 18A. However, I have been advised of instances in which child victims of very serious offences, such as sexual and domestic abuse, have found out by accident about the release of an offender. One of the partner agencies that the cabinet secretary is working with is Children 1st, which works with children to help them recover from the traumatic experience of abuse. It knows of situations in which an offender returned to live in the same community on release and the first that the child victim knew of their release was when they literally bumped into them in the street. Amendment 18 does not make it clear whether, if a child victim does not have the right to be notified, their parent or guardian has that right. A child who is older than 12 might not want to know or might not realise the consequences of not wishing to be notified, but in order to consider how to protect the child from encountering a released offender, the parent or guardian might wish to be notified. How does the amendment provide for such an occurrence? Moreover, a child might not realise the importance of knowing about the release and they might find the release traumatic. It is important to provide support for a child victim so that they can address the impact of such information and process it as positively as possible. Guidance would help the justice authorities to work out what might be required in different circumstances. My amendments 18A and 18B would allow for such eventualities. They would allow Scottish ministers, once proper consideration has been given to the effects of amendment 18, to issue appropriate guidance and to continue to finesse the operation and implementation of amendment 18. The justice secretary has accepted that amendment 18A is within the overall aims of the bill. Amendment 18B is supported by Children 1st and I encourage everyone else to support it too.

About 15 years ago, the Northern Constabulary issued a book to young people about knowing your rights when dealing with the police. Is it not a positive thing for people to know their rights?

First, I congratulate the Scottish Human Rights Commission on the publication of its national action plan. It is significant that it had Scottish Government support and active participation; that sends a clear signal. The plan represents four years of hard labour for the SHRC and it has been fruitful. The purpose of the plan is: “To focus and coordinate action by public, private, voluntary bodies and individuals to achieve human dignity for all through the realisation of internationally recognised human rights.” For me, it is important that people understand and can affirm human rights, and a requirement for that understanding is education. As I said in my intervention, I see no threat in people understanding their human rights fully. In the longer term, problems will arise if people do not know their rights. If the national action plan is properly implemented, people should be pushing at an open door with authority to ensure that their rights are being respected. We cannot say often enough that those rights are dignity, equality, freedom, autonomy and respect. Indeed, the PANEL—participation, accountability, non-discrimination, empowerment and legality—acronym has participation as a key element and there are opportunities with things such as consultative budgets and, as members have alluded to, the opportunity to participate in the compilation of our constitution, which has adopted a rights-based approach. Accountability is the next element, and the Parliament has been criticised for not having a human rights committee and not appearing to address human rights issues overtly when we know that they are being addressed. Perhaps we need to be a bit more explicit about that. Non-discrimination is the third PANEL element. We all have interests in particular areas. Ms Marra is genuinely interested in and concerned about the issue of female genital mutilation, and who would not be? Others, like myself, are interested in Gypsy Travellers, Roma, and blacklisting, all of which are important aspects that we have to pick up on. Empowerment is very important, and we need to be alert to the role that advocacy plays in that, and how often it is the first thing that local authorities cut in these pressing times. The national action plan will be relevant regardless of the outcome of the referendum, although I note that the report says that progress has been made since devolution, and it identifies the next steps. The minister rightly points out that we have a strong legal framework. Perhaps surprisingly, Alex Johnstone referred to the deserving and undeserving as viewed in rights. He referred to one poll and I will refer to another. A recent Trades Union Congress poll brought out the many misconceptions about welfare and benefits spending. It found that “On average people think that 41 per cent of the entire welfare budget goes on benefits to unemployed people, while the true figure is 3 per cent.” That clearly has some resonance in the debate that we are having today. It is interesting that the UK Government’s position should be brought up in this debate. I would have thought that Mr Johnstone would keep quiet about that because, just as Mr Cameron talks about slaying the health and safety monster, he takes a very similar approach to human rights, and there is no place for that. We will have an opportunity to address that in the coming months. Health and social care has been touched on, and I think that independent living is a clear issue, as is the fact that the ever-present dignity and acknowledgement of the individual should be key to any care package. The minister is right to talk about the Government’s commitment to abolishing homelessness, and that is very positive, but it has to be delivered in practice. However, the challenges remain for people such as prisoners who are released without a home to go to and who have difficulty in accessing medical treatment because general practitioners will not treat certain individuals who have addiction issues. The action plan has a vision of a Scotland in which everyone is able to live with human dignity, and I do not believe that anyone will dissent from that.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the review of wild fisheries management that it announced during the passage of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2013. (S4O-02664)

I understand that a number of waters in Scotland are under community control but not under community ownership. Indeed, some have salmon rights that have been donated to a town or a club. I am particularly interested in the potential for community interests to conflict with the wider public interest and have written to the land reform review group about that. Would the minister agree to the Scottish Government examining wild fishing rights and laws—those in New Zealand and Nova Scotia have been commended to me—to see what lessons, if any, can be learned for Scotland in order to democratise the issue?

Does the minister acknowledge that there needs to be uniformity of services and that there cannot be any areas in which there is an opt-out due to public perceptions of treatment for people in drug programmes?

I, too, welcome the broad consensus that we have heard, and which I hope will continue. I was delighted to hear the minister talk about the human-rights based approach that will be taken. I want to comment on some research by the Scottish Drugs Forum, which looked at the life stories of 55 people: people, not statistics. The main aim of that research was to record and understand the life stories of problem drug users; we have heard many examples of what came out of that. It is compelling that the interviewers were SDF volunteers who were addicts in recovery. I commend that approach, which was also used in SDF’s naloxone peer-educator initiative. I was delighted that the research covered urban and rural Scotland, because the problem is not limited to the central belt—it covers the entire nation, unfortunately. It will come as no surprise to anyone that most problem drug users are from disadvantaged neighbourhoods and are personally disadvantaged. There is no doubt in my mind that antipoverty policies and the promotion of equality, in terms of income disparity, have the potential to make a significant impact. We heard from members that an association between problem drug use and deprivation is worsened by stigmatisation. I find such stigmatisation to be particularly galling when it comes from people who systematically abuse alcohol, as it often does. There is almost a strange snobbery associated with that. Many of the 55 people talked about significant childhood problems, including anxiety and attention deficit, hyperactivity and conduct disorders. I hope that the getting it right for every child approach will catch that. Anne McTaggart’s comments about education were very important, and I certainly commend the patient-journey approach, which looks at where interventions could have made a difference. We heard in the research that using alcohol and drugs relatively heavily from a relatively young age happens usually in the context of socialising and having fun. In a previous debate I mentioned to the health minister the cynical targeting by social media that is taking place, which is a significant problem; alcohol promotion—whether peer promotion or global promotion—is something that we need to address. We hear of the multiagency approach to everything, which is fine; however, local authorities and housing associations face challenges in having to deal with competing issues including provision of housing to people who have drug addiction issues and the disruption that can sometimes result. We need to address that and we need to address GPs refusing access to people because of their addictions. Of course, many addicts are not bothered or concerned about the implications of what they do and will experiment with so-called legal highs because they feel that they have nothing to live for. We also have to remember that many of them are victims of the violence that is associated with the street drugs trade. I am particularly concerned about the problem of estrangement from families and about difficulties with care and custody of, and access to, children. We should work very hard to keep family units together and social work departments—rightly—take a child-centred approach to such matters. I, too, support methadone as an important part of the process. It is regarded as an essential aid on the road to recovery, offering the possibility of improvement, increased stability and—significantly for me—a reduced need for street drugs. Interestingly, the SDF research also highlighted difficulties in getting and keeping a methadone prescription. In my earlier intervention on the minister, I asked about the patchwork of services and I certainly think that there should not be any no-go areas—including Argyll in my region, where thus far ignorance has prevailed. However, I think that NHS Highland is going to ensure that the full range of services that should be available to all citizens will be available. I want to raise with the minister an issue that has previously been raised by my colleague Patrick Harvie about diamorphine, which as we know is a controlled drug but can be prescribed for treatment of drug misuse and addiction. In the response to Mr Harvie’s written parliamentary question, the cabinet secretary Alex Neil said: “Such decisions should be based on individual patient need and are a matter for the clinical judgement of the patient’s doctor”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 18 November 2013; S4W-17911] The fact that no licensing requests have been made might be connected with an understanding that such a move would be a departure from Government policy, but I want nothing to be ruled out in terms of assisting people who have drug issues, including the prescribing of heroin on a harm-reduction basis. Of course, that would need to be assessed, but I would welcome either ministers’ comments on the matter. Of course, the same goes for the very challenging approach of supervised injection, which also has a role in harm reduction, and street-drug analysis. There is no doubt that our harm reduction people often deal with very challenging individuals and disruptive lifestyles, so anything that can be done to help is worth trying. I therefore ask ministers to consider such initiatives. A very compelling phrase in the SDF research was about “maximising what people can recover to.” People must have something to aspire to; with compassion, understanding and care, we can make things better for them.

I recognise what the minister says about GPs. Does he acknowledge that a ministerial lead would be needed? He would have to initiate measures such as prescribing heroin, supervised injection and testing for street drugs.

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I apologise to you and the cabinet secretary for missing the opening remarks. I am a member of the committee that put together the report, which reflects a wide range of views. It is very important that all voices are heard. My colleague John Mason, who is also a member of the committee, talked about the importance of the bill in negative terms, if I heard him correctly. For me, there is little more important than equality and fairness and, for that reason, I fully endorse the bill. A number of members have talked about changed attitudes. That is reflected in attitudes to gender, disability, race and sexual orientation. As a police officer who commenced work in the mid-1970s, I learned laws about homosexuality that seem bizarre and are totally unacceptable nowadays. The Equality Network’s recent briefing says that marriage equality “matters to LGBT people”. That is very apparent, and we have heard powerful testimonies from Ruth Davidson, Marco Biagi, Kevin Stewart, Jim Eadie and other members. I have received many communications from people of faith and I hope that I showed that I was respectful of their views. Those views were clearly individual ones. There were individual interpretations individually made from self-selected sources. I am sure that the faith groups recognise that attitudes have changed, not least to things such as mixed-race marriages and divorcees. If members check the Official Report, they will see that Professor John Curtice talked about the “liberalisation of attitudes even among regular worshippers.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 September 2013; c 1518.] It is clear that there is no requirement to marry same-sex couples and that protection is afforded to faith groups by article 9 of the ECHR. I, for one, commend the legislative co-operation with the UK Government on aspects of that. I hope that faith groups will participate at some future point, and I commend the humanists, Quakers, Unitarians, liberal Jews and others. Not much has been said about registrars; I thought that more would have been said about them. They are public servants and should complete public duty. We would not tolerate people saying that they would not participate in conducting a mixed-race marriage so, frankly, they need to get on with it. There has been a lot of talk about the nature of communications. Unlike Margaret Mitchell, I have not found opponents to be inhibited in any way in their contact with me. I have received individually written letters, mass postcards and personal representations. Some people have strange obsessions with physical acts. I found reading about some of them to be very uncomfortable. Like many others today, I got a communication that started, “Dear Frequent Sinner”. Uniquely, however, when I tried to explain things to someone in the range of other parliamentary work, I got back, “Nice work, Satan.” It is important to recognise that there are genuine, strongly held views on both sides and that those remarks are not representative of all the faith organisations. Other members have touched on the issues that the Scottish Transgender Alliance raised; time will not permit me to go into them. I commend the cabinet secretary for his comment that he will think further about those issues. There are a number of issues and they are challenging to discuss, not least the age aspect, but I was reassured by what I heard from the cabinet secretary at the Equal Opportunities Committee and I look forward to those issues being addressed. The future will not be without challenges, but it must be without prejudice. The bill will make Scotland fairer and more equal and, I hope, an enlightened and inclusive nation. Equality in love, and the opportunity for that love to be publicly displayed via marriage, must trump intolerance and inequality, and that will happen if we support the general principles of the bill tonight.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what the outcomes were of the President of Turkey’s recent visit to Scotland. (S4O-02578)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that reply and particularly for the information regarding the consulate. Two days ago, Turkey’s supreme court of appeals upheld the convictions of 11 public officials following the death in custody of Engin Çeber in 2008. Amnesty has reported on the flawed investigations into abuses related to the Gezi park protests; the need to establish a truly effective and independent police complaints mechanism; and on-going concerns about the treatment of the Kurdish minority and about the rights of lesbian and gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people, and women and girls. Will the Scottish Government highlight Amnesty’s concerns at a future meeting with the Turkish Government?

In his opening speech, the minister mentioned the unparalleled budget restraints that have been placed on the Scottish Government. Those restraints are not in dispute, except in the Tory amendment. However, politics is about priorities and competing demands, and it is evident that the motor lobby has a very strong voice that has been listened to. I am disappointed that there has been no mention of ferries, which are a vital part of our infrastructure. Given the fact that the motion talks about “strategic transport networks”, it is strange that there has been no mention of ferries. There is good news for the Scottish Government in relation to the Raasay ferry, which has an innovative design and was built in Scotland. I would like to see that replicated, with a replacement programme that would put our shipbuilding yards to some constructive use, and an enhanced, less polluting fleet. I was heartened to hear the minister say that he is keen to encourage people to move from road to rail. Of course, the practicalities of rail travel will shape people’s view on whether it is worth while. I received a detailed email from a constituent who travelled twice on the Inverness to Aberdeen line at the weekend. He outlined the various challenges connected with his journey and said that “26 got on at Insch, 50 at Inverurie and 15 at Dyce. We became a sardines tin!” That is good news in that plenty of use is being made of the service, but he had a similar experience on the return journey. That raises the question why, 10 years after we were promised that the short platforms at Elgin and Insch would be lengthened, that has not happened. That is what people are interested in—they want practical opportunities to use rail. As things stand, it is quicker to use the train than to travel by road between Inverness and Aberdeen. It is, therefore, disappointing that the Scottish Government seems intent on reversing the position with its plans to dual the A96. How does that square with the minister’s assertion that he wants to encourage people to move from road to rail? A cost benefit analysis must be done on that. The phrase “modal shift” is used a lot, not just about freight, but about passengers. What analysis is done? We must make rail an attractive option, and part of doing so will involve considering how it integrates with other policies—not just transport policies, but policies on the environment and planning. For example, how transport links with developments such as those at Kishorn will be important. Reference has been made to the briefings that members have received. I will talk about the one from Friends of the Earth Scotland in the context of the damage that air pollution does to health. We all want to encourage more cycling and walking as well as more and better public transport, but those things will require less traffic. The minister’s mention of retrofitting is welcome. That is a practical example of what we should encourage: inspecting, repairing and replacing in that order, not going straight to replacing. Unusually for me, I will commend something from the United States. Smart Growth America, which is on the internet—I can show the link to the minister—has carried out research that says: “Public transportation investments generate 31 percent more jobs per dollar than new construction of roads and bridges, and repair work on roads and bridges generates 16 percent more jobs per dollar than new bridge and road construction.” The research goes on to say: “Fixing existing infrastructure produces a higher return on investment than new construction because repair: •prevents the need for reconstruction later, which costs 4 to 14 times as much; •saves money by reducing damage from potholes and vibrations; •Keep existing communities vibrant. Neglecting existing places while building new infrastructure drives growth out, and means the public ends up buying two of everything.” I do not think that we have the money for “new construction”, so I commend the inspect, repair and replace approach. Mention has been made of the Borders rail line. It is welcome and a good example of consensus being built. In a previous debate, I also commended the additional Oban to Glasgow rail service, with which there is excellent connectivity. Members talked about shift, but the shift will require infrastructure. Members also talked about the north rail line. It is now at capacity and I understand that that is why freight now goes east and south, rather than west and south. Rail and cycle hubs are very important, too, but their design is important. The right design must form part of the franchise so that there are storage areas for cycles and other things. I have been in touch with the minister on those matters. The national cycle network is very much to be welcomed. I ask the minister for more of that, please.

The minister says that there will be an assignment, rather than an appointment. There is public expectation that the post and person specifications will be clearly laid out, as happens with other public appointments. Does the minister see merit in that?

The Justice Committee described the bill as “a welcome development in revising the administrative justice landscape.” We have certainly heard about the varied tribunals that are covered in that landscape, the 80,000-odd cases that they deal with and the fact that that is a small percentage of the overall number of cases—between 2 and 3 per cent—because the rest are covered by reserved tribunals. I am grateful to the witnesses for the evidence that they gave and to the organisations that provided briefings. The briefing from Citizens Advice Scotland says that tribunals are the facet of the justice system that people are most likely to access. If people are going to access tribunals, they must be accessible and I concur with CAS and others that the purpose of tribunals should be on the face of the bill. Citizens Advice Scotland suggests various principles to ensure that the practice and procedure of tribunals is accessible, such as placing users at the core of tribunals. The policy memorandum says: “The Bill has no differential impact upon island or rural communities.” That will be the case, but I hope that technology can be embraced, in conjunction with the courts and public services, to ensure accessibility. CAS says that tribunals should be fair, expeditious and just. That will require adequate resourcing. Like many members, I do not favour the resourcing coming by way of fees, which would affect people’s access. CAS also suggests that a safeguard must be provided to ensure that the spirit of tribunals and the distinctive nature of individual tribunals will be maintained. Many speakers have covered that point. We know that there is a unique range of not only subjects but manners in which those subjects are dealt with. CAS says that the bill should provide a framework of defining principles to frame the development of new tribunals. We have heard from the minister that there is a feeling that the framework is adequately loose—if I can use that term—to absorb future tribunals. The principles that CAS suggests would help to mitigate the lack of detail about procedure on the face of the bill by guaranteeing a minimum standard to which all Scottish tribunals should operate. Its suggestions are not at all unreasonable and I hope that they can be considered. Much has been made of the special case that the Lands Tribunal for Scotland believes that it is. That is certainly not my view. It said that it does “not really fit in with the scheme.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 3 September 2013; c 3112.] In a written response, the minister told the committee that all the tribunals are unique; I would not place one above any of the others. The Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland has been referred to—it can deprive someone of their liberty. There are also challenges associated with the additional support needs tribunal. All the tribunals are important and should be treated similarly. The committee’s view on the postponement of the inclusion of reserved tribunals is that it would welcome the inclusion of the other tribunals, although our report acknowledged that this is something that “is not entirely in the hands of the Scottish Government”. I do not think that it is in the hands of the Scottish Government at all. The report went on to urge the Scottish Government “to work with the UK Government to ensure ... early progress”— we have heard that those discussions are on-going— “and to examine closely whether the Bill as drafted will create any barriers to the future inclusion of reserved tribunals”, not that we identified any. I welcome the significant role that tribunals play in civic Scotland and the oversight provided by the Lord President. My early intervention on the minister about the appointment of the tribunals president is not about an individual—far from it. The Scottish Government’s response to the committee’s report says: “The position is not a stand-alone appointment—it is an assignment by the Lord President. ... The President of Scottish Tribunals has to be a senior person from within the Lord Presidents judicial complement as they will have the responsibility for managing the Upper Tribunal which will be made up of Senators, Sheriffs Principal and Sheriffs as well as Chamber Presidents”. There is a debate about appointment versus assignment. How does someone become assigned? Roderick Campbell talked about opening up the field, but how do we do that if we do not know the field’s boundaries? I do not think it is unreasonable to ask for a job description which, in many respects, is given in the Government’s response to the committee. Public appointments should have a post and person specification. It is not about personalities but about public confidence and about judicial and senior circles in Scotland not being seen as some sort of exclusive club. The committee commended the idea of extending the pool of eligible candidates. I welcome the minister’s response on the use of the term “judge”. We want the tribunals to act independently and make their own decisions, but implying wigs and gowns might be intimidating and off-putting to tribunal users. I think that that is the case. The tribunal should be a forum for the lay person, but that certainly is not my experience of employment tribunals. I go along with a lot of what Elaine Murray said about the changes that have taken place there, and I would add to that the issues of increased qualifying periods of one to two years, the fees, reduction in compensation and judges sitting alone. If we come to inherit the employment tribunal, we would be going to what has certainly become a different beast in recent years. I think that there would be an opportunity for the Scottish Parliament to reinstate some of the fairness and opportunity with control of employment law. The issue of specialisms has been mentioned. There is another human resource term that should apply, which is succession planning. The explanatory notes to the bill state that “the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland ... currently has 332 members ... the Scottish Charity Appeals Tribunals ... has 19.” Further on, table 3 refers to: “Projection of number of members approaching 70, and number of resignations”. I certainly do not favour age discrimination. I think that people should hold a job on the basis of competence. One of the ways to deal with the issue is not to invest specialism in individuals but ensure that knowledge is widely spread by having succession planning systems. I will conclude by again mentioning Citizens Advice Scotland, which said something that I think we can all go along with: the needs of the user must be placed at the centre of the process. I am certainly very happy to support the bill at stage 1.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve safety for cyclists. (S4O-02528)

I thank the minister for that detailed response. Police Scotland has record numbers of officers at the moment. In the past, police officers engaged with primary schools on cycling proficiency. Things have moved on, but there is surely an opportunity for the police to engage with young people on road safety. Will the minister get in touch with Police Scotland and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to encourage that approach, which could only enhance community safety?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to expand community ownership of Scotland’s natural assets. (S4O-02468)

I thank the minister for that detailed response. Scotland’s rivers are an important part of our natural assets. What plans and funding does the Scottish Government have to ensure community ownership of our rivers, with a key role for angling associations?

Does the member acknowledge that such a blanket comment is a bit erroneous? As he will be aware, during the Justice Committee’s inquiry into purposeful activity in prisons, we learned, for example, that only three of the 24 women who had been through the Inverness prison women’s unit had reoffended.

I think that the cabinet secretary used the phrase “long-standing question”, which might relate to the competing priorities under the legislation between the rights of the individual and the rights of the state. The system is proportionate and balanced and, for that reason, it enjoys public support. However, I certainly support every effort on securing employment and education. Some astonishing figures have been quoted, such as the fact that 23 per cent of convictions are for breach of the peace. The Scottish Government is keen on preventative spend, and I certainly warmed to much of what Anne McTaggart said about how that approach could be adopted on the issue of offenders. We have high police numbers, the crime rate is at a 37-year low and reoffending is down. The other day, I saw a picture in the local paper of a PC Macleod in a primary 1 class—I point out that he was instructing rather than participating. We have campus cops. The role of education is important, because all the evidence shows that offenders have majorly underachieved in relation to numeracy and literacy and that they lack communication skills, which often contributes to their offending behaviour. Like many others, I was delighted that, last year, Scottish Government officials held discussions with a range of people. They have come up with the notion that the system is not fit for purpose. That is a view, although I certainly hope that the intrinsic elements of the legislation are retained. Many organisations work with the legislation. Apex Highland, with which I have a lot of dealings, certainly does tremendous work in assisting people who face many challenges, and it values them as individuals. Of course, many of them have addiction issues. Maureen Watt mentioned yoga, but Apex Highland utilises acupuncture. Indeed, I have personally sat in on one of the acupuncture group sessions, which I found very therapeutic. There are wee magnets that go in your lugs. Apex Highland plays an important role in relation to the jobcentre. The need for enlightened employers was alluded to. Organisations such as Apex are involved in community projects. On more than one occasion, I have been asked to present the users of the service with certificates. That might be the only occasion on which those people have been given anything by way of a reward, and they genuinely value it. Also, the community genuinely values the work that they do. Hopefully, it leads to gainful employment with enlightened employers. We need co-ordination across the public sector. That means between the UK Government with regard to benefits, the Scottish Government with regard to support for the third sector, the Scottish Prison Service and local authorities, within which we need co-ordination between housing and criminal justice social work. It should be no surprise to anyone when someone leaves prison. That should have been prepared for, which should mean that a fundamental right, namely the right to housing, is catered for. On many occasions—although not always—housing issues coupled with a six or seven-week delay in securing benefits mean that what should be a positive start is not the best of starts.

Christine Grahame is quite right. For that reason, NHS Highland, for instance, has provided dedicated medical staff for homeless people and people with addiction issues. It is shameful that a general practice would turn away anyone from treatment. Christine Grahame and Mary Fee touched on the role of the family, which cannot be underplayed, as it is vital. Part of that is about co-ordination around benefits and the increasing difficulties with that. Sadly, as has been said, the issue is mainly with young male offenders, who are returning to environments where their substance abuse took place, so there is also a need to rehabilitate communities. The cabinet secretary touched on the genesis of the 1974 act. The idea that anyone would suffer a lifelong punishment on the basis of being convicted is clearly not correct. I also wonder whether a blanket application of legislation is correct. Members have alluded to disclosure and the multi-agency approach to individual risk assessments. I wonder whether there is an opportunity for rehabilitation to be dealt with by way of the judiciary when sentencing. After all, they have all the information relating to the particular circumstances of the case and previous convictions. I hope that that can be considered.

Yes. Graeme Pearson is entirely right. For that reason, risk assessment should be continuous. There is no doubt that an individual’s circumstances can change. Of course, the pattern of behaviour mainly concerns young, single males. The appendix to the legislation gives some recognition of the frailty of youth, as there are different criteria for those under 18 and those over 18. I would like that to form part of any reform. The review is worthy. We cannot state enough the wider implications for the family. If someone is trying to go about their life but cannot secure insurance or a bank account, they will not have much of a productive future. Housing and jobs are key. I hope that the public sector will play a role on that. It would be interesting to know how many public sector organisations are fast tracking—for want of a better phrase—people who are covered by the act. I was interested in, and am still looking into, the system whereby one of the prisons was providing formal cleaning qualifications with the hope and expectation that that could result in jobs with sister public sector organisations. I appreciate the difficulties with that, but we also need confidence for offenders in a testing employment market. Access to education is crucial. In a former career as a police officer, I dealt with two individuals—I will not say anything that will identify them—in what can only be described as violent circumstances. Both of them, who are peers with me, now lead rounded lives. One of them is involved in volunteering and is following an academic career. The other is a full-time carer for his elderly parents. That has been a salutary lesson for me that people who we might have thought would never get out the bit can move on. The cabinet secretary talked about court-imposed fines having a five-year rehabilitation period and about three-year prison sentences having to be disclosed indefinitely. Alison McInnes talked about the change south of the border. It is important that we have compatibility of systems not only within the British isles but throughout Europe, ideally. I welcome the review and the measured nature of the debate. Poverty has not been mentioned so far, but it has a role in offending. In the foreword to the consultation document, the cabinet secretary talks about “increasing public confidence” and “strengthening community resilience”. If we can address poverty, that will have an effect on offending and, I hope, will have positive outcomes for all.

The minister talked about local interventions. Does he accept that there is a global challenge in relation to the targeting of young people by the drinks industry, particularly via social media?

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to review its arrangements for dealing with civil emergencies. (S4O-02343)

I recently lodged a parliamentary question to ask the Scottish Government “whether it maintains details of companies based in Scotland that are involved in research into, development or manufacture of armaments.” In response, I was told: “The Scottish Government does not maintain a central list of companies”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 16 July 2013; S4W-15197.] If that is the case, how can the cabinet secretary assure the public that all contingencies to cover civil emergencies are in place?

The minister referred to action following on from the two reports and acknowledged that there have been deficiencies. What was the Government doing prior to receipt of those reports?

I am grateful to all the organisations that have provided briefings for today’s debate, which indicates the widespread interest in the subject. A great number of traditional stopping-off places in the Highlands and elsewhere were blocked off in the 1980s in order to deal with a phenomenon of the time: new age travellers. Many of those new age travellers are now back working in the City of London, but the stopping-off places remain blocked off, and the vested interests are keen for that to remain the case. There is a place for talk and for strategies, but I am interested in practical solutions. When a site is blocked off, it is done by placing a handful of large boulders. If the Scottish Government is genuinely interested in maintaining the “traditional way of life” of the Gypsy Travellers, as it says it is in its response, it will play its part in making available some of those sites. I accept that not all the sites are in public ownership, but it seems to me that the transport minister could get in touch with Transport Scotland and the local authority minister could get in touch with councils. To me, that would be a wee bit more proactive than the examining that we have been promised. It would also have the benefit of showing leadership to other landowners. Bulldozed tracks cover the hills of the Highlands and farmers have the status called “permitted development”. Those are both planning issues that are facilitated as a result of central direction. If that can be the case, why not also do it for Gypsy Traveller sites, both settled and transit sites? If that involved compulsory purchase on the part of the Scottish Government, I would be very happy with that. The local authority sites have rightly been criticised. There are three permanent ones in the Highland Council area: one is built on a rubbish tip, one is in a sand quarry and the other is in a stone quarry. If a people’s accommodation is in such places, it sends a very clear signal about the priority that is given to them. An awful lot of good work is going on with the Gypsy Traveller community—for example, with MECOPP, as has been mentioned. I also mention Karen MacMaster in that regard. She is a development officer on interrupted learning—which Mr McMahon mentioned—with Highland Council education service, from which between 64 and 97 Gypsy Traveller children a week receive education. I mention that because any needs assessment would have to recognise that the Gypsy Traveller community is not a homogeneous group of people; their patterns of work and travel vary, which needs to be taken into account. I know of a traditional stopping-off site on the outskirts of Inverness that is fenced off by the local authority. There is no mention in the local plan of new or additional Gypsy Traveller provision. The site is certainly coveted by developers.

A bullet-point briefing from Highland Council indicates what its education service does: “Support families in accessing education Provide guidance and teaching support to schools Support a multi-agency approach to working” as per getting it right for every child, and “Develop resources and deliver training”. That is the sort of thing that can be done with education. There are a number of very articulate young Gypsy Travellers. Halting sites were mentioned by Mark McDonald, which I thought was considerably more interesting than his reliving of the politics of Aberdeen City Council. The sites issue is the sort of thing that needs to be discussed. The committee report that went to the Government was quite intentionally very forceful in many respects, which was what was needed. We know that public authorities have a general duty to eliminate discrimination. I commend the words of Malcolm Chisholm in relation to that. If we are going to advance equality of opportunity for these people as regards accommodation, I would like to see a situation in this chamber at First Minister’s question time, for instance, whereby in addition to reeling off commendable statistics about house building, mention was made of provision for Gypsy Travellers. The action plan is certainly very welcome. However, there is a need for elected representatives of all parties and no party to be very mindful of their words. Mention has been made of the UN rapporteur who is in Scotland and who met young Gypsy Travellers. I hope that the young women from Article 12 Scotland will have made a significant impression on the rapporteur. I do not know what impression the accommodation will have made, because I have to say that a lot of it is extremely embarrassing. So what future is there for those young Gypsy Traveller women? What prospects have they? Where are they going to settle? Where will be their base? Does the Scottish Government want them in houses, too? Quite bizarrely, it is still suggested by officials—as I know from my dealings with constituents who are Gypsy Travellers—that everything would be sorted if they were housed. It is not all down to the housing minister, but I certainly welcome the issue around the tenancy agreement. However, the message must go to all the minister’s colleagues that action is needed—by action I mean new sites, both permanent and transit sites—and that it is needed now.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has with universities when they are replacing senior posts, such as principals. (S4O-02298)

In the foreword to the “Public Sector Pay Policy for Staff Pay Remits 2011-12”, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, stated: “To help maintain staffing levels across the public sector, it is essential that we restrict pay growth and maintain pay at levels that are affordable and sustainable.” He went on to say that a pay freeze for all staff would apply in 2011-12. The Scottish Parliament information centre produced a paper for me on the pay of principals. From 2010-11 to 2011-12, the salary of the principal of the University of the Highlands and Islands increased by 31 per cent to £227,000: an obscene increase to an obscene sum. Given that that particular post is due to be replaced, what steps will the cabinet secretary take to bring some restraint to senior academic salaries? If he does not have the powers to do so, what steps is he taking to acquire them?

Given the member’s strength of feeling on case companions, did she think about whether it would have been appropriate to have a minority entry put in the Justice Committee’s report? The position that the committee’s convener outlined is entirely accurate.

How we deal with victims and witnesses marks the sort of society that we are. I want us to be a society that cares about, and is compassionate towards, victims and witnesses. With my background as a police officer, I know only too well that police officers, procurators fiscal and court officials routinely deal with witnesses and victims. However, we forget at our peril that, for many victims and witnesses, it is a unique experience and their first engagement with those services. There are, of course, particular challenges associated with repeat victims. Since my time, the police and the Crown have made huge progress with regard to domestic abuse and sexual crimes. There is still a way to go on those, and the bill will play its part, although it is not without some challenges. There has been much discussion in the debate about giving witnesses and victims the right to certain information. The Justice Committee supported that call and the proposal for an online hub. Like others, I am grateful for the cabinet secretary’s response to the stage 1 report, which suggested that the online hub was not intended as a replacement for human contact. There is no substitute for an empathetic human. Let us also not forget that the needs of those who are not online must also be serviced. The phrase “Clear standards of service” has been mentioned. Often, unintended offence is caused to victims by the manner in which information is or—more commonly—is not relayed. Such information can relate to changes of plea, charges being dropped and the accused being released on bail, for example. The children’s commissioner gave the committee an excellent document—“Children’s Rights Impact Assessment: The SCCYP Model”—in which he refers to the standards of service and the fact that there is no mention of their being monitored, evaluated or reported on. I note that, in his response to the stage 1 report, the cabinet secretary said that there would be individual standards. I am sure that the committee will want to look further into that. I see no intrusion into the rights of the accused. A presumption of innocence must apply. The bill certainly passes the human rights test and is not in conflict with human rights legislation. There are degrees of vulnerability. No one welcomes standing in a court and, as is often the case, being required to point out the accused. Most will feel vulnerable. The presumption that certain categories of person are more vulnerable and given the right to use special measures is important. I welcome it, and I also welcome the witness assessment. However, there is no point in assessing need unless we meet it. One way that we will move towards meeting the need is the commitment from the Scottish Court Service in the past couple of weeks to make facilities for special measures available throughout the country. That is to be welcomed. The Justice Committee asked the Scottish Government “to make every effort to ensure that removal of the presumption that child witnesses under the age of 12 will give evidence away from the court building does not lead to the unintended consequence of children giving evidence in court against their will.” That illustrates the differing views. The cabinet secretary has given the following reassurance: “The Bill makes a small amendment to put more weight on the views of the child so that if a child expresses a desire to give evidence in court”— and some do, along with their parents— “there will be a presumption that this will be allowed.” The correspondence from the victims organisations collaboration forum Scotland has been mentioned by some members, such as Alison McInnes, so I will not go into detail on that. I reiterate that the forum has a genuine concern about the right to appeal the use of special measures and calls for the removal of certain provisions from the bill. I note that, in his response to the stage 1 report, the cabinet secretary advises us that he is discussing that with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. It is an important issue, and I hope that there is a positive response to the forum’s specific concerns. Committee members have alluded to the harrowing first-hand testimony that we heard from victims about the traumatic and long-lasting effects on them and their families, friends and entire communities, and the health and wellbeing implications for them. No one wants to be a victim or a witness, and I am delighted that the 40-year low in the level of crime means that there are fewer victims, but there is of course no room for complacency. We also heard about the discussion of the terms “complainer” versus “victim”. I support and encourage others to support the position of the children’s commissioner that child victims must be believed and they are believed by being given that tag. Perhaps the committee became more hooked up on that point than the general public would be. In recent days, I have written to the justice secretary and the health secretary asking for Victim Support Scotland to play a lead role in implementing the legislation. It is important that that organisation is involved from the very start. Police liaison officers have a specific case-related role to discharge, and it is not a criticism of that role to say that it is not the same as the hands-on, practical role that VSS can and should have. As members know, VSS administers the victims’ fund for harrowing cases to provide for things such as a replacement bed for a rape victim or glasses for an older person who has been the victim of a robbery. That is an important early contact for victims, and I would put it in line with the preventative spend that the Scottish Government is following. If we can get the issues right, the cost of individual and family health and employment can be dealt with. That will come if we provide adequate support. There is a range of other issues, but I do not have time to touch on them. It is fair to say that there are challenges connected with the information technology system and the support that it can give to victims. Graeme Pearson’s comments on that are right. There are also particular challenges in the issue of gender-specific interviewers, not least in rural areas. I support the principles of the bill, and I look forward to scrutinising it at stage 2.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the work of the land reform review group. (S4O-02209)

The day after the publication of the land reform review group’s interim report, the group’s chair, Dr Alison Elliot, addressed the annual general meeting of Scottish Land & Estates—the lairds. Professor Jim Hunter says that Scotland retains the “most concentrated, most inequitable, most unreformed and most undemocratic land ownership system in the entire developed world”, while Scottish Land & Estates tells us that it remains “disappointed at the persisting view that the pattern of land ownership in Scotland is unfair and unjust”.

When tenant farmers still have no right to buy their farms and are reluctant to speak out for fear of repercussions from the very lairds to whom I referred, what can the Scottish Government do quickly to show the country that it has not abandoned its historical campaigning zeal on another important issue?

The debate has been interesting. The minister mentioned Borders rail, and I think that all members recognise the benefits that are associated with such an expansion. There was mention of the introduction of two additional trains to the north at the tail end of 2011, which was very welcome, but that line is now at capacity, which is an issue to which I will return. Rail and cycle hubs were mentioned, but—as my colleague Dave Thompson said—we need to get the coach design right for that. There has been a lot of talk about the Aberdeen to Inverness service and the Highland main line, and it would be helpful to hear some clarification on definitive timescales from the minister in his closing speech. However, enhancements to the Oban service—the Sunday services—are welcome. A practical example that my colleague Dave Thompson also mentioned is the opening of the Conon rail link. It is a modest construction in which Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Highland Council and the Scottish Government were involved. Two additional carriages were provided during the significant road works at the Kessock bridge. Elaine Murray and Claudia Beamish mentioned Wales. The principles that Claudia Beamish outlined are commendable. I certainly agree that more imagination is required. The Independent/Green amendment talks about recognising the constraints that are placed on the ScotRail franchise. Those constraints come in the form of section 25 of the Railways Act 1993, which states that the public sector cannot be a franchisee. Of course, as the minister mentioned, there is no corresponding ban on foreign public sector bodies being able to bid for and operate UK franchises. That explains why there is a German state-owned Deutsche Bahn locomotive in Waverley now and again, courtesy of Deutsche Bahn’s involvement with Arriva. The amendment also talks about the Scottish Government ensuring “greater transparency in its franchise decisions”.

I think that Stewart Stevenson will find that Deutsche Bahn operates with Arriva. Whatever—the principle stands. Ken Macintosh and others mentioned greater transparency in franchise decisions. Section 30 of the 1993 act says: “The Authority shall provide, or secure the provision of, services”. Our amendment certainly talks about providing, rather than securing the provision of, services. There is an obvious way to remove constraints. Our amendment also talks about “better value for the public investment in Scotland’s railways”. In 2010, the dividends paid to ScotRail’s shareholders could have paid for a 7 per cent reduction in fares if the service had been under public ownership. I think that that would enjoy widespread public support. On a number of occasions, I have asked the minister about nationalisation and received the reply that we heard today, and have heard many times, that it is for individual bidders to come forward. Indeed, he has mentioned the Strathclyde partnership for transport previously in that regard. Like my colleague Patrick Harvie, I am interested in what Ken Macintosh said. I hope that the minister will listen to the proposal and engage in the detail, because we all want to ensure the best possible service, in which, to my mind, there is no room for profit. The Brown review was also touched on. In a previous reply to me, the minister said that the extent to which it would have an impact was not yet known. Perhaps he could let us know about any lessons that have been learned from that. In our amendment, we condemn the UK Government’s plan to reprivatise the east coast line. As has been said, the east coast service requires less public subsidy than the 15 privately run franchises in Britain, according to a report from the rail regulator. I commend that report to my colleague Alex Johnstone, who rightly said that it is important that we do not make the same mistakes. It is clear that the UK Government is intent on making a mistake by returning the east coast line to private hands, with a new operator taking over by 2015. The line has been in the control of the Department for Transport since 2009. My colleague Patrick Harvie has given members the figures: in the past three and a half years, £640 million has been returned to the taxpayer, and it is estimated that the figure will be £800 million by the end of the current year. As has been said, the operator is perfectly capable of providing fine fare for Mr Fraser and others. It was discourteous that reprivatisation was not mentioned to the Scottish Government. In our amendment, we express concern about the road building programme. It is clear that vast sums for road building are available to take minutes off journeys and that the priority remains the motor car—the motor car is king.

If Bruce Crawford reads the amendment, he will find out that it refers to that. The Scottish Government is committing £3 billion to the dualling of the A9 to reduce journey times, and it is our view that that money could be better spent. Indeed, there are people who believe that it would be better spent on the A82.

No. Sorry. More freight being taken off the roads and put on to rail would mean less pressure on the roads. In the short time that I have left, I will mention a few additional concerns, of which one is the carriage by rail of exotic nuclear fuels from Dounreay. Another is the fragmentation of ScotRail services, with a separate franchise for the Caledonian sleeper, which concerns many people. The clauses in the franchise that allow the reimbursement to private operators of revenue lost as a result of industrial action is also a matter of concern. The First Minister was quoted in The Herald on 6 August 2008 as saying: “Railways must at least compete with the roads”. That is certainly not the case. The minister has been asked about the Railways Act 1993, but as yet there are no plans to remove profit from the public service that is Scotland’s rail network. That is not transformation; it is the status quo. The public must be central to the provision of public services.

Will the member take an intervention?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a director of Highland Homeless Trust. As John Mason said, homelessness is a very complicated issue, on which a wide range of agencies need to come together to provide support. As we heard in the minister’s very positive response, and as we read in the committee report, local authorities are working collaboratively. We also know that good work is happening in the voluntary sector. The report reflects the good work that continues to take place, on a consensual and factual basis, among members of the Equal Opportunities Committee. For that reason, I was very disappointed by Alex Johnstone’s speech. If the Scottish Conservative and Unionist party’s view is that homelessness is a lifestyle choice, that just shows how out of touch the Tories are. When the committee took up its inquiry, I was very keen that we should not lose the rural dimension—I frequently go on about that—so I was delighted that we took evidence from Highland Homeless Trust. We heard the strategic line from Dr Paul Monaghan, we heard the front-line manager’s view from Gordon Fleming and, most important, we heard the first-hand experiences of residents Julia Edgar, Matthew Friess and Rhea Nicholson. We heard, similarly, from residents from Quarriers. The rural dimension is no different from the urban dimension, in that if someone does not have a house, they do not have a house. It is very simple. However, in rural areas, services are invariably centralised and the absence of wider support from the community or family can lead to many challenges. We heard about the challenges for Rhea Nicolson’s mother, who is a single parent, and that, because of benefits implications, Rhea could no longer stay with her. That is part of a vicious welfare attack, which we heard about from Linda Fabiani and others. Family breakdown has been mentioned a lot, although overcrowding has not been mentioned so much. I have similar experience to that of Dick Lyle. As a councillor, I represented the largest area of social housing in the north of Scotland. Highland Council has 11,000 people on its waiting list and there are 36 communities that have no single-bedroom accommodation whatever. Overcrowding is a significant issue. I had officials consider house design to see whether something could be done. When three generations of a family live in a two-bedroom house, there will be tensions, regardless of the other circumstances. Support services are terribly important, as is mediation. The report talks about linking mediation with respite, perhaps because mediation has a greater potential to fail if it is not coupled with respite. It is important that a risk assessment is done. The getting it right for every child philosophy is important and it should apply across the board. In my experience, housing was not always taken into account, which was disappointing, given that we all have to live somewhere. I hope that that has changed, because a residence is as important to a child as it is to an adult, and the same pressures are brought to bear. Under GIRFEC, the wellbeing of the child and young person is at the centre of everything. If we have that in mind, we will not go too far wrong. Truancy is an issue, and I see a positive role for the police in supporting other agencies with it. That would be not a punitive role, but a child protection role. Throughcare and aftercare have been referred to. We are all corporate parents. The situation that has occurred of corporate parents leading their child to the service point to have them declared homeless does not seem to me to be the appropriate way to go about business. The report refers to the comment from the Scottish Council for Single Homeless that it is not a surprise when someone leaves care. Good grief! We all plan, and if we cannot plan for vulnerable people who are in our care, there is a problem. Local authorities are critical of the way in which individuals have conducted themselves with regard to families, so perhaps a bit of introspection is important, too. The Scottish Government has talked about strengthening the legislation on vulnerable groups, which is to be welcomed. We have heard many comments about the life-skills deficiencies and lack of educational attainment that are often associated with looked-after children. Those issues are a corporate responsibility. The committee clerks asked for updates from various participants in the inquiry. I would not normally discuss individual cases, but some people were happy to report and give us an update. Julia Edgar and Rhea Nicolson, who come from the Highlands, have moved from supported accommodation to take up tenancies. We all know the challenges that are associated with that—the issue is often not just housekeeping, but door-keeping—but they continue to receive support, which is important, and are doing relatively well, which I would say is not bad in this day and age. Matthew Friess, who also gave evidence, is still in supported accommodation and fancies a career in politics. He has not nailed his colours to any particular mast, but he was impressed with the Parliament building. The Highland Homeless Trust welcomed the Scottish Government’s amendment to legislation that creates new duties to assess households and to meet needs. There are challenges with the community care grant. As many members have said, collaborative work with the third sector is important. I commend the work of New Start Highland, through which basic furnishing and starting packs are available, so that young people can move into semi-furnished, rather than unfurnished, accommodation. There is sometimes an important role for people to assist in a positive way, even with decoration. The additional moneys to the Scottish welfare fund are to be welcomed. It is apparent that the issue crosses portfolios. Although it is probably appropriate for the housing minister to be here, I know—from correspondence that we have received on this and other matters—that there is a recognition that the issue crosses portfolios. It would be wrong just to leave it to one minister. Education has a key role to play. Reference was made to some programmes. One of them was called “on the money” and the other was called “skint”. One was for young folk and the other was for old folk. It is clear that skint is the more appropriate one at this time. On prevention, building houses will prevent homelessness. It is a long-term approach and only part of the solution, but I would like to see a massive house-building programme. There are communities the length and breadth of Scotland that lack single-bedroom accommodation and so face the problems that are associated with that. A massive house-building programme would be a welcome boost to local economies. On housing options and overcrowding, many people in the council area that I represented previously were in two-bedroom houses. There was overcrowding there, so it is clear that more houses and a better range of houses would play an important role in keeping families together. I look forward to support from across the chamber—including from Mr Johnstone—on addressing the issue of removal of housing benefit for people who are in education. It is crucial that we have active progress for people who are moving on. I commend the response to the report.

Will the member give way?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what flexibility there is in the curriculum for excellence to reflect evolving situations in society. (S4O-02138)

The Parliament’s Equal Opportunities Committee will shortly scrutinise the proposed same-sex marriage legislation. What assurances can the minister give that that issue will be dealt with in an age-appropriate and non-partisan way in Scotland’s schools?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to increase the routine use of Gaelic across its services. (S4O-02073)

When will the Scottish Government publish new written guidelines on Gaelic-medium education, as recommended in the Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education 2011 report “Gaelic Education: Building on the successes, addressing the barriers”?

I, too, add my congratulations to Neil Findlay not only on securing the debate but on his on-going work on blacklisting and other worker-related issues. Thanks are due, too, to the trade union movement—individual members and collectively—the Hazards magazine, the blacklisting support group and countless others. As many members have mentioned, thanks are also due to the Scottish Affairs Committee for its interim report. We know that there is evidence of financing and supporting the sinister list. I am grateful to Unite for its briefing. It refers to the “human story of poverty, family breakdown and emotional despair and—in the worst case—suicide.” It is important that we recall that we are talking about individuals. The damage has been done. Perhaps it cannot be repaired directly, but it certainly cannot be allowed to be repeated and we must see the eradication of what, as many other members have said, is an attack on human rights. Unite’s general secretary described the matter as an “on-going problem.” I am dealing with an incident of corporate abuse of smaller businesses, which in turn affects workforces, so the bullying continues. What we have seen is vindictiveness, deceit and collusion but, as yet, we have not seen any justice. Some members have talked about attitudes. The attitude that is shown when the United Kingdom’s Prime Minister talks about slaying the “health and safety monster” and refers to equality impact assessments as “nonsense” is the very attitude that underpins a lot of this. Drew Smith referred to the erosion of safety in the workplace and the dearth of proactivity from the Health and Safety Executive, including no unannounced or follow-up inspections, the consequence of little investigation and even less prosecution and the pernicious—that is a word that is used a lot—rights for shares issue. Whose interests are served by that? It is certainly not those of the workforce and it is not efficient. It is political dogma and invariably the blind pursuit of profit, which cannot be allowed to go unchecked. I hope that the minister will set out what plans the Scottish Government has to address the issue and, indeed, whether it has moved on from earlier in the year when Fergus Ewing, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, said: “I remind members that this is a Parliament and not a court. It is not appropriate, in my view, to bandy around allegations without evidence.”—[Official Report, 31 March 2013; c 16250.] There is a growing wealth of evidence on blacklisting and I hope that that will be picked up by the minister. Many members have talked about the procurement bill, in which there will be opportunities to address much more than blacklisting. I do not know whether it is appropriate to commend the blacklisting of blacklisters, but there may be a place for that. Neil Findlay talked about owning up and Alex Johnstone talked about reconciliation. We certainly need to shift the burden of proof. I favour no public money going to any company that disregards workers’ health and safety or the important role of trade unions and staff associations. We can make a start on that through the procurement bill. I support Neil Findlay’s calls for an independent public inquiry. There is a debate to be had about the status and powers of such an inquiry and about issues of compensation. However, we must ensure that the corporate cowboys are reined in. I like the challenge that has been thrown to the Parliament by the trade unions. Everyone who genuinely supports social justice and a positive future for Scotland must add their voices of support to the call for an inquiry.

Does the minister accept that human rights are a devolved issue?

I congratulate George Adam on securing the debate and I wish the MS Society well with MS week. I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests: I am on the board of directors of the MS Therapy Centre in Inverness. I spoke in the previous debate on MS about the trauma that is associated with diagnosis. We heard from George Adam about the circumstances of Stacey’s diagnosis and the trauma that was associated with that. As he said, the issue is very personal. We can talk in terms of statistics and percentages, but when we put a name to a case it becomes very meaningful. I understand that approximately 85 per cent of people with MS suffer “an initial, short-term neurological episode known as clinically isolated syndrome ... A definitive MS diagnosis is based on a combination of factors, including medical history, neurological exams” and “development of a second clinical attack”. That was a direct quotation, and it is the only medical reference that I am likely to make. I had a look online at the research and found a layman’s summary, which included some interesting points. Pregnancy appears to afford female MS patients a precipitous drop in symptoms during the second half of gestation, and researchers are considering how the benefit could be extended to people who are not pregnant. I thought that that sounded exciting. The Swedish Neuroscience Institute is considering matters. A year on from the previous debate, people still have care and support demands. We heard about the challenges that are associated with that, and Liam McArthur talked about how the problem affects people in rural and landward areas. I will be parochial and talk about NHS Highland, which has an identified nurse, Anne Stewart, who is based at Raigmore hospital. She sees patients in hospital and at home, and she provides advice and support for people with multiple sclerosis and their families, friends and healthcare professionals—we should not forget that some healthcare professionals find MS very challenging. Anne Stewart also liaises with local MS groups and the MS Therapy Centre in Inverness, which offers a range of treatments, including a hyperbaric chamber. I pay tribute to Jackie McIntosh, the centre’s manager, and all the centre’s staff, volunteers and supporters—and indeed my fellow board members—because the centre is a great rock for a number of people. Links with social services are part of the specialist nurse’s remit, which is particularly important in the context of the integration of health and social care, on which Highland Council and NHS Highland have taken a lead. A year on, there are still financial challenges. The Scottish Government’s provision of £270,000 for MS therapy centres is welcome. The Multiple Sclerosis Centre Mid-Argyll is looking at developing its services and transporting them to people who are further afield and currently out of reach. I note from the report, “A lottery of treatment and care—MS services across the UK”, which members have mentioned, that 68 per cent of folk said that they receive care from someone who is unpaid and that 89 per cent said that they require assistance, of whom a quarter said that they require constant assistance. Press coverage indicates that the minister welcomes the report and I welcome that. Malcolm Chisholm talked about the neurological clinical standards. The national neurological advisory group has identified MS as a priority, which is very welcome because efforts need to be co-ordinated. A number of members have spoken about welfare reform, which is a compelling and dark shadow looming those who have MS as well as a number of other people. However, not everything is right with the existing arrangements. I know someone who was unable to secure reasonable adaptations in their workplace, which should have been readily achievable in this day and age. A year on and there is still hope. In last year’s debate, I said: “In any fight, we need resilience and strength of mind, and in my experience that is to be found in abundance among MS sufferers and their supporters.”—[Official Report, 2 May 2012; c 8671.] That is still the case. I again congratulate George Adam on securing the debate.

This debate was meant to be a meaningful reflection on a political legacy and I hope that has been achieved. The tone that was set initially by Patrick Harvie, when he said that the debate was about ideas and not persons, was largely followed. The ideas continue 20 years on and are regrettably very dominant, as has been said by a number of people. There was a lot of talk in the debate about economic damage, not least to our mining and steel communities. Patrick Harvie also mentioned homophobic policies, which are perhaps one instance where there has been progress and some cross-party consensus and where we have moved on. There were reflections on Pinochet versus Mandela. Who would want to associate with one and vilify the other? That is not a legacy that people would be proud of. Patrick Harvie’s speech was a critique of individualism. There was some dubiety about who was responsible for the imposition of the poll tax in Scotland and its timing, but to the Scottish population that is entirely academic. They felt the full effects of it, and that is what has mattered to them. Privatisation of public assets has been mentioned by a number of members. Patrick Harvie referred to it as a transfer of wealth, which is an accurate reflection of what it was.

Yes, I certainly would be fully in support of nationalising, which I will come to later. Take, for instance, energy supplies: rather than the public being served, international shareholders are being served with vile and obscene profits. I will come back to that. Market fundamentalism—the price of everything and value of nothing—was touched on. Patrick Harvie talked about dependence on growth and the resource depletion, economic injustice and environmental crisis that that gives rise to. There was also mention of the £70 billion of North Sea oil reserves. The reality is that successive London Governments have continued Thatcher’s approach. The other day, the UK Prime Minister made the bizarre assertion that “we are all Thatcherites”. I do not think that that phrase has much resonance in Scotland. We will have an opportunity to change that approach. The next speaker in the debate was the Minister for Local Government and Planning, who touched on society, internationalism and equality. If I noted down correctly what he said, it was that we should “use the wealth to build a strong and fairer society.” I think that we would all agree with that. The references that I heard seemed to reflect Oxfam’s humankind index. Margo MacDonald intervened to encourage us all to think creatively, and thereafter the minister talked about Jimmy Reid. The debate would have been greatly enhanced had Mr Reid been here to contribute to it. Although he would share a lot of the views expressed, the present Government’s policy on corporation tax, for instance, would not enjoy his support—nor does it enjoy mine. James Kelly gave an excellent speech—one of the best that we heard today. It was very much from the heart. He spoke about the implications for his neighbours and friends and talked about desolate lives. Hanzala Malik and Malcolm Chisholm also touched on the implications for the steel community. Thereafter, Ruth Davidson talked about the living tapestry. I do not know whether that tapestry was intended to include the mining villages or the steelworkers—Christine Grahame alluded to that. If there was a tapestry, it was ripped apart in many communities. I warmed to the speech that Alison McInnes gave. Thereafter we had Joan McAlpine, very much speaking for herself and no other man or woman. It was an excellent critique, in which she used the phrase “all shock and no therapy”, with which we can all readily identify. A number of members, including Gordon MacDonald and Jamie Hepburn, spoke about communities, which clearly are societies. Elaine Murray made another excellent speech, in which she said that Mrs Thatcher believed that assertion trumped evidence. Certainly, Mrs Thatcher’s strident style lent itself to that. John Lamont talked about pain, which was a very gracious acknowledgement. Mark McDonald picked up on that point when he talked about the analogy of “Animal Farm” and the role of the state as being the bedrock in many instances. The story of Baxter Dick’s buggy was important and salutary, because I would look for Baxter to be provided with a buggy by the state rather than by the generosity of others through social media. In the time that is left I will touch on a number of areas in which the legacy lives on, one of which is the banking industry, where unregulated greed has led us to the crisis we are in at the moment and obscene private profit has seen us all become bank owners. We did not use to, but we own two banks now—not that small businesses would be aware of that, because there is still a reluctance to lend to them. Recently, the UK Prime Minster referred to equality impact assessments as “nonsense” and he takes a similar approach to health and safety, which is another example of the legacy living on. In the area of health and safety, reduced inspections, investigations and prosecutions can only make our workers and our workplaces more vulnerable. There was a lot of discussion on housing and the sell-off of housing and Margo MacDonald’s point about the receipts, which others picked up on, is very relevant. With 11,000 folk on the waiting list in Highland, the overcrowding of properties, the absence of sufficient three-bedroom properties and a significant dearth of one-bedroom properties have all been compounded by the bedroom tax. I am sure that Mrs Thatcher would have been very proud of the bedroom tax. I for one am delighted that that is being addressed by an increase in social housing. Ruth Davidson talked about nationalisation. We have fuel poverty in the energy-rich country of Scotland and a 10-year inquiry into SSE, which has refused to accept blame for ripping off customers despite the fact that it was fined £10.5 million that has gone straight to the Treasury. That is an insignificant sum given the £1.3 billion profit that it has made. That was a racket that was revealed by the regulator, the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets. If we look at transport, the east coast service was being run very well by the state after two failed attempts by the private sector. After three years and £600 million in premiums and profits, the plan is to return it to the private sector that failed on two occasions. I should say that that was without any reference to Scotland’s Minister for Transport and Veterans. The greatest legacy of Mrs Thatcher’s era is probably in welfare. Most of us believe that there is a requirement to assess need and then put in place mechanisms to meet that need. Those mechanisms—I welcome the discussions that we have had on universalism—include progressive taxation to meet those needs. That would clearly rule out the recent reduction in the top rate of income tax from 50p to 45p and it would also rule out cuts in corporation tax for multinationals. Policing is another area in which we have a very clear assurance from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in Scotland that there will be no privatisation. The police workforce terms and conditions have been protected. It is quite the reverse in England where we see a greater intrusion by the private sector into a very important public service, which is to be regretted. We also have Virgin healthcare in the health service south of the border, where there will be an absence of public scrutiny because we will be told that it is a commercial and confidential deal. Similarly, the fact that Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust was declared bankrupt this week shows that the legacy is very much alive. I turn to the question of attitudes and, unusually, find myself quoting Boris Johnson who said: “Thatcherism was not about exalting the rich and grinding the faces of the poor. It was the exact opposite.” My assertion is that successive London Governments have serviced Britain’s elites—the bankers, the public schools, the military and the arms dealers. There is an opportunity next year and, in the meantime, there is an opportunity for debate—as in Iceland—about a written constitution to enshrine and respect human rights, education and housing, and to ensure that our country is nuclear free and committed to no wars of aggression and that we have an elected head of state. We all have a choice: the continuing mindless pursuit of self and wealth or the chance to prioritise the common good—because there is such a thing as society.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to ensure that fares on public transport do not become so expensive that people are priced back into their cars. (S4O-01960)

State-run East Coast has been widely regarded as a success, with more than £600 million in premiums and profits paid into the United Kingdom Government coffers in the last three years. Does the minister agree that a state-run service can be a success? Will he make representations to the UK Government not to return East Coast to the profiteers of the City of London? Will he outline what plans he has to return Scotland’s rail network to successful public ownership?

I, too, congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing the matter to Parliament. It is important for everyone who is elected to represent the public to articulate the concerns in their communities. Genuine and heartfelt concerns are properly being addressed today. The motion asks whether lessons can be learned, and it is clear that they can be. I will not go over a lot of them; I will approach the issue from a slightly different and—given that Graeme Pearson is not here—perhaps unique position. I am a former police officer and former full-time official of the Scottish Police Federation, where my role was to defend people who were accused of misconduct and disciplinary offences. What have been alleged are serious offences, which would be outwith the remit that I described and which the courts would—rightly—deal with. I certainly do not condone any wrongdoing, not just on a personal basis but because to do so would undermine the fabric of the criminal justice system. There were 1,424 arrests, which is a significant number. Were they all superbly executed? That is highly unlikely. Neil Findlay asked in his questionnaire about fabricated, bogus or exaggerated charges, which are possible when emotions are high. I found targeting of strike leaders to be perhaps the most concerning aspect. When we hear of the pernicious influence of the UK security services—the people who decide who the goodies and the baddies are—and subsequent events such as blacklisting, there is every likelihood that targeting took place. I am keen to defend workers’ right to strike. I favour the reversal of some of the anti-union laws on matters such as secondary action and picket numbers and locations. We must try to look ahead. The situation in Scotland was different from that in South Yorkshire, but the situation in North Yorkshire was different from that in South Yorkshire. The Metropolitan Police’s negative influence was often a factor. However, there was United Kingdom co-ordination. People will say that that was about mutual aid and communications, but there was clearly politicisation of the police role, and that causes understandable concern to many people, including me. I have a number of queries about having a review of all cases. I certainly favour—and I have briefly discussed this with Neil—due process being exhausted. That has been outlined. The questionnaire that was issued covers appeals, but does not say how many complained to the police and what the response was. Having said that, I well understand that miners would have good cause to believe that there would be little value in complaining, with the state having been involved in the miners’ dispute to the extent that it was. What form would a review take? Would competent witnesses be compellable? The right to not self-incriminate would apply to not only police officers, but miners. The relationship with the criminal justice system cannot be bypassed. If someone has done wrong, we have courts, not reviews, to deal with that. There is also the right to defend accusations that have been levied against someone who is dead. That applies to officers and mineworkers. I am not reticent about challenging the authorities; indeed, I have been pursuing the issue of how one make an individual complaint against the Lord Advocate acting as an individual. Do I accept that there are issues to be addressed? Yes—if the process is exhausted. Do I think that a review of the whole event would help? Given what we have heard, it clearly would. Do I support an independent inquiry? Well, it depends on what that would mean. My personal preference is for clarification of events rather than recrimination. Events elsewhere, whether in the north of Ireland or South Africa, show the benefit of truth and reconciliation, but that approach might be very challenging in this instance, because it is clear that the concerns that have been voiced are not going away. For that reason, I have reviewed my position and support an independent inquiry.

For clarification, my conclusion was that, for all the reasons that I outlined, there should be an independent inquiry.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that, under rule 8.11 of standing orders, there can be only one speaker against a business motion. Undoubtedly, occasions will occur—this is one—when there will be more than one MSP who, for separate reasons, wish to speak against the business motion. In this instance, as business manager for the Independent and Green group, I wanted to speak not to oppose the subjects listed in the business motion, which we think are worthy of debate, but to oppose the parliamentary business that is scheduled for next Wednesday, when the Public and Commercial Services union is on strike and picketing this building. Presiding Officer, can you please advise me what opportunity exists for individual members who have not been chosen to speak against the business motion to put on record their reasons for opposing it?

I thank my colleague Jean Urquhart for securing this debate. I want to talk about the connection between people and the land, which is difficult to put down on paper the world over, whether we are talking about native Americans or aboriginal Australians. It is incumbent on legislators to shape policies that recognise that connection, whether with regard to the older people of north-west Sutherland not wishing to be institutionalised and coming up with models that will retain them in their own area, linked to the land, or with regard to crofting. Legislation on land reform has helped, but parliamentary draftspeople are not always capable of capturing the very essence of that relationship. As a native Highlander and former police officer, I give the poaching laws as an example. Highlanders have great difficulty recognising that someone who is resident in London for 50 weeks of the year, or a multinational from the Netherlands, can own wild fish or wild deer, so it is important to remember that things have to be relevant. The Highlands have a troubled history connected with land, and women have played a significant role in that history, for example Màiri Mhòr with her song “The Battle of the Braes”. The crofting legislation and land reform have helped, but as recent events in Harris have shown, we are not quite there yet. Attitudes of greed and ownership need to be resolved. Crofting has a distinguished past and it has to have a distinguished future. The motion talks about crofts being “a valuable source of high-health status animals for larger agricultural food producers”. For me, the link to the local butcher is more important than that. Our earlier debate on food policy covered a lot of issues that affect crofters. Some of the things that were mentioned included the modern globalised food supply chain, an unsustainable food culture, the domination of multinational corporations, and community-driven initiatives. I think that we all recognise that the community around crofters is the one that we want to see promoted. The motion also talks about the key role of crofters “through the production of store animals for the agricultural supply chain”. It is about quality and it is about staying local—it is vital for the planet that food production and consumption take place as close to each other as possible. The Scottish Government’s food policy recognises that. The Scottish Crofting Federation produced a report in 2008 that prompted some discussion about the indigenous people of the Highlands and Islands. It contains a lot of pleasing radical language. It says that sustainable local agricultural systems such as crofting must be supported ahead of unsustainable agri-industry, which the UK Government would export, along with the environmental consequences for places overseas. It goes on to say that crofts have a vital role to play and that there is a fear in some quarters that the very idea of crofting is the subject of official hostility. Other members have alluded to the fact that most crofters rely on common agricultural policy subsidies to earn a marginal income. In 2008, there was talk about the less favoured area support scheme, a policy that saw areas such as East Lothian and the Black Isle, with fine agricultural land, being treated the same as the rocky slopes of Harris, as the report mentions. Of course, the farmers in East Lothian and the Black Isle did not have second jobs—most crofters do. In Lochaber, I well remember neighbours who worked for the Forestry Commission having crofts and having time off to work on them. We have moved on in some areas. There has been talk of efforts to remove the bull hire scheme, but that scheme will be retained. I hope that community use can be made of Knocknagael, where land is being freed, and ideally there will be a combination with what is in the existing plan. Recent events on Raasay have led to a high level of interest in crofting. I ask people to act with good grace, in the terms that Dave Thomson outlined, in relation to those events. The situation was not ideal, but I think that the best has been made of it. There is a future for crofting.

The purpose of public services might be self-evident but, in case it is not, I note that their purpose is to serve the public, to discharge the statutory obligations of the local authority, and not to generate profit. Any reform should follow those principles. I have seen at first hand the development of shared services in the Highlands, where Highland Council and NHS Highland have been involved in the integration of adult health and social care services and children’s services. The benefits are clear. Willie Rennie mentioned delayed discharge, in which there has been a significant turnaround as a result of the development of shared services. Some simple measures can help with that. Co-location is one of them. Golspie police station is a fine example—just about every badge is on the front door, and why not? We do not need to replicate support services. What people want are the services. The cabinet secretary talked about the GIRFEC approach, which has certainly helped. More and more elements of the public sector are working together, although there is some way to go. We lose sight of the needs of citizens at our peril. An outcomes-based approach is a good way of addressing things. Seeking economies of scale must not mean disregard for public sector workers’ terms and conditions. It is important that we have a level playing field, whereby training, quality of work and sustainability are valued. Of course, best value does not mean the cheapest tender or the highest bid. I would be grateful if the minister could confirm that in his summing up, not least for the benefit of the crofters of Raasay. Many politicians in local government have welcomed job evaluation, equal pay and the living wage. Therefore, I consider it rank hypocrisy for the same politicians to outsource public sector work to people on the minimum wage and poor terms and conditions. We know that, when the profits in the care sector went, some care sector providers went, too. What did not go was the statutory obligation of local authorities, along with the NHS, to meet the assessed needs of the people concerned. Benchmarking has been touched on. There are complications with benchmarking when it comes to some of the work that is undertaken by the private sector, particularly in rural areas. There is a procurement bill coming. I hope that due regard will be paid to the work that is undertaken on behalf of the public, particularly in the context of things such as equality policies, health and safety policies, and apprenticeships, which others have mentioned. When it comes to the delivery of public services, I am unequivocal. I like them to be delivered first and foremost by public servants and secondly by the voluntary sector or social enterprises. They come well ahead of the private sector, because of their link to democratic accountability. We must learn from elsewhere—I am thinking, in particular, of the NHS in England. With the previous UK Government’s foundation hospitals and the big spread of privatisation that is taking place at the moment, issues are arising to do with democratic accountability and freedom of information. Access to health board minutes is limited as they are being described as commercially confidential. I suggest that we have a similar issue in Scotland with the arm’s-length organisations. I am sorry that the recent Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill did not go far enough. If ALEOs are about rates savings, where does the wider public sector financial perspective come in? How does that relate to the “benchmarking and performance measurement” that the motion refers to? There has not been much discussion of funding. A number of people feel that the council tax should be reviewed. I favour a local income tax; I do not favour the corporation tax approach. There needs to be continuing discussion between local government and the Scottish Government. The concordat has given us the framework for that to happen. I mention funding against the background of growing demands and demographic change, to which a number of members have referred. If we want the same level of service from a reducing pot, that suggests that the revenue will have to come from somewhere.

I think that they provide an opportunity for that. Today, I heard about the £10 million reducing reoffending fund. That offers an opportunity for the public sector to get things right—local authorities with housing, the UK Government with employment issues, and the health service with addiction issues. If I noted what Kevin Stewart said earlier correctly, the use of total resources and co-ordination are key to that. Not all communities are the same, even if they have similar needs. As I understand it, the evidence that the committee received from three councils in my area highlighted the significant impact that cuts to public service can have on rural communities. That does not mean that there are not innovative ways of addressing that. I ask that rurality and supersparsity constantly be taken account of. The Scottish Government and NHS Highland are doing important work with the community in West Ardnamurchan, looking at ways of delivering healthcare in remote and rural communities. Supersparsity is a challenging issue in the delivery of social care in north-west Sutherland, which cannot be done on the same per capita basis. I commend shared services and the involvement of trade unions and staff associations in discussing them, because it is important that we take people with us along the way. I think that the public value public service and public servants, and we should reflect that in all decisions that we take on public service reform.

It was good to hear the minister reaffirm the values that are proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I hope that the whole Parliament will reaffirm those values at the end of business today. The motion talks about an “inclusive Scotland”. I want to hear about the challenges in that regard. Neil Findlay talked about the right to work, in the context of blacklisted workers, which is clearly a challenge. Workers’ rights are also challenged in relation to safe workplaces, given cuts to health and safety and threats to the European working time directive. The biggest challenge comes from the austerity programme and cuts in public spending. Human rights bodies have asked the UK Government and devolved Administrations to “consider more effective processes for assessing the impact of legal, policy and practice steps on equality and human rights.” It was therefore less than helpful of David Cameron to refer to equality impact assessments as “nonsense”. Politics is about priorities and competing demands, but whatever our differences, hard-fought-for human rights cannot be a casualty. Our first national action plan for human rights will be Scotland’s plan, not the Scottish Government’s plan, and it is important that there is ownership in the chamber and beyond. The motion talks about embracing “the opportunities presented by Scotland’s engagement in the wider world to promote respect for the universal and indivisible rights of all of humanity.” I ask the Scottish Government to bear that in mind as it deals with regimes around the globe, not least China, Israel and the Maldives, where we have heard of late about shocking human rights abuses.

I agree with my colleague. For that reason, we must sustain rights and not allow their erosion. The plan will resonate, regardless of Scotland’s constitutional future. I am disappointed that Patrick Harvie’s amendment was not selected for debate, because it would have given us an opportunity to talk about a number of areas, not least what would be in a constitution in the context of important issues to do with civil rights. Members mentioned relevance, which is key. The action plan must be relevant to people. The Scottish Human Rights Commission said that Scotland has made “notable progress” but “can do better”. The Parliament must pass legislation that is ECHR compliant, and as we heard, legislation is shaped by the courts. Many members are concerned that human rights remains with the justice portfolio. That is not a criticism of the individuals who are involved. Rather, there is a view that the issue transcends all portfolios and should be part of every committee’s remit. I am delighted that the amendment that I lodged, which called for the inclusion of a reference to human rights in the oath that new police officers take, enjoyed support from members of parties across the Parliament. It is important that we seek practical applications of our approach to human rights. The Equal Opportunities Committee is conducting an inquiry into Gypsy Travellers, who seem to be the last group in Scotland whose rights are routinely disregarded by the public sector. We have heard shocking evidence and the issue needs to be addressed. There needs to be better promotion of human rights in the areas that matter to people—their homes, neighbourhoods, workplaces and schools. Above all, the action plan must be relevant. We have heard that such an approach to human rights has had success elsewhere. I wish the Scottish Human Rights Commission all the best with its work and ask for the fullest participation.

The proposed Scottish civil justice council enjoys a lot of support and it will have an important role to play in the procedural changes and the research that is carried out. I am grateful to the various organisations for their briefings, not least Friends of the Earth, which said that ensuring that the new council is established in accordance with the principles of accountability, openness and participation is a crucial step on the way to Aarhus convention compliance. It is fair to say that the Aarhus convention continues to exercise a number of bodies and individuals; I wrote to the Minister for Local Government and Planning about it following last week’s planning debate. If we accept that there are financial challenges—as, I think, members across the chamber do—we must demonstrate those principles, not least as the council will have a significant influence over the way in which environmental law develops in Scotland. On accountability, I share some of the concerns about the legislative patronage that the bill gives to the Lord President. In his defence, as other members have mentioned, it has been said that he is a decent chap who would not overstep the mark. I, too, have no cause to doubt that, but we must understand that the powers are given to the postholder and not just to the present incumbent. As Malcolm Chisholm said, there are no guarantees about what might happen in future. Just this week, concerns have been expressed about a significant public appointment by the new Scottish Police Authority. Therefore, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s assurance that there will be scrutiny of how things progress in that regard. I am particularly pleased that the Scottish Government took on board points about public appointments, that a fair, open and accessible appointment process has been adopted and that the Lord President will be required to publish a statement on how he will achieve that. Openness is terribly important. Malcolm Chisholm talked about assurances and, if he checks through the debates, he will find a lot of assurances. The Lord President gave the assurance that it was extremely unlikely that the Court of Session would object to rules that were drawn up. I note that the Lord President has a role in the Court of Session and the new council. The Justice Committee was also assured that the Lord President would reflect a wide range of interests when appointing council members. Many individuals have paid a lot of attention to those assurances. I supported one amendment from Jenny Marra, which was on the council’s composition. It is important that the council’s members represent a cross-section. I have used the term “lawyers club” and I feared the potential for a lawyers club to be created. It is important to involve users. We have heard that people would not be up to it and we have heard promises of change in the future. Many members will have heard such statements in another forum in relation to another debate. As for participation, no matter how the numbers are juggled, the Lord President should be in no doubt that people are very interested in his discretionary appointments. Most effective organisations value rather than fear participation. The best employers consult their employees and unions and value their participation; the best shops value their customers; and the best public bodies listen and engage. I hope that the Lord President will do that in relation to his appointments. Accountability, openness and participation are required. The civil legal system’s customers hope for active involvement. I hope for active involvement from consumer and environmental groups as a step towards bringing Aarhus convention compliance closer. I wish the council well in its important role of keeping the civil justice system under review, and I will support the bill.

All members across the chamber agree that planning is an important matter, but the question that we all need to pose to ourselves is this: whose interests are served by planning policy? In 2010, the “Scottish Planning Policy” document “consolidated a series of topic specific policy statements into a single, more concise statement” containing “Cross-cutting policies on sustainable economic growth, community engagement and sustainable development.” In my speech, I want to comment on two of the document’s policies: housing and rural development. Regarding the reference to “high quality sustainable places”, I pose this question: what is required to sustain such places? The minister repeatedly used the term “sustainable economic growth”, but to my mind that should not be about the blind pursuit of profit. With profit, as with all other things in life, enough is as good as a feast, but greed has led us to the situation in which we are seeing a reduction in vital public services. However, I ask the minister to take cognisance of the challenges that are posed by rurality and supersparsity, some of which have already been alluded to. On sustaining landscape and natural heritage, for that we need people, and people need homes. Whose interests are being served by the planning policies of councils and national parks if the only homes in large areas of the landscape are second homes? There needs to be linkage across the planning process, but that linkage must include continuing land reform, which I know is coming up. Many people in the Highlands have welcomed the broadband that is being provided along the rail network, but they contrast that with the difficulties that they still face in getting a broadband connection. I know that a lot of work on that is going on, but broadband improvements are a significant element that should link into planning processes. Another phrase that is used—both in the documentation and by members today—is place making, which has been emphasised. Well—the Highlands and Islands are full of places, so no making is required. It would emphasise the worth of those places if public policies—I absolutely accept the need for central planning—recognised the worth of rural communities. By way of example, 60 houses being built any distance from Holyrood would of course be welcomed, but they would not be significant statistically, but six houses being built in a village or township in the Highlands and Islands would emphasise place making and sustain the local community. They would help to retain the local school, the post office, the pub and the bus service, all of which are vital to sustaining communities and rural economies. I, too, am a former member of a planning committee and, like Mark Griffin, I have seen communities being galvanised both in support of and in opposition to major local developments. However, I suggest that some caution is required about the term “planning gain”, because I think that tax-avoiding multinational supermarkets that put bowls of fruit into the local primary school are perhaps not being as benevolent as they would want the local papers to believe.

Absolutely. I am not suggesting for one second that developers should not pay their way. However, many members have alluded to the role of developers in employing professional lobbyists and the like, so we need to exercise some caution on that. As regards housing, I welcome the recent additional moneys that have been allocated. Policies are about people and, given that there are 11,000 people on Highland Council’s waiting list alone, we must ask whether our planning and other policies serve them or—as is occasionally the case—the predatory developer who employs the public relations representatives to which I have just alluded. There are plans for a new town outside Inverness—“Greater Suburbia”—but I suggest that, rather than that, we need vibrant communities across the Highlands and Islands that are sustained by national planning policies on housing and employment. For instance, I welcome the recent announcement of the development of a fishing apprenticeship, which has the potential to have a significant effect in some areas. The retention of rural schools is another aspect that can be picked up, if our planning policies are right.

That example was a failure to do any forward thinking or to recognise that a school is at the heart of a community, and that if we are to retain genuine communities rather than just residential areas, we need to keep schools. There were certainly failures. I want to raise a number of matters, but I will not have time to cover them all. I am grateful to the organisations that have provided briefings for the debate. I would like to hear the minister’s comments on the Aarhus convention. We have heard about the public’s right to participate. I welcome the charrette system, because we need genuine public involvement. Mark Griffin’s comments about local development plans were absolutely right, as are the comments about involving young people. Local issues can have national implications. As one of the briefing papers suggests, bottom-up challenges to national developments can take place without unduly undermining the value of national planning. I also agree that local authorities should be required to publish pre-application discussions with developers, because that would bring welcome transparency. Resources are finite, and there are challenges across departments. I ask the minister to respond to the Scottish Wildlife Trust’s view that connections between nature reserves is a national initiative that might not be seen as such under the planning framework. The issue of hill tracks has been raised, and I have been in touch with the minister on that in recent days. I am not reassured by the suggestion about best practice—far from it. Our hillsides are scarred by people who are too indolent to get off their backsides, except to go and destroy wildlife. We need firm action; permitted development rights should not be allowed. The minister has a challenging post and that is an issue that he must address, so I ask him to consider it. My final message is that we should recognise the challenges of rurality for all services. Anything that the minister can do to acknowledge those challenges would be appreciated.

Willie Coffey used the word “materials”. Does he acknowledge that, across Scotland, there are schools that have 1970s extensions built on to Victorian blocks and where the Victorian building is in pristine condition while the 1970s one is falling down? That is because proper materials were not used.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits specialist domestic abuse courts bring to victims. (S4O-01644)

With more than 500 charges with a domestic abuse aggravation reported to the fiscal from Inverness alone and more than 1,000 from the Highland Council area, does the cabinet secretary agree that the Highlands victims would benefit from a specialist domestic abuse court? Could he encourage officials to examine the possibility of putting one in place?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to the member for giving way. Does she accept that there are supported employment places in Inverness where the same criteria would apply?

The Remploy debate is about attitudes and language. Patricia Ferguson spoke about cynicism. Cynicism has quite clearly peppered the entire process and has been very destructive. We heard from Mark McDonald about the UK Government being uninterested. That is extremely disappointing. On a more positive note—I am grateful to the organisations that provided briefings for the debate—the Community trade union talks about “the right political will” being the way forward. I am delighted that the minister accepts the inclusive Labour amendment, which provides an opportunity to involve a wide range of folk, not least the unions. That is the way forward. Ideology also plays its part: it is the UK Government’s aversion to quangos that sees Remploy under attack. We heard about the creation of Remploy at the end of the second world war. We also heard some very positive words: sheltered employment and rehabilitation are very positive things. There are the two strands of the factory network and the various figures for people who have been put under threat, which I will not repeat. Then we heard about employment services. The figures that I have show that, in the past year, employment services have assisted 20,000 people into mainstream employment. Those services will have to redouble their efforts if the closure programme is continued. I will pick up on Graeme Pearson’s points about CCTV and the key role that its operators play in policing operations. That is a very good example of a role. Front-line crime is fought not only by police officers; CCTV operators also have an important role. That is the case in Fort William, Inverness and Tain in my area. It is important to be aware of the attitude and language in the UK Government’s approach to health and safety at work. Clare Adamson talked about a tragedy, and we all share her sympathetic response. A University of Stirling report has talked about the erosion of the Health and Safety Executive’s role that has made it almost exclusively reactive, rather than proactive and reduced the number of investigations and, consequently, the number of prosecutions. That comes from a UK Government whose Prime Minister describes equality impact assessments as “nonsense”. That is important language and gives a clear indication of where the UK Government is coming from. One argument that could be made and perhaps has been—it is certainly implied in the Conservative amendment—is that the issue is not about premises; it is about people. That would be fine were it not for the attack on the welfare system, to which several speakers have referred, involving disability assessments and the approach of Atos Healthcare. As we have heard, the welfare reform is predicated on savings, not on assessed need. The word “contrast” has been used a few times. I, too, would like to contrast the approaches of the UK and Scottish Governments on the issue. This morning, the Equal Opportunities Committee heard from the minister, Fergus Ewing, about the positive approach that has been adopted. Again, the language is important. Like other members, I was pleased to hear that the minister has visited a number of factories. It is apparent that those were not visits to the boardroom, but that they involved positive engagement with people on the shop floor. We heard about particular worries that we would all understand to do with Christmas and so on. That is important, because the issue is about people. We can talk about statistics all day long, but everything is about people. I am also pleased about the engagement with potential customers, particularly in the oil and offshore sector. The Scottish Government’s concerns about the UK Government’s handling of the issue are understandable. There has been unnecessary secrecy. Patricia Ferguson talked about freedom of information requests. If we are to make progress, it is absolutely crucial that everyone is as open and transparent as possible. Information must be relevant and there must be sufficient information available to people to allow them to meet their obligations. I agree with five words in the Conservative amendment, which are “Partnership Action for Continuing Employment”. As we know, PACE was not allowed access to the employees. However, as we heard from the minister, early intervention and one-to-one counselling are vital if we are to address individual needs in local circumstances. A range of options can and should be considered. The models include employee buy-outs, social enterprises and co-operatives, but there are others. Staff feel uninformed. Someone told the minister that they do not understand how things happened. A £2,500 stipend from the Department for Work and Pensions will come as cold comfort, particularly at this time of year. The minister and others talked about good businesses and quality products, but said that the prospects are undermined by the approach that the UK Government has adopted. I am delighted that the priority is the continuation of businesses and that employees are central to that. Working with the trade unions, we can make progress. Like other members, I look forward to the minister’s statement later in the year.

I am grateful to the member for accepting my intervention. Will the member accept the point from me that there are individuals on the methadone programme who are holding down jobs and contributing greatly to society in the process?

For me, the motion is about people and their individual needs, which should be assessed and, wherever possible, met. If that is done regularly, the issues that have been alluded to, particularly by Duncan McNeil, should be picked up. The debate has been a useful one, although any fixation on methadone has been less than helpful. At the outset, the minister talked about some of its benefits, and I know of individuals who have gone through methadone programmes who are now leading positive lifestyles. I am pleased that the motion pays tribute to addiction workers, who have a very testing job. As we know from the briefing from the Scottish Drugs Forum, the long-lasting therapeutic relationship is key and many of the workers go above and beyond the call of duty in the way that they treat their clients. They not only get the client through the door but retain them there, which is very important. Harm reduction seems to be considered by some as a negative, but to me it is a positive thing. We have heard about the benefits of syringe exchanges, which are benefits not just for the individuals but for their families, friends and the wider community in preventing the spread of hepatitis C and HIV. I will pick up on a couple of issues that I do not think anyone else has picked up on. The first of those is the issuing of drug warnings. We had a series of tragic deaths in the Highlands. I understand that drug users have an extensive knowledge not just of market availability but of market strength. They also know the clear sequence in which substances must be taken to get them where they want to go and get them back down again. Drug deaths are, therefore, often complicated—the term “cocktail” is sometimes used. Sensationalism does not help, but drug warnings do. I am aware of the frustration at what was a logjam between the agencies in putting information out. Indeed, I have asked a parliamentary question on the subject. No one will be sued if they say that there may be difficult things out there. It is a bit like an avalanche warning: anyone will say that it is unsafe to go up a hill and no one will say that it is safe to go up in the winter, but there is no avalanche threat unless there is heavy snow. We need to address that issue. The second issue is the danger of legal highs. I raised the issue of legal highs with the police but they told me that they had no intelligence on the subject, so I gave them names, locations and car numbers. I encourage everyone else to do that, as legal highs are invariably linked to the issues of controlled drugs. Neil Findlay’s point about housing is key. We need to recognise the link between drug abuse and poverty and realise whom we are serving. There are wider implications of putting drug users into communities when they are ill equipped to deal with the situations that they are confronted with. Naloxone saves lives—that is the simple message. I welcome the roll-out and think that it should be extended to include the police service. Naloxone saves lives, and I hope that it can save more in the coming months.

Does the member agree that the message sent to workers from the cuts in health and safety and the recent report suggesting that there was little capacity for proactivity is not the sort of message that this Parliament should be sending?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what implications have arisen for the Scottish rail franchise as a result of the recent United Kingdom Government decision on the west coast main line. (S4O-01392)

Will the minister advise me what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the UK Government on the transfer of powers over rail, which could allow public sector models to form part of any review of the rail franchise in Scotland? Does he agree that publicly run railways would offer the public a better deal than the current fragmented and inefficient model?

Is the member aware that the Labour members on the Justice Committee agreed that in principle, and that it was included in the report yesterday?

Tha mi à Clunes, baile beag faisg air a’ Ghearasdan. Cha robh Gàidhlig aig mo pharantan. Chuala mi rud beag Gàidhlig bho na seann daoine anns an sgìre nuair a bha mi òg aig dannsaichean, cèilidhean agus air an tuathanas far an robh mi ag obair. Nuair a chaidh mi dhan àrd-sgoil, dh’ionnsaich mi Fraingis. Cha do thaghadh ach duine no dhà Gàidhlig mar chuspair. Carson? Airson a’ mhòr-chuid de dhaoine, cha robh Gàidhlig, na Gàidheil no cultar na Gàidhealtachd cudromach. B’ e seo an suidheachadh tro eachdraidh na h-Alba. Nam bheachd-sa, b’ e rud sgriosail sin. Is e rud cianail a tha ann agus feumaidh sinn uile ga cheartachadh. An-duigh, tha cuisean nas fheàrr. Tha daoine ag aithneachadh dè cho prìseil ’s a tha ar cànan ach tha tòrr againn fhathast ri dhèanamh. Tha an rathad fada. Is ann an Inbhir Nis anns an robh a’ chiad bun-sgoil Gàidhlig. Tha sin math. Tha Comhairle na Gàidhlteachd a’ togail bun-sgoiltean ùra ann an Gearastan is Port Rìgh. Tha seo fiòr mhath. Feumaidh sinn barrachd tidsearan trèanadh. Dh’ionnsaich an nighean agam Gàidhlig aig bun-sgoil ann an Inbhir Nis agus tha ise fileanta. Tha an dithis nighean aice a’ dol dhan Sgoil Ghàidhlig Ghlaschu agus tha iad comasach a bhith “cheeky” ann an dà chànan. Is urrain do chloinne air feadh Alba pàirt a ghabhail ann an foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Bidh fios againn gu bheil ar cànan laidir is beò, ge-tà, nuair a tha a h-uile duine a’ bruidhinn Gàidhlig, chan ann dìreach anns na sgoiltean ach air feadh na coimhearsneachdan. Is toil leam am plana—airson rudan a leasachadh, tha feum againn air plana. Tha planaichean cudromach, ach, airson rudan atharrachadh, chan eil planaichean gu leòr. Gach latha, bu chòir dhuinn oidhirp mhòr a dhèanamh Gàidhlig a bhruidhinn agus a bhrosnachadh. Chan eil ach beagan Gàidhlig agam—as is apparent—ach tha mi smaoineachadh gum feum sinn Gàidhlig bruidhinn a h-uile latha. Feumaidh sinn sabaid airson Gàidhlig ann am Pàrlamaid na h-Alba. Tha mi toilichte a’ cur fàilte air a’ phlana nàiseanta 2012 gu 2017. Is e rud cudromach airson na Gàidhealtachd, agus Alba gu lèir, a tha ann. Following is the translation: I am from Clunes, a village near Fort William. My parents did not have Gaelic. I used to hear a little Gaelic when I was young from the old folks in the area at ceilidhs, parties and on the farm where I worked. When I went to high school, I learned French. Only a few people picked Gaelic as a subject. Why? For most people, Gaelic, Highlanders and Highland culture were not important. That has been the situation throughout Scotland’s history. In my opinion, that is a travesty. It is a terrible thing that we must all put right. Today, things are better. People recognise the value of our language but there is much still to do. The road is long. The first Gaelic primary school was in Inverness. That is good. Highland Council is building new primary schools in Fort William and Portree. That is really good, but we need to train more teachers. My daughter is a fluent Gaelic speaker. She learned at primary school in Inverness. Her daughters attend the Glasgow Gaelic school and are able to be cheeky bilingually. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: Children all over Scotland can receive their education in the medium of Gaelic. However, we will know our language is truly alive and kicking when everyone is speaking it not just in the schools but throughout the community. I like the plan—to develop we need a plan. Plans are important, but to change things plans are not enough: we need action. Every day we should make a huge effort to speak and promote Gaelic. I have only a little Gaelic—as is apparent—but I think that we must speak Gaelic every day. We must fight for Gaelic in the Scottish Parliament. I am pleased to welcome the plan. It is important for not only the Highlands, but Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that, regardless of who forms the Government centrally or the local authorities, there is a challenge to be faced in the fact that we have more than 400 Gaelic-speaking teachers who are trained, but we still have difficulty in recruiting people to posts?

On the requirement for corroboration, if only one police officer, rather than two, is required to turn up at court, surely there will be a saving.

Lord Carloway described the Cadder judgment as “a serious shock to the system”. Others, perhaps unfamiliar with the protections afforded by the Scottish legal system, may have been shocked at the absence of legal representation for people in custody at police stations. The Scottish Parliament responded to that and we moved on. Lord Carloway said: “The task facing the Review was to identify how criminal law and practice in Scotland ... should be re-cast to meet the challenges and expectations of modern ... legal thinking.” He said that the focus, in doing so, would be on applying “a human rights approach”. One or two of the key recommendations cover that, including the recommendation that legal advice should be a right for anyone who is taken into custody; that the period of arrest before charge should be limited to 12 hours; that there should be protection for child suspects and vulnerable adults; and that there must be no adverse inferences from someone choosing to exercise their right to silence. The report proposes fundamental changes, and as always a balance must be struck with regard to whose interests are being served and which criteria are involved. Police investigations are key in criminal matters, and the clarification of the distinction between detention and arrest on suspicion is helpful. I support the robust application of a rights-based system, with regard not only to Lord Carloway’s recommendations but to the forthcoming legislation that a number of members have mentioned. I will concentrate on a couple of rights—article 5, which is the right to liberty, and article 6, which is the right to a fair trial—from the perspective of Scottish Women’s Aid, which is an important and informed user of the criminal justice system. The emphasis is on a presumption in favour of liberty. That may seem self-evident in any system, but it requires to be mentioned and regarded, and I will refer to it later. Indeed, one or two members—such as Margaret Mitchell—have already mentioned it in relation to concerns about the release of the accused. A letter of rights will be provided to every suspect, who will be able to choose their solicitor or waive their right to a solicitor, and appropriate protections will be put in place for children and vulnerable adults, which is important. As members have mentioned, training will be required not just for police officers but for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and solicitors. That will bring about some consistency and comprehension of each participant’s role in the proceedings. It is important that if a suspect is charged, they should be brought to court within 36 hours of arrest. The implications for our courts have been mentioned, but I certainly do not see any problem with the courts responding by holding weekend, public holiday or—dare I say it—evening sittings. The additional clarification around the idea of a suspect being liberated to allow time for further investigation by the police before further questioning is very important, not least in relation to issues concerning the forensic examination of computers and accounting systems.

There are resource implications, but there is also the potential for greater use of technical equipment. We do not want to increase the number of people going to court; we want to deter criminals, detect crime and divert people away from prosecution. Most members have touched on the question of corroboration. The Carloway report states that evidence should be assessed “free of the current restrictive rules and principles, such as the general requirement for corroboration”. That is a simple phrase, but it has significant implications. Continuity of evidence, which saw two people involved in picking up productions, is nonsense, and it is not what most people are concerned about.

Yes.

They may have to agree that the production has been jointly collected, so the implication exists right from the word go.

Yes, there are minutes, so I am sure that agreement could be reached, and it is clear that they have their place. Scottish Women’s Aid is keen to explore the implications of the proposals for victims of domestic abuse. We know the figures, but I will put them on the record again. There are almost 52,000 incidents of domestic abuse, of which 10,000 end up in court, and only half of the cases that are reported to the procurator fiscal reach court. The situation with regard to rape and sexual assault is worse. Recent Scottish Government statistics show that the number of reported rapes is rising and the number of prosecutions is falling. It is clearly important that we do something in that regard. Law and practice are evolving, and Scottish Women’s Aid mentions two important developments that have helped along the way: the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 and Lord McCluskey's 1982 decision, which opened the door for a man to be prosecuted for raping his wife. Those are examples of how the law evolves and of how the removal of corroboration could be seen in a positive light. On the right to liberty, in reality there is an understandable concern on the part of women that the alleged perpetrator of a crime is free to interfere with the house or the evidence or to get an alibi. That is why it is important to realise that each case is about individuals—the individual victim; the individual accused—and that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to them all.

The arguments have been about quality versus quantity. Just because there are two witnesses, that does not mean that they are necessarily reliable witnesses or that they will be treated as such by the court, whereas there could be a very credible individual witness. We strive to maximise the evidence that is presented to the court at all times—in terms of not simply eye witnesses but all the evidence. Nothing that is part of this is a dilution of the investigation, the aim of which is to acquire the maximum evidence to present to the court.

Yes, I recall that point well from 36 years ago, when I learned it by rote. I accept that point. The Scottish Government is keen that all these pieces of legislation are delivered in a coherent way. The making justice work programme is important. I encourage everyone to participate in the consultation in the short time that is left and to give us their views—it is important.

Scottish Women's Aid commended the great strides forward in the police treatment of domestic violence cases, and that extends to the application of that rule. Does the member accept that?

The member might not be familiar with the Moorov doctrine, which is a system whereby a series of unrelated incidents corroborate themselves. Although those particular acts might not have been corroborated, there might have been justification for the arrests on each of those occasions.

7. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the recent 10-day enforcement period on the A9 Inverness-Perth road where 687 motorists were charged with speeding offences, whether it plans to repeat the exercise. (S4O-01292)

In light of the level of fatal road collisions on the A9, is the Scottish Government considering installing average speed detection cameras?

Does the member share my concerns about the disregard for health and safety regulations that the UK Government has promoted? Does he agree that that is a further encumbrance to young people and, indeed, workers of all ages in the workplace?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what the benefits are of the naloxone programme. (S4O-01219)

I understand that naloxone is available in nasal spray form. Will the Scottish Government take the opportunity of that development to ensure that all relevant agencies are actively participating in the programme and that all front-line services, such as the police, are trained and equipped to use naloxone?

4. To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Government has made to BBC Scotland following the announcement that there will be job losses at BBC Highlands and Islands and a reduction to its Gaelic news service. (S4F-00816)

The First Minister will be aware that BBC Alba has been very successful in pulling in viewing figures of more than 0.5 million despite the number of Gaelic speakers being fewer than 100,000. Does he agree that that is clear evidence that the people of Scotland are seeking out programming that is made in Scotland and want more productions to be made and shown here, and that independent public service broadcasting would help to deliver that?

Does Nigel Don share my view about the implications of welfare reform and the bedroom tax—which will mean that foster children, children with a disability without an overnight carer and, indeed, children who are the subject of regular access arrangements will not be permitted an additional bedroom—given that a considerable number of the properties that we are talking about will be one-bedroom properties?

There is an element of duplication in my question. What discussions has the minister had with trade unions on the transfer of staff and the protection of NorthLink Ferries workers’ pensions?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what is being done to increase the supply of social rented housing. (S4O-01208)

Given that the Highlands is leading the way with health and social care integration, and in the light of the Christie commission’s proposals promoting collaborative working across public bodies, will the Scottish Government encourage public authorities to convert, wherever practicable, vacated office space into dwelling houses?

I fully support the need for robust parliamentary scrutiny of the police and fire and rescue services, but the policing commission that Graeme Pearson proposes would do nothing that the Parliament cannot already do. My amendment 67 seeks to make it clear that the Parliament has an important role to carry out in scrutinising the new services as they are established and as they bed down, but it does not prescribe how that should be achieved. I have been an MSP and a member of the Justice Committee for over 12 months, and the committee has provided valuable scrutiny of this bill and other legislation that has passed through the Parliament. That is an excellent example of what a committee, working effectively, can do. I support the establishment of a single police service and a single fire and rescue service for Scotland, but I recognise that it represents a significant change, not least in governance. The bill already provides new opportunities for scrutiny. My amendment simply seeks to provide a further safeguard to ensure that the Parliament takes up those opportunities. I appreciate the motivation behind Graeme Pearson’s amendments, and I understand the deeply felt views that he has on the issue, but I do not consider that it is necessary to put in place new structures to achieve scrutiny. We should build on the existing committee structure. Policing and the fire and rescue service are key public services, and the Parliament would be failing if it did not find time to scrutinise the transition to and operation of the new services. I consider that there is merit in the idea of setting up a new committee that is dedicated to that role, but that is a matter for the Parliament to decide.

The amendment deals with the requirement to consult the Scottish Police Federation. As the bill is drafted, Scottish ministers are required to consult all three central committees of the Scottish Police Federation before making regulations. However, the federation has raised concerns that consultation of its constituent parts might result in separate responses from each, without a clear view being provided. The amendments in the group respond to the federation’s concern. Prior to making regulations under sections 11 or 49 of the bill, the amendments will require—

I am. I apologise.

I thank you and apologise again, Presiding Officer. This is a hugely important issue so it is worth mentioning it two—if not three—times. The bill requires that the Scottish ministers consult the three central committees of the Scottish Police Federation, which would require a level of consultation that could bring about a situation in which the constituent parts provide separate responses with no clear view being offered. Amendment 1 responds to concerns that were raised by the federation about that and will ensure that Scottish ministers are required to consult the three central committees of the federation sitting together as one joint central committee. Consultation of the federation as a whole through the joint central committee will ensure that there is a single shared view from its members before any regulations are made. I move amendment 1.

Collaborative working is the future of public services and this reform will not only ensure that, but protect and improve local services, despite financial cuts. We have heard members talk about stopping duplication eight times over; in fact, it can be nine times over if we include the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and the Scottish Police College. This is not about cutting the front line; indeed, according to figures announced last week, the total number of police officers has gone up by 1,202 since 2007 to a record 17,436. There is no doubt that the visible police presence created by those numbers has brought about the lowest crime rate for 37 years.

Operational matters are for the chief constable, but I agree that the mix of specialisms that support staff provide is greatly appreciated. As I was saying, those police officers have brought the crime rate to a 37-year low and the fact that there are 9,000 fewer victims is hugely important. In the brief time that I have, I want to touch on other positive aspects of this reform: equal access to specialist support and national capacity. At the moment, we have a system of mutual aid, by which those who feel that they cannot deal with an issue within their boundary can call in assistance from elsewhere. For historical, personal and other reasons, there has been a reluctance for the system to be used, often because it is seen as a sign of escalation. As a result of this reform, there will be greater national capacity; a helicopter, for example, will belong not to one force but to everyone. In evidence to the Justice Committee, Assistant Chief Constable Finlay addressed concerns about the seniority of the local commander and what that would mean with regard to access by referring to the system of tactical tasking, which is well understood in the police service. A number of people have pooh-poohed the suggestion of giving more elected members a formal say. An example I have given, and unashamedly give again, is that of Orkney. Currently, two delegates go to Aberdeen every six weeks. In future, the entire council will be involved in liaison with the local police commander and the local senior fire officer, who they will scrutinise against a plan. There is an important role for better integration with community planning partnerships, an economy of effort and, indeed, a shared direction. That will strengthen the links between both those services and local communities. An issue raised with me at one forum was the situation in which, historically, a chief constable had attended a meeting, whereas henceforth it may well be a chief superintendent. Of course, throughout Scotland a chief superintendent generally attends such meetings. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said, there is a key role for the superintendent rank. I note something that may not be readily understood by everyone: the comment about the role of the ASPS executive as the representative body, recognised as such by the Scottish Government, is a significant statement. I, too, convey thanks to Chief Superintendent David O’Connor for his constructive engagement throughout the process. I do not know who Tavish Scott was listening to, but the SPF is full square behind this.

I will perhaps give way later.

I would like to thank Calum Steele and John Duffy, along with the FBU. Both those individuals are aware of the contrast with England, in relation to 6,000 fewer officers, the Winsor review and the Con-Dem Government’s intention to reduce numbers by 20 per cent, offset by a better offer from Labour to reduce them by only 12 per cent. Mobility was touched upon, and we must have good practice on that to ensure that no officer is disadvantaged in that respect. Given the time, I will finish there.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made regarding the integration of health and social care in the Highlands. (S4O-01173)

Can the cabinet secretary advise me to what extent the Scottish Ambulance Service patient transport improvement plan 2012 had regard to the integration of health and social care in the Highlands?

As we have heard, women are being disproportionately affected by the recession, and that will be compounded by the policies of the Westminster Government, particularly with regard to welfare reform. The STUC is clearly concerned about the issue, especially as women’s unemployment has increased by 19 per cent in the past year, while male unemployment has declined. The general secretary of the STUC, Grahame Smith, said: “The STUC looks forward to working constructively with the Scottish Government on this key issue over the coming months.” I am delighted that it will be involved in the first women’s employment summit, which will be held later this year. The agenda certainly sounds interesting. We cannot rewrite history, undo the wrongs or change the assumptions that have been made—assumptions that are often forgotten in a time of war. The post-war treatment of women is a clear example of hypocrisy in our society. We know that women are more likely to have primary caring responsibilities, to work part time, to be in lower-paid jobs, to be in insecure and lower-status jobs, and to be lone parents. Those factors all impact greatly on what we are discussing. Many academic studies have covered the issues, and I am grateful to all the organisations that have provided briefings. I will quote from an informal briefing that was provided to me following a conversation at the weekend with a young mother of twins in Inverness. Following a meeting with two other young mothers—she will like me calling her young—she provided me with some information about their concerns. I will tell members about them by quoting their words. As background, I note that they both work for the national health service and both have a child under one. One of the mothers has returned to work and the other has not. Their concerns related to the following: “Flexible working including the option to work weekends. Lack of affordable and flexible childcare - only available 8 to 6, Monday to Friday. Requirement to pay a month up front before a child starts with childminder/nursery - can be hundreds of pounds. Employer attitudes to request to reduce hours on return from maternity leave - not always positive. Complicated benefits/tax credits system that offers no assistance to middle income families. Sheer number of firms offering childcare vouchers - one or two companies would simplify system both for parents and childcare providers. Need for employers where possible to offer flexible working to fathers not just mothers.” I am grateful to the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee for mentioning the committee’s round-table discussion, at which we heard a flavour of the problems that exist. The convener mentioned as an example short-notice changes of shift for women who have primary childcare responsibilities, who often care for other family members as well. The significance of that is shown by the fact that it was discussed at the STUC women’s conference, and we had some very good input on it at the round-table discussion. We also heard that there is a huge gulf between employers’ agreed policies and what happens in practice. I am grateful to the Equality and Human Rights Commission for highlighting the following, which is another issue: “Work-life balance and diversity initiatives, as well as the right to request flexible working, are likely to be given lower priority by employers during the current recession.” It is for that reason, and because of the well-documented concern that some people have about people’s ability to challenge malpractice, that we need strong trade unions and staff associations more than ever, not just to ensure that people are properly represented but to ensure that hard-fought-for workplace gains are not lost. There is much that can be done. It is significant that neither of the two young women whom I mentioned knew about some of the Scottish Government initiatives. It is important that we get information out there. There is a lot to be done, and I look forward to the rest of the debate.

Does the member accept that we also heard evidence of the support that is provided to victims by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, Victim Support Scotland and the like, and that it is not necessarily a requirement for victims to understand the minutiae of the legislation, as opposed to its intention?

First, I say that the provisions in part 1 are vital to addressing an anomaly and that they remain—despite all the criticism we have heard—unamended. Messrs Petch and Foye have a lot to answer for—not least their vile crimes. As we know, the background of their appeal was the time that those who have been given discretionary life sentences or orders of lifelong restriction must serve before becoming eligible for parole. Clearly, the anomaly was unforeseen. However, by way of reassuring the general public, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice made it clear that such individuals still had to satisfy the Parole Board for Scotland that they pose no risk to the public. The bill will reinstate the judicial discretion that was removed by the appeal court ruling and will reduce the risk of decisions being overturned on appeal. ECHR law has decreed that non-mandatory life sentences are different from other types of sentences and are imposed by courts after an assessment of risk to the public. The bill sets a framework for the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences. First, the court must assess the appropriate period of imprisonment had the prisoner not been sentenced to life imprisonment or been made the subject of an order of lifelong restriction. That period ignores any period of confinement that is necessary for protection of the public. The court must then assess the appropriate period for satisfying the requirements of retribution and deterrence. Under the bill, that part of the period of imprisonment—known as the punishment part—must be either half or some greater proportion of the period specified, up to the entire period of imprisonment. At that point, judicial discretion kicks in. A greater proportion than half can be specified only if the court considers it appropriate after considering the seriousness of the offence, or of the offence combined with other offences of which the prisoner has been convicted on the same indictment as that offence; after its considering whether the offence was committed when the prisoner was serving a period of imprisonment for another offence; and after its considering the prisoner’s previous convictions. Any legislation that closes a gap must be welcomed. There has been much discussion about the complexity of the bill; indeed, the Justice Committee debated whether or not it is ECHR compliant. However, it was very much assured by the Scottish Human Rights Commission’s response that the bill meets the specific terms of the convention. No one said that this was going to be easy. In its response to the committee, the Scottish Government made it very clear that it would consider any alternatives that were offered, but none was forthcoming. There is no simple ready reckoner. As I have pointed out, judges will have to consider a range of factors, but we suggest at our peril that our High Court judges have neither the wisdom nor the guile to make their way through the legislation. Proportionality is as important in our judicial system as it is in life and is certainly vital to our sentencing policy. The public rightly expect assurances that they will be protected. However, as I said to Ms Marra, I do not believe that victims need to understand the minutiae of sentencing law; after all, they receive support from the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and from the victim information and advice service. Moreover, a victims and witnesses bill is heading our way.

Jenny Marra highlights two different issues: the sentence itself and the release period. The public want to know the bottom line: the judge will give it to them. Indeed, we heard in evidence that the advocate who is prosecuting a case will liaise closely with the family and victims throughout the process. Assurances already exist. As for part 2, I could not disagree more with Margaret Mitchell; the provisions are not “redundant”. They were never about a specific case and, although they have been dressed around one case, they have further application. That said, it is perhaps understandable that the bulk of the attention on the bill has been focused on part 2. There is an obligation for justice to be seen to be done and, as we have heard, the Scottish Government views the provisions as a commitment to openness and transparency in relation to the al-Megrahi case. The Justice Committee certainly viewed that the publication of the Sunday Herald on 20 March largely superseded the legislation, but the legislation still applies. We heard comments about the Scotland Act 1998 and the reassurances that were given to the UK Government. I am certainly very happy for the bill to include terminology through which the UK Government is viewed as a foreign government and, if it is put on the same footing as foreign governments, I will be relaxed about that. Crime has to be fought across international borders and that requires co-operation, which is catered for by the bill. I will leave it at that.

My point was that no alternative was offered. If any alternatives had been forthcoming, they would have been considered.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the reform of the common agricultural policy. (S4O-01130)

What assurances can be given to the crofting community that reform will address the anomalous situation that has resulted in crofting land being classified in the same way as prime agricultural land elsewhere in Scotland is classified?

The aim of making justice work is laudable but will not be without its challenges. It is clearly important that every part and every level of the justice system works. We have heard a number of members say that victims need witnesses: there can be no justice without them. That seems self-evident, but it is worth repeating. I listened intently to what Lewis Macdonald said about the evolving nature of changes in this area of the criminal justice system. I see the consultation as part of that evolution in advancing the treatment of witnesses and victims, building on the discussions to which the cabinet secretary alluded. The police practices with which I am familiar from a previous career have evolved, too. I give the example of domestic abuse. In the mid-1970s, the options for dealing with an offender were their removal from the house by way of arrest if there was sufficient evidence—invariably, there was not—or encouraging them to go elsewhere. That was totally unsatisfactory. It is clear that the wellbeing of the victim, multi-agency efforts to ensure that there is no repetition and the awareness of the effects on the wider household, not least the children, are now seen as important. I noted with interest Mary Fee’s remarks about the difficulties that children face, and concur with many, but not all, of them. Even the community suffers as a result, so the question of who is a victim is important. We have seen improvements in the treatment of victims of sexual assault, rape and child abuse. A multi-agency approach, in line with the getting it right for every child programme, is perhaps a model that can be built on. The ministerial foreword to the consultation document states: “Being a witness is an important civic duty”. Is that civic duty being discharged? I have long held concerns about people being referred to Crimestoppers as the first port of call for the police service. It is clear that there is a place for anonymous calls, but we must empower communities to defend themselves. Previously, as a councillor, and now, as an MSP, I have forwarded on a number of occasions criminal intelligence that has been provided to me by constituents on a confidential basis, and I will continue to do so. It is very easy for me to say, “Give your name to the police,” but I do not knowingly live beside a drug-dealing neighbour who has visited violence on people who call at their house, often with the use of weapons. I appreciate that it is not easy for victims. The police are often the first port of call for both witnesses and victims, and the police service needs to have understanding. It is clear that there can be a conflict of interests. For instance, a householder who wants a drug-dealing neighbour to be dealt with will want them to be dealt with immediately, whereas the police—perhaps understandably on occasions—will want to find the optimum time to raid the premises so that they can have the best possible impact on drug dealing in the area. The initial response from the police is crucial to victims and witnesses. They do not need to know how busy the police are; they do not need a lecture on the law of corroboration; and they do not need to know how frustrating it is for police officers to deal with juveniles. Rather, they need to be listened to and responded to positively. Again, I pose the question: who are the victims? An individual criminal act in a household can produce many victims. As we know to our peril, if we do not get things right, entire neighbourhoods can be victims. We can place all the measures that we like into supporting victims through health, social care and the third sector, but the criminal justice system needs witnesses, and how we treat them is very important. Police officers in the houses of people who have come forward as witnesses must deal with those people sensitively. A flagging system for persistent witnesses should be utilised so that they are not continually asked the same questions when they phone. I know of constituents who no longer phone because they do not want to go through the rigmarole. Preventative spend is key to everything. We need to avoid creating victims. There is certainly a record number of police officers that is in some way contributing towards what is a 35-year crime low. The consultation paper says: “Victims and witnesses should feel confident in coming forward and that their personal safety will be protected”. It is clear that visible police patrols can play a part in that. Prevention work with young people and advice provided to schools are very important, as it is often forgotten that young people are disproportionately the victims of crime. Action can be taken on cyber-crime and bullying. I turn to some of the key proposals. On the victim surcharge, I recall the publicity around the introduction of compensation orders, and I therefore believe that it is important that, after an initial peak, we do not lose the meaningful contribution that such a move could make to the process. It is important that the surcharge is a credible alternative to criminal injuries compensation. It is significant that the criminal, rather than the public purse, pays that compensation. Special measures, which have been mentioned, are very important, particularly for victims of sexual and domestic abuse. We heard from Roderick Campbell how special measures can be a positive experience. It is important that we embrace technology, and I make a plea for rural areas not to be disadvantaged. We should harness the opportunities for videoconferencing: it should not in any way undermine the rights of the accused person, but we need to use it to best effect. If it proves to be an inconvenience, it should be an inconvenience to the accused rather than to the victim or the witnesses. In the longer term, issues such as court design must be taken on board. With regard to restitution orders, it is shocking that there were nearly 5,000 convictions for assaults on police officers between January 2010 and March 2012. That figure is for convictions: it is not the overall figure for prosecutions, nor does it include assaults that were never reported. An attack on a police officer in the course of their duty is an attack on the criminal justice system. Restitution orders, which would involve compensation being paid to a treatment and rehabilitation centre, would send a significant signal not only to the accused but to police officers. I welcome the consultation, and I hope for the fullest engagement.

Does the member accept that, in many cases, rescues are co-ordinated across force boundaries? For example, in the Cairngorms, Northern Constabulary and Grampian Police will be involved. Also, the member mentioned the RAF teams. There is a history of co-ordination across services and across forces.

I congratulate John Mason and thank him for lodging this significant motion. This is Scotland’s Sikh community’s Parliament and we must articulate and address the community’s concerns. I attended the rally outside the Parliament, which was colourful and vibrant. Animated speakers outlined fundamental principles regarding human rights and humanity, and I listened intently. Like other members, I have no doubt that pressure from the worldwide Sikh community has brought about the postponement of the death sentence for Bhai Balwant Singh Rajoana. I am grateful to Amnesty International for its briefing—I should declare my membership of the organisation. I join Amnesty in congratulating the Sikh community in Scotland on its campaign work on India and the death penalty. I am also grateful to Glasgow gurdwara for its briefing. It is evident that, in 1995, Bhai Balwant Singh Rajoana witnessed vile acts, which would shock any decent human. I was shocked by references to the systematic pattern of abuse against the Sikh community. Extrajudicial murders—the acts of the very people who are charged with protecting the community—undermine any society. As we have heard, Amnesty opposes the death penalty for two fundamental reasons, articles 3 and 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights—“the right to life” and the right not to be tortured or subjected to any “cruel, inhuman or degrading” punishment. Amnesty states: “The death penalty is the ultimate cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment. It is irrevocable and can be inflicted on the innocent. It has never been shown to deter crime more effectively than other punishments.” As John Mason also mentioned, the effect on the mental wellbeing of someone who has been sentenced to death is significant—the experience of that Japanese gentleman is surely beyond our comprehension. The briefings that we were given have some graphic detail and some alarming information about the execution process. I was taken by the following definition from Amnesty: “An execution, like physical forms of torture, involves a deliberate assault on a prisoner. The only difference is that the assault is continued until a person is killed.” That is a telling explanation. In India, a number of executions have been suspended by courts to allow for the consideration of separate legal challenges on the delay in deciding mercy petitions, and the constitutionality of a prolonged stay on death row—that is important. It is also important to understand the issue of revenge that Humza Yousaf mentioned. What is the purpose of punishment? Is it retribution? Is it to bring about reform? Certainly, as a child I was told that two wrongs do not make a right, which stands me in good stead in my views on other matters, too. The state of Georgia was referred to. We can talk in abstract terms about the death penalty, but linking it to an individual provides a graphic example. Many of us will recall the death last year of Troy Davis who, by any stretch of the imagination, was far from compellingly convicted—there were serious doubts about his guilt. That was one of the 676 executions that took place worldwide in 2011. According to the Amnesty International 2012 annual report on human rights, which was released last Friday, India’s growing influence in the world was marked by its election to the UN Security Council and the UN Human Rights Council. I did some research—I hope that I got this right and certainly do not wish to offend if I got it wrong—and I understand that the Sikh turban symbolises discipline, integrity, humility and spirituality. I hope that India will think again, display discipline, integrity, humility and spirituality, and dispense with the barbarity of the death sentence.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it keeps an inventory of historical artefacts from the Highlands and Islands that are held by museums outside of Scotland. (S4O-01051)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her reply, although I found it a bit disappointing. What consideration would the Scottish Government give to compiling such an inventory of national or Highlands and Islands artefacts?

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to Mr Macdonald for not being present for his opening speech. The motion refers to recognising “the key role played by civilian staff in Scotland’s police forces in helping to protect communities”. I have first-hand knowledge of that through my police service and I have a great number of friends who are support staff. No one takes issue with the statement in the motion, but the debate should not be about police officers versus support staff. There is not some bizarre numeric equation that can be worked out; the debate is about what constitutes an effective and efficient police force that will build on and enhance the 35-year low in crime.

I will come on to that point. Improvements will not come about through unnecessary duplication, which we must stop and prevent from recurring in the new structure. Chief Superintendent David O’Connor advised the Justice Committee that staff costs form 84 per cent of the police budget and, as was quoted by Mr McLetchie, Chief Superintendent O’Connor said: “the right people with the right skills must be doing the right jobs.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 972.] The motion talks about an independent audit. I argue that such an audit is already done by Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary, who is obliged to certify whether each constabulary and all other component parts of the police service are effective and efficient, which we know is the case. Graeme Pearson talked about a “political commitment”. The commitment to 17,234 officers is non-negotiable and is welcomed by the public. It has made a noticeable difference, not least in the visible police presence.

Indeed. The member is well aware that I have concerns about a greater sum of money that relates to an IT project. All resources should be directed to the front line. The public will not be reassured by the presence of several procurement departments. It could be argued that, if those departments were effective, they would procure a single procurement department. The debate is about not personalities or geography but what is effective and efficient, so there is no suggestion of taking “vital roles” out of the equation, as Alison McInnes said. I mentioned the Christie commission’s work in last week’s debate. There are functions that are undertaken centrally, which might—in small measure, I acknowledge—go some way towards explaining the reduced figures. For example, there is centralisation of recruitment and the ever-present training. The issue must be seen against the background of the Westminster cuts. Unison said in its e-mail that “Taking trained operational police officers off the streets to perform administrative or specialist tasks, at greater cost, makes no … sense.” What are those tasks? Who are those trained police officers who can go in at a higher rate of pay? It makes no sense at all—who would disagree with that? In any case, Kevin Smith told us that it does not happen.

Calum Steele, the secretary of the Scottish Police Federation, told us that the point of some roles is not immediately obvious to him. Another weak point in Labour’s argument is the reference to England, where the loss of police officers compared with support staff obviously tilts the equation—if we want to make bizarre numeric equations. The cabinet secretary has given an assurance that there will be no compulsory redundancy and that there will be transfer to the new service on the same terms and conditions—

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that the Unison representative who gave evidence acknowledged that rehabilitative and protective duties all explain the filling of some of those roles?

It seems that the trigger for exemption from VAT is local delivery, yet the UK security services are exempt. Is the member aware of that?

As the cabinet secretary has made clear, this reform process has been driven largely by Westminster cuts. Nevertheless, it is important that we constantly review our public services. Indeed, the Christie commission has played a vital role in that respect and the current approach to shared services will certainly be applied to the new services. As far as the Scottish police service is concerned, the status quo is not sustainable if we are to maintain front-line numbers. There has been wide consultation on the proposals and I want to thank everyone who has contributed to the debate in either written or oral form. I certainly think that, as a result of the bill, we will end up with something that is more democratic and accountable and allows more scrutiny. I am well aware of the concerns that have been expressed about support staff numbers. However, what have not changed are the statutory requirement for an efficient police service and the monitoring role of Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary. Mr McLetchie quoted Chief Constable Smith in his speech, but Chief Constable Smith also made it clear that there was no movement of police officers into back-room positions. Although I understand people’s concerns about the creation of a single service and the potential for political interference, I must reaffirm the cabinet secretary’s point that the bill clearly defines the roles and responsibilities of Scottish ministers, the police authority, the chief constable, the local council and the local fire officer and police commander in each local authority area. It also makes it clear that only the chief constable can direct police officers and only the Lord Advocate or the procurator fiscal can direct the chief constable in the investigation of crimes. Neither provision is a change to the present situation. We also have an opportunity to strengthen links with communities. In the Highlands and Islands, Orkney sends two delegates to Inverness once every six weeks. Under a regional model, it would send only one delegate perhaps to Aberdeen once every six weeks; however, under the proposed model, the entire council will have hands-on involvement with the local commander with regard to police and fire services.

Of course, the pathfinder pilots are still on-going—indeed, there is one in my area—but the fact is that the policing plan will play a key role. I imagine that there will be widespread consultation on that from community council and community beat-officer level up, with the aim of delivering a plan that is appropriate to each area. Moreover, the local authorities must be involved in setting priorities that are appropriate to them. I think that the snapshot that a number of members have mentioned is terribly important. We already have a commitment to maintain 17,234 officers, and we need a similar commitment to a baseline for front-line fire and rescue officers that will allow scrutiny to be carried out. I think that it is remiss of the committee’s report not to pick up on the fact that security in that respect partly comes down to something that is formally called regulation 19, which many police officers will be very familiar with. In my opinion, the bill alters that regulation unnecessarily, and I hope that that issue will be addressed. The committee spent a lot of time discussing resources and resource allocation models. I should point out that, in each of the forces, tensions already exist between the localities and the centre, and we need to understand how they will be dealt with in the allocation of resources. Assistant Chief Constable Finlay of the Police Service of Northern Ireland told us in evidence that, under its current tactical tasking model, it is the merit of the individual bid for additional resources, not the rank of the person who makes it or the locality from which it comes, that is important. We also heard about the sharing of specialist services, which is important, particularly in a large landward area such as the one that I represent. The appointment of the chief constable and chairs is important. We know that the boards’ primary function will be to oversee the new services and hold the chief officers to account. The composition of the boards will therefore be important. There should not be a bidding war, as happened at one time, to see whose area can be represented. We need people with the appropriate skills to do that work in very public bodies. We have heard about early appointments in autumn 2012. That is quite right. That is the response, but that is subject to the progress that is made and a role for the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland, which is important. Scrutiny has been touched on. Jenny Marra accurately reported what the report says. A sub-committee of the Justice Committee to fulfil that role is another option that we could actively consider, and I think that it will feature at some point. It is important that leadership is shown. I pay credit to the Scottish Police Federation, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents and the Fire Brigades Union, which have grasped what many would consider to be a very difficult issue and moved it forward. I could say many things, but I would like to touch on the Police Service of Northern Ireland and the advice that we received from Assistant Chief Constable Finlay and Sir Hugh Orde. The report mentions the human rights aspect. We have commended the model that applies in the PSNI. I would like to see human rights references included in the oath that Scottish police officers take, the training and, indeed, the entire ethos of the new service. Can you remind me whether I have six or seven minutes, please, Presiding Officer?

I will conclude at that. Thank you very much.

Chief Constable Smith said that that was not the case. Is he wrong?

I gave the example of Orkney, where the arrangements are made in Inverness rather than Kirkwall. Surely the member must concede that the proposals for having a local commander who is answerable to a local committee is an enhancement of local democracy.

I thank Dave Thompson for bringing the debate to Parliament. I was born and brought up in rural Inverness-shire, blissfully unaware of the Dewar report. The education authority was fixated on the Roman and Norman invasions, so the teaching concentrated on those issues. That was a lost opportunity, because Sir John Dewar would have been an excellent role model for us all, so I am grateful to Dave Thompson for highlighting the issue. Lloyd George is to be commended for setting up the Dewar committee. The terms of reference clearly indicate the humanity that underpinned the process. I am grateful to the British Medical Association for the briefing that it has provided, and which makes terrible reading in that it describes appalling squalid conditions, malnourished children and high infant mortality. Those aspects, and the fact that one in five deaths went uncertificated by a doctor, is what concerns me. Certification is not a cold administrative process—we value life by determining issues about death. It would not have been called a road show or focus groups, but the Dewar committee went on a tour and took evidence. It would have been fascinating to listen to that. We cannot change the geography of the Highlands and nor would we seek to do so; people have a right to live and prosper in challenging environments. The Highlands and Islands are full of vibrant communities. As the Dewar report indicated, the Government has a duty to provide and, as David Thomson eloquently said, parties across Parliament support the work of the NHS in Scotland. I am proud that the report introduced the first public healthcare system in the world and that it formed the basis of the start of the NHS in 1948. I wonder what Sir John Dewar would think of the service today. We had a temporary blip yesterday, with the air ambulances being out of service and cover being provided by the military and the coastguard. He would have felt that such provision goes a long way towards dealing with the transport problems to which David Thompson alluded. We still have poor housing and poverty, and rural deprivation is not always recognised. As has been said with reference to west Ardnamurchan, the delivery of healthcare remains challenging, and that is also the case in Wester Ross. Clearly, we cannot have a specialist in every town or township, so people’s expectations must be realistic. However, there are creative ways of meeting the challenges, and the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has addressed the issues in those locations. The equal top measures in Oxfam’s humankind index are “Affordable, decent and safe home” and “Physical and mental health”. Dave Thompson talked about free and accessible healthcare, which we should strive to ensure remains a foundation stone of Scottish society. Sir John Dewar served as the member of Parliament for Inverness from 1900 to 1917; what parliamentarian would not wish for the legacy that he left through the report that was produced.

I congratulate George Adam on the motion. It is not only timely, but relevant. He spoke about individuals; everything that we do in Parliament should be figured around individuals. I declare an interest as a director of the MS Therapy Centre in Inverness. My role is extremely minor and involves attending meetings and the odd event. The true spirit of what is done there is in the manager, Jackie McIntosh, and in the staff and the volunteers. MS is a pernicious disease and the symptoms differ from person to person. The one thing that unites them is the devastation that is caused by the diagnosis. In a previous career, I assisted someone who had work-related issues and I distinctly recall the mixed feelings that that individual had when they were finally given a definitive diagnosis. The report that we all received in our e-mail inboxes—“Fighting Back: Ordinary people battling the everyday effects of MS”—mentions the emotional impact, which struck me as being important. The report also touches on the mental wellbeing not only of the individual who is unfortunate enough to have the disease—I, too, would use the term “sufferer”—but of the family, friends and loved ones. It is devastating. I will touch on a few points. George Adam mentioned relapsing-remitting MS. The report talks about “a rollercoaster of emotions”, which that form of MS must be. I know individuals who feel that that is the case. As a councillor and an MSP, I have asked about research into MS and have received good and detailed responses from the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy on that and on the level of national health service support. We all hope that as much support as possible is given to people with the disease. It is a cruel fact that—as the report mentions—people with MS feel stigmatised as a result of having the disease. Unfortunately, that feeling is not exclusive to MS sufferers. It has a significant impact on people’s wellbeing. The report says that there is no evidence to support those feelings of stigmatisation, but that is not the point: the point is that people should not feel stigmatised. George Adam touched on the UK Government’s attack on welfare. I share the view that it is shocking. I have assisted a person in relation to childcare issues and recall the trauma that was associated with the assessment process. Again, that trauma not only affected the individual but had wider implications. He is to be commended for his motion, which lays out why MS sufferers will be among those who are hardest hit by the welfare reforms which, as we have heard, are money driven rather than being about assessed need. Scotland has the highest prevalence of MS in the world, but we need not be insular about that. The disease is very much an international issue and some of the research that has taken place worldwide is to be commended. The international community will deal with the condition. I congratulate the MS Society, its branches and the therapy centres throughout Scotland. In any fight, we need resilience and strength of mind, and in my experience that is to be found in abundance among MS sufferers and their supporters. The fightback will never stop until a cure is found. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in tonight’s debate.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, commend the commission for its report and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for setting it up in the first place. The commission was set up to provide a fresh and independent perspective and to bring forward solutions this session and, for the reasons that members have highlighted, it is very important that the Government takes time to reflect on the report. After all, there have been many such reports before and people now want action. I look forward to getting the Government’s detailed response before the summer recess. We should certainly congratulate the individuals who have made an input to the report. The man or woman on the street might well ask why there has been such a focus on women when, after all, we certainly need to address offending behaviour by both genders. I make no apology for repeating many of the statistics that we have already heard. For example, compared with men, women are more likely to be a lower risk to public safety, with only 2 per cent involved in serious crime. They are more likely to be in prison for dishonesty offences, by which I mean acquisitive crime as a result not only of addiction—if that were properly addressed, people might be prevented from coming into the justice system—but, dare I say it, of poverty. With the attack on the benefits system, that is likely to become more and more of a factor. Women are also more likely to be placed on remand. In fact, a quarter of the women in prison are on remand and only 30 per cent of them receive a custodial sentence. I therefore agree with Lewis Macdonald that there seems to be a lack of logic in that respect. There are also higher rates of mental health problems among women in prison. As we have heard, the inspectorate’s 2007 report said that 80 per cent of women in Cornton Vale had such problems. I think that it is important that this report refers to borderline personality disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder, and I might well come back to that issue later. As if prison were not traumatic enough for inmates and those charged with looking after them, it has been suggested that women in prison are around 10 times more likely to self-harm. That is an alarming statistic. We have also heard of the impact on families and children. Approximately 30 per cent of imprisoned parents will develop physical and mental problems and are more likely to end up in prison themselves. We in the Parliament have met many organisations that are doing sterling work in that respect. I am grateful to Equality and Human Rights Commission Scotland for its briefing paper on what it calls a case for a different approach. It says that “women demonstrate different predictors of reoffending than men ... women are more likely than men to lose their homes.” It also says that “Women offenders are more likely than men who offend to have dependent children ... and less likely to rely on a partner outside to look after their children while they are in custody”, which increases the potential for greater adverse impacts on children of women prisoners. So there is a range of gender issues inherent in what is being said today. Cornton Vale is not everyone’s favourite establishment and there has been much consideration of the recommendation to replace it. I visited Cornton Vale with Alison McInnes, and I have to tell members that I think that the establishment is suffering a bit from visitor fatigue, which is probably what gave rise to many of the reports. There is a continual focus on the facility, which may have affected the morale of the staff who work there. Prison officers and their civilian colleagues apply the highest possible standards and should be commended for their work. A lot of comment has been made about the 218 project and I am grateful that the Government has funded it to the tune of £8.5 million over five years. There is a very good reason for that investment. As Christina McKelvie said, there is evidence that, for every pound that is invested, the potential saving is £2.50 across healthcare, criminal justice and social care. However, this is not just about money. We are talking about the approach that we take. Reference has been made to the multidisciplinary teams—criminal justice, social workers, health professionals, addiction workers—and the tailored support that the 218 project can provide. The report also talks about service redesign and doing things in a different way. Perhaps the more radical suggestion is to have a national service. We have all heard about the fragmentation of the service and I fear that, in some cases, out of sight means out of mind. Some of the information that we were given at Cornton Vale about the on-going involvement of the 32 local authorities—or, in most cases, lack of on-going involvement—suggests that something needs to be done. I hope that consideration will be given to that. It is important to note that we are talking about reintegration into the community, and housing is a key part of that. That means an important role for the third sector. The report refers to the benefits system, which I think is pertinent. This is not a party-political issue and, clearly, integration will not be achieved if someone who leaves prison has their housing arrangements sorted but does not have their benefit sorted. Planning needs to go into that and I hope to see a positive role for the benefits agency. Mentoring, to which Christina McKelvie and others have alluded, is also key, not just to deal with reoffending but to ensure that court orders are adhered to. The report makes the interesting point that males and females breach court orders for differing reasons. Males generally breach court orders when they reoffend; with females, it is generally because of their chaotic lifestyle and the implications of distance, cost and childcare. There is a clear difference there and we cannot afford to do nothing about it. The report is a very positive start and I look forward to hearing the Government’s response.

Will the member accept an intervention?

An important function of local councillors is involvement with the local development plan. We have heard repeatedly about the identification of areas of land. I take it that the minister would encourage greater involvement by local authorities in the identification of land. To that end, could the Scottish Government assist by making any land that is within its control more readily available for the use of allotments?

Does the member accept that part 2 of the bill has a wider application than just Mr al-Megrahi’s case?

Does the member accept that the Government’s position remains that the manifesto commitment will be implemented once the terms of the McLeish commission are met?

I will concentrate on part 1 of the bill—the easy bit. We know that part 1 resulted from the much-talked-about Petch and Foye case. As we have heard, part 1 relates to the time that prisoners who are given a discretionary life sentence or an order for lifelong restriction must serve before becoming eligible for parole. We have heard from various sources that the bill is complex but not unintelligible. We need to bear in mind the practitioners who will use the act. The people who will impose discretionary life sentences and orders for lifelong restriction are perhaps better placed than I am to understand the complexities. We know that the subject is complex and that the appeal court did not reach agreement on the terms of the judgment in the Petch and Foye case, which was decided by a majority of five to two. Part 1 will introduce a clear framework for judges to calculate sentences and make the process easier to understand. Petch and Foye are two particularly unpleasant individuals. Petch was found guilty of two charges of rape and was given a discretionary life sentence. Foye pled guilty to a charge of rape and was given an order for lifelong restriction. Both appealed the punishment elements of the sentences. As we have heard on a number of occasions, the punishment part is the period that must be served before a prisoner is eligible for parole. In 2011, the appeal court ruled on the periods that Petch and Foye had to serve before being eligible for parole. We have heard the situation being described as “an anomaly”. I do not know whether it is a simple or a complex anomaly, but it has certainly required a complex solution. We heard from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that approximately 75 people have been given discretionary life sentences in the past six years. The important point to note is that such people could become eligible for parole earlier than prisoners who have been given determinate sentences for like crimes. That comparison is important. However, as the cabinet secretary confirmed, that has posed no risk to the public, because the requirement to satisfy the Parole Board for Scotland about safety has remained. Given that, people might say, “So what?” and ask whether the issue is important. It is extremely important. We have heard about the sort of crimes that draw a life sentence—they include murder and a few others. Courts must have the discretion to impose significant penalties. Non-mandatory life sentences and orders for lifelong restriction are given to the most dangerous offenders, who will be subject to varying degrees of monitoring and supervisory regimes for the remainder of their lives. A recipient is given a non-mandatory life sentence not as a more severe punishment for their crime or offence but because the judge believes that they are likely to pose a high risk to public safety in the future. Persons who do not pose a high risk would receive a fixed determinate sentence. Given that, the fact that someone who is deemed to pose a risk to the public and who has been sentenced accordingly can be eligible for release ahead of someone who has received a fixed sentence for a similar crime is clearly wrong. The committee heard no evidence to the contrary on that. We have heard that the Petch and Foye ruling removed judicial discretion. Part 1 will return that discretion and reduce the risk that decisions will be overturned on appeal. Perhaps predictably, Mr McLetchie brought up sentencing law. A rewrite is not required. The bill is a specific response to a specific problem. As we have heard, it draws on ECHR, domestic law and the framework of existing legislation. The committee supported the aims of part 1. I will try to outline a very simple version of the solution; it will not be as complex as the convener’s explanation. ECHR laws decree that non-mandatory life sentences are different from other types of sentences because, as we have heard, they are imposed by courts based on the assessed risk to public safety. The bill addresses the problem through providing a framework for the court to set the punishment part of non-mandatory life sentences. The court must first assess the period of imprisonment that it considers would have been appropriate for the offence had the prisoner not been sentenced to life imprisonment or been the subject of an order for lifelong restriction. That period of imprisonment must ignore any period of confinement that may be necessary for the protection of the public. The court must then assess the part of that period of imprisonment that would represent an appropriate period to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence—I do not think that we have heard those terms in the debate, but they are a component part of the sentencing regime in Scotland. The bill requires that that part of the period of imprisonment, which will be the punishment part, is to be either one half or a greater portion of that period specified, up to the entire period of imprisonment. That is where judicial discretion kicks in, because between 50 and 100 per cent can be levied, provided that certain criteria are satisfied. The criteria, which exist already, relate to the seriousness of the offence or the offence being combined with other offences of which the prisoner is convicted on the same indictment, the offence being committed when the prisoner was serving a period of imprisonment for another offence and, understandably, any previous convictions. The situation arises out of an anomaly—no one is to blame for it. Part 1 of the bill will remedy the problem and should enjoy full support. I do not think that victims needs to understand the minutiae of sentencing law. They receive support from the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and from the victim information and advice service. We can all look forward to the implications of the bill and, more important, to the victims and witnesses bill that will be introduced in the future.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in recruiting appropriately qualified teaching staff for Gaelic-medium education. (S4O-00856)

To what extent does the minister believe that the on-going recruitment difficulties facing Gaelic-medium education are discouraging parents from choosing bilingual education, particularly at secondary level?

This is a potentially interesting subject for someone who happens to be one of the many users of the tribunals service. I draw members’ attention to the ministerial foreword to the consultation document, which talks about the “shared commitment to ensuring that public services are of high quality”. I am sure that we can all go along with that. It goes on to talk about how “A modern legal framework commands public confidence”. Some of the previous speakers’ remarks show how that is important because one of the purposes of the tribunals—again, this is referred to in the ministerial foreword—is that they protect “people from unfair treatment by the state, by businesses or by other people.” Social justice should be at the heart of everything that we do, and those aims are very commendable. Judicial independence has been referred to. The minister talked about being fair, open and impartial, and I welcome the oversight of the Lord President, which will be important as we move forward. In improving the system, it is important to retain the benefits of the existing system and to protect the unique and specific elements that will transfer to the first tier. Given the caveat of right of appeal to the court or a judicial review, it is correct that the first tier will hear and make decisions on appeals. Reference has been made to the speed of appeals and, again, that is important so long as it does not come at the expense of justice. Distress is often felt by the appellant’s partner or family because of the inherent delays in the existing system. With the first tier, it is important to recognise that a confident organisation will reconsider its decisions and correct, amend or set them aside if that is appropriate. On a practical aspect, I am reassured that existing terms and conditions will be transferred, and that specific workloads will go with the tribunals. The tribunals package is set within the wider context of the making justice work programme, which was launched last year. We have heard from the minister about shared venues and administrative support leading to continuous improvement and savings, which can be redirected. Since 2010, the Scottish Tribunals Service has supported six tribunals—I do not think that I need to mention them all—and they are all vital to our communities, so they must be properly resourced. In 2011-12, £1 million has been saved and there is prospect of saving £5 million overall; some of those savings will transfer immediately to the tier 1 system. The system must be resilient; that is very important. The minister referred to the Scottish committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council—a snappy title—and its report, “Tribunal Reform in Scotland - A Vision for the Future”. I will focus on accessibility, which is one aspect of that report. With some tribunals, the impression from the outset was that they would be for the layperson. However, that is certainly not my experience of employment tribunals, where there is discomfort about parity of representation and lack of legal representation. Such issues invariably turn a tribunal into the reverse of a layperson’s forum: a legal forum. Accessibility relates not only to geography. There is an opportunity to use technological advances that do not disadvantage rural communities or people with mobility or language issues. That is referred to in the consultation document. The equality impact assessment will consider that. That is again in line with Lord Gill’s principles in the civil courts review. I make a specific plea for a role for Gaelic in the Lands Tribunal, if not in the other forums. I welcome the standardisation of the appointment of tribunal chairs and members. As we have heard, the approach in the past has been fragmented. Resilience is required to deal with the developments to which Mr McLetchie alluded—the absorption from other jurisdictions—and future creations of this Parliament or elsewhere. On the exchange between the minister and Mr McLetchie, the discussions that the minister mentioned, which are on-going, follow on from the merger of courts and tribunals in England and Wales in April last year. Although the tribunal arm of that new body can be effective in Scotland, the court arm cannot, so we await with interest the formal consultation on that from the Ministry of Justice this year. I am sure that, through the discussions that have been alluded to, we can agree on budget transfer and the timetable for implementation. Another of Lord Gill’s principles is the encouragement of early resolution. Certainly in my time, employment tribunals latterly operated on the basis that they would not deal with any case in which in-house procedure had not been exhausted. It is important that we have good employer-employee relations and robust grievance procedures and that mediation and management training take place. I mention mediation services and training because those are often the focus of cuts. However, if we are focusing on preventative spend, those are important elements that certainly should not be cut. It is welcome that there is to be judicial involvement in the upper-tier tribunal. It is important that the term “leadership” is used in relation to the Lord President, given the roles that the Lord President will be expected to undertake, which include training, welfare, guidance, appraisal and discipline of the tribunal judiciary, chairs and members—I hope that that task will not have to be done with any frequency. Importantly, the Lord President will also have a role in the allocation of cases. I commend a phrase from one of the documents with which we have been provided, which states that we need a system that will “be fair and accessible, cost effective and efficient and make proportionate use of resources.” I commend the motion.

The member mentions the stress that is associated with attendance at a tribunal. Does he agree that everything should be done to resolve issues through early intervention to prevent them from going to tribunals in the first place?

Will Rhoda Grant give way?

Given the member’s background and his knowledge of the effect of alcohol on society, are the views that he is expressing his or his party’s?

Does the member agree that, if we look at ourselves as others look at us, we will realise that they value the Gaelic language in the Highlands? Does he agree that that should be actively promoted?

Will the member give way?

Does Neil Findlay accept that devolution of control of the Crown estate to Scotland would be a significant step in that regard?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that there is an element of hypocrisy among Opposition members, who are calling for an inquiry when their colleagues down south have failed to disclose the UK Government’s position?

I, too, declare my membership of Amnesty International. I am the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on human rights. Last week, a meeting of the group, which was well attended by members from a variety of parties, dealt with the same issue that we are dealing with today. Such a consensual approach needs to be adopted both within this nation and further afield. At that meeting last week, we heard from Amnesty International Scotland, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, the Equality and Human Rights Commission and TARA. All made excellent contributions, many of which have been referred to today. We heard from Amnesty about its groundbreaking report in 2008, “Scotland’s Slaves”. The report highlighted the prevalence of human trafficking in Scotland, focusing on women and girls who are trafficked into the UK for sexual exploitation and domestic servitude. The children’s commissioner spoke about identifying the number of children involved. Without in any way seeking to minimise the importance of the matter, I would say that the figure given earlier does not tally with a figure that was sent to me in a briefing yesterday—80 children in the past 18 months, which is clearly 80 too many. The clear consensus is that quantifying the issue is proving to be very difficult. We also heard from TARA. It is unfortunate that Malcolm Chisholm is not still in the chamber, because TARA gave examples of the support that is given across the central belt and beyond, and the complexities involved in that. TARA also gave us a very harrowing report about the horrendous circumstances in which some people find themselves, the impact of their incarceration on people who are still in their country of origin, and the predatory individuals who deal with them. Migrant Help works closely with TARA—both organisations are funded by the Scottish Government—and last year helped 130 individuals. We have heard trafficking described as modern-day slavery. The Equality and Human Rights Commission describes it as “the underbelly of globalisation”. It is a global problem, and it is shameful that I can use the words “Russian mafia” and “Isle of Skye” in the same sentence. That is the reach of the problem, and a global effort from a variety of agencies will be required to tackle the many problems that create the environment in which trafficking flourishes. The situation is not helped by the withdrawal of the three specialist UKBA officers who were assigned to Stranraer. The connection between Scotland, the north of Ireland and the Republic of Ireland is well understood; trafficking flows in both directions, and was the subject of a prosecution. I was delighted to hear the cabinet secretary’s comments about his discussions. There is a contrast in respect of the additional £4 million that the Scottish Government has put into the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. There is important expertise within the agency, which can deal with international policing and drugs-related issues. Of course, organised crime is not always involved, but it is clear that serious crime, which comes under the SCDEA’s remit, is involved. The opportunity to stop money laundering and confiscate assets cannot be lost. The international dimension is very important. The Serious and Organised Crime Agency leads on that for the UK and runs the trafficking centre. It is important to co-operate across boundaries, not least the boundaries between the nations of these islands. Much has been made of the fact that there has been only a single prosecution, although the sentences were certainly salutary. The reality is that there have been related prosecutions for offences involving people living off immoral earnings or for identity card offences and fraud. The issues are not simple. As Roderick Campbell alluded to, many of them were picked up in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010. There are limitations on what can be done, given that certain matters are reserved. However, a statutory aggravation for trafficking would be an excellent way of dealing with the issue. It might be a swifter solution, as it could be appended to a variety of already serious crimes. I think that the judiciary would respond accordingly. I was reassured by an answer to a parliamentary question to the Lord Advocate, who said: “all human trafficking offences are ... considered by specialist prosecutors at a very early stage to ensure that a specialist and consistent approach is applied to maximise the quality of the investigation and outcome.”—[Official Report, 23 June 2011; c 1039.] There is so much to say on the subject and so little time. It is important that we find victims and that they are confident in coming forward. As the EHRC report says, it is vital to see trafficked people as victims of crime rather than as immigration offenders. I am grateful to all the organisations that have sent us information. I could not agree more with Christina McKelvie about the UKBA, which would do well to reflect on the statement that it is vital to see trafficked people as victims rather than as immigration offenders because, as the EHRC report says, it has a clear conflict of interest. There is a clear role for the referral mechanism, but I support Christina McKelvie’s position that that is not a role for the UKBA and is one that should be undertaken by local authorities.

There is a link between trafficking and poverty; trafficking also has an international dimension. I welcome the Scottish Government’s research, which will inform future care standards. The hidden victims of the terrible crime of trafficking must have justice, and adding a trafficking aggravation to crimes is one way to do that.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member brings into doubt the entire High Court circuit, as cases are frequently held outwith the immediate area in which the crime took place.

I congratulate Iain Gray on securing this evening’s debate. There has been a reduced settlement, which is not of the Scottish Government’s making, and it would seem peculiar if the Scottish Court Service was not subject to some of the implications of that. Forward planning is important. I hear what Iain Gray says about the sustaining of communities and the historic connections, and it is important that justice is administered as locally as possible. Mr Gray used the term “next door” a couple of times, and the word “local” has been used many times. Many of my constituents would be bemused by the phrase “next door”. For instance, due to the historic connections that a number of members have mentioned, someone in Durness in north-west Sutherland would travel to the sheriff court in Dornoch. Much of the 79-mile journey is on single-track roads and it will take two hours and 32 minutes. If they go to Wick, the journey will be 90 miles and it will take three hours, or 20 per cent longer. I have to say that they would be bemused by the suggestion of a bus journey.

Point taken. This is not a geography test although, having said that, I am about to give another example. John Lamont alluded to the significant deficiency of public transport in these areas, and Jenny Marra alluded to the separation of witnesses. That is important. It has always been challenging in relation to cases from Barra, where the witnesses and the accused will travel to Lochmaddy sheriff court on the same boat. We need some realism. This is an important debate, but it is not about altering structures, many of which have existed for a long time. Victims and Victim Support are right to highlight some of the concerns that they have expressed. However, they have highlighted to me long-standing concerns about, for example, court structures that see vulnerable witnesses—albeit that they are escorted, due to the support that is now in place—going upstairs to the court with a queue standing at the top of the stairs. Some of the buildings are simply not suitable. There are opportunities for shared facilities and for videoconferencing, which is much used in rural areas. The motion is about access to justice. The reality is that no one wants to go to court. Access to justice in its broadest sense has been brought about by the reduced likelihood of the requirement to go to court, as a result of the 35-year low in the crime rate. The use of fixed-penalty notices, which has been alluded to, has also reduced the likelihood of people going to court. A number of options relate to opening hours and the frequency of court sittings, which can relate to workloads and locations. Members have referred to the district court set-up. Mr Gray will know some of the implications of that in the Highlands. The court estate is old and is not fit for purpose. It was me who questioned the Lord President of the Court of Session. I gave the example of busloads of witnesses travelling from the Highlands and Islands to the central belt for lengthy sittings of the High Court as against a few carloads of advocates—I say that with all respect to my colleague Roderick Campbell—travelling north, which has implications for the carbon footprint. In a letter, the Lord President said: “I can confirm that the impact on carbon emissions for the court estate and for those attending court will be considered as part of the process in determining future court locations”. The choice might be between poor local facilities and travelling some distance to better facilities. It is a question of quality versus quantity. What is important is having an informed consultation process and Parliament’s approval for anything that is decided.

Does the member accept that the opportunity exists for more shared services, which are what the public sector should be about? Evidence need not be given from some building that was historically a court building.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what information it holds on how many lives have been saved by the use of naloxone in the last year. (S4O-00707)

I thank the minister for his reply. Has consideration been given to extending the range of people who are trained in the use of naloxone—in particular, police officers?

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether the proposed single Scottish police service will result in a reduction in the number of police superintendent posts. (S4O-00670)

Given the wide variation across Scotland’s eight forces in the ratio of police superintendents to operational officers, will the cabinet secretary cause Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary to ensure that all promotion processes for superintendent ranks cease with immediate effect, pending a review of the numbers that will be required for the single service to be efficient?

Given the member’s awareness of the 1980s, how does he respond to Alistair Darling saying that he would have made cuts that would have been deeper and more savage than that?

It is very important that public bodies and, indeed, politicians are held to account, so I am grateful to my colleague, Jamie McGrigor, for securing the debate. In many respects, this is a highly technical matter, but in other respects it is not. I have called on a number of briefing papers, one of which was sent to me by Scottish Environment LINK, which tells me that it has a “broad spectrum of environmental interests”— 30 in total— “with the common goal of contributing to a more environmentally sustainable society”. It says that it understands that SACs are “ecologically coherent” and that “decisions must be based solely on features ... of the Habitat Directive”. It is not in dispute that the reefs are important habitats for important species, with more than 400 having been identified during the survey. One of those species is a very iconic Scottish species: Homo sapiens—the native islander. It is clear that the islanders, who have been in touch in some numbers, have great frustrations about the process. I understand that strength of feeling. As a regional MSP, when I am in receipt of matters, I clarify them with the constituency MSP, so I record my thanks to Dr Alasdair Allan for his work behind the scenes. He made the case that designation is unnecessary; that view is shared by local people and the council. As is apparent to all, the European designation process is flawed, because it allows for scientific but not economic concerns to be discussed. I found the briefing papers to be fascinating, with some interesting phrases that I had not come across before, such as “displacement of fishing effort”. I doubt that displacement of the fishing effort will be matched by displacement of the fish following the fishing effort. We can give a cautious welcome to the advice that was provided to ministers that an SAC will be administered on a basis that minimised the impact on fisheries, but we need much more information on that. I join my colleague, Dr Allan, in seeking further assurances on the protection of scallop dredging and undertakings in relation to creel fishing. We have heard about the inconsistency between the damage to equipment and the reality for people fishing in the area. I welcome the removal of the area around the airport and identify myself with the comments of Rhoda Grant about the possible implications for renewables. How many of the 30 members of Scottish Environment LINK who are strong proponents of the proposal have spoken to the good folk of Barra or given any consideration to the main indigenous species during the process? History will record that we in the Highlands and Islands have a history of men coming in from outwith the area and telling us what is good for us, and sadly that organisation has fallen into that category too often in recent years. Indeed, it can be seen as frustrating the “environmentally sustainable society” that it purports to support. As I said, it is very important that we have confidence in our public bodies, and I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say about that.

Much has changed. There is more collaborative work between councils and the health service. Organisations dealing with harm reduction and with dependency and substance abuse are now present in prisons. That is certainly the case in Inverness.

In 2009-10, visiting committee visits in Aberdeen totalled 20, with two applications made. Does the member acknowledge that that does not suggest any growing demand among the clientele?

6. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to promote Scotch whisky overseas. (S4F-00423) [Interruption.]

I thank the First Minister for his response and welcome the success of Scotland’s thriving whisky industry. Does the First Minister not find it pathetic that certain news reports on Sunday claimed that Foreign Secretary William Hague was briefing against the use of whisky in embassies when Scotland becomes independent?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what investments it has planned for the Highland main line and the Inverness to Aberdeen railway. (S4O-00593)

I thank the minister for that reply, for the on-going consultation on the 2014 rail franchise and, most important, for the £50 million investment in the Caledonian sleeper service. Highland concerns about the sleeper service have now moved on to the Highland Chieftain service, which is run by East Coast. In effect, that means the United Kingdom Government, but it is yet to consult on something that is to change in 2013. Will the minister write to the UK Government to encourage it to act and end the uncertainty connected with the Highland Chieftain?

This has been an interesting debate. One of the most important things that we can do is be positive about our cities. We need some innovation in the economic climate that we face. I will speak unashamedly about the Highland capital—the city in the Highlands, which is a popular destination for many—and refer to a Highland Council document, “Inverness City Vision: thinking about the Inverness of the future”. It is significant that that document was the subject of widespread consultation in conjunction with the Highlands-wide local development plan. The contribution from organisations such as Architecture and Design Scotland was welcome. Significantly, there was a lot of public interest in the consultation. Some of that was reflected in Scotland’s housing expo, which took place in Inverness and was a great success. The first point of the Inverness city vision is that the economy should be at the heart of everything. That priority is shared with the Scottish Government—indeed, it is the bedrock of everything that we are trying to achieve—and we know that cities play a significant role in economic growth not only for the nation but for their surrounding regions. Collaboration is mentioned in the vision. It is important that not only the Scottish Government and local authorities but—in the Highlands—Highlands and Islands Enterprise collaborate. I look forward to a significant chunk of the additional £5 million that the cabinet secretary announced making its way north. We hope for positive involvement from the UK Government, but that will prove to be challenging, given the £1.3 billion that has been removed from the budget and the significant attack on capital expenditure. Collaboration between the cities through the alliance is also important. In line with that, I commend Jimmy Gray, the Labour provost of Inverness, for the important role that he plays in the alliance for Inverness and, indeed, the Highlands. Many other aspects of collaboration will help to bring our cities forward. I commend an initiative that is taking place under the cabinet secretary’s other portfolio with health and social care in the Highlands. That will improve the wellbeing of the Highlands and provide opportunities for asset management and the sharing of resources. For instance, if we get greater work across the public sector, it will result in the opportunity to free up resources such as Inverness castle. I also commend of the role of the Inverness BID Ltd. It is a member-led organisation of large and small businesses that are involved in a constructive dialogue about the future. We have heard about the enterprise areas. There is not time to go into all the benefit that will come to the city and the Highlands from that initiative. However, the cabinet secretary referred to life sciences, and Inverness is proud to have world experts in diabetes and world leaders in health research. Developing a niche in such matters provides cities with opportunities. I will mention one site that was included in the enterprise area announcement: Nigg. It is not only of Highland, Scottish and UK significance, but of western European significance. The investment in that site will bring rich rewards not only to the immediate Nigg area but to the city of Inverness and the wider region. It will provide the opportunity for growth in the city. There are 111,000 people in the travel-to-work area of Dingwall and Inverness, so that opportunity will be welcome. The investment will also be an opportunity to repatriate many of our workers who were involved in the initial oil boom of the 1970s and who now work overseas in, for example, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan. It would be really good to see those families return. The other matter that is mentioned in the Inverness city vision is strengthening the city centre. There are always negative comments about its city centre, but we need to be positive. One of the positive things that we can say is that, in the Highland Council area, nearly 8,000 businesses no longer pay rates. Whatever the challenges, that is something with which we have been able to help. It is important to recognise that, as is mentioned in the Labour amendment, we must build on the city centre regeneration that took place previously. Part of the regeneration in Inverness concerned the visual appearance, which is hugely important to an area that relies on tourism. I will race through a few other points. A better connected Inverness is what is sought. The infrastructure plan highlights firm commitments relating to the A9 and the A96. The plans are ambitious, but there is a solid commitment. I hope that Highland Council will meet its end of the commitment by completing the southern distributor road, with the eastern end being funded by the Scottish Government. The A96 corridor is an ambitious plan to develop to the east out towards Nairn. That is an area of excellent agricultural land so, although I support the plan in general, I hope that we keep some quality agricultural land, because we all need tatties. Improved rail times to the central belt, which require line upgrades, are important. I am a huge supporter of rail. The announcement of the £50 million investment in the Caledonian sleeper is very welcome. That helps with our carbon emissions and there have traditionally been difficulties with the flights to London getting slots anyway, so the sleeper will be a sound investment. I also welcome the commuter trains from Moray, Badenoch and Easter Ross. The city benefits from a £51 million investment in Inverness College, which forms part of the University of the Highlands and Islands college system. That will not only retain our young folk but will, I hope, encourage others to come in. Much more could be said about the culture of Inverness. We are very proud of Eden Court theatre, the city arts, Inverness Caledonian Thistle—which attracts people and has raised the city’s profile—and the Gaelic hub that we hope to develop. It is important to have families living in city centres; we need to have them living above the shops and in other currently empty spaces. There is a lot to be positive about and I hope that everyone will continue to be positive.

The bill has been informed by the Lord Advocate—the senior law officer in Scotland—and police officers. I do not think that they have powers on demand, as has been suggested. Nor have we had only three police officers asking for those powers: the representatives of every police officer—all three staff associations and the British Transport Police—commend the bill. The bill’s title is important. That might seem to be a self-evident statement. The bill seeks to tackle offensive behaviour at football and threatening communications. It is not about righting society’s wrongs. The bill seeks to deal specifically with events that are connected with football.

No, I do not accept that. The standard judgment that applies to police officers and prosecutors will still apply. I am always hearing people trying to decide how relevant the bill will be to them when they are attending football matches, so I have tried to envisage what the match-day experience might be for someone at a football match after the legislation is passed. Someone might well come from a community in which, in addition to on-going work on the pernicious issue of sectarianism, £9 million has been invested to deal with schools, community centres and the workplace. In many respects, there is not likely to be any noticeable difference on match day. However, travel to and from matches will be subject to the legislation, which is entirely in line with the criteria that were set out in the football banning orders that were put in place by the previous Labour-Lib Dem Administration. The joint action group, which has done commendable work across the different sectors that are involved in dealing with football, is bringing about more rigorous checks for alcohol on buses. Alcohol plays a significant part in disorder. It is unfortunate that James Kelly is not in the chamber, but there has been clarification on the issue of the casual bigot who intervenes but is not going to the football match. Such people will be caught by the legislation, which will be rigorously enforced by the British Transport Police, who strongly welcome it. In public houses, the licensee will be reminded of their obligations under the licensing legislation and the new legislation, which will make public houses more pleasant places for anyone to be a customer.

I do not have time. The public house will become a more pleasant place to walk past, and it will certainly be a more pleasant place in which to work. Public houses are workplaces. In grounds, there will not be a discernible difference to policing. The police will be there and a fan will know that the officers will have been trained and that they will be vigilant and able to deal with offensive behaviour. There has been some dubiety about the behaviour that the bill will cover. I will read out the following because it might well help: “Songs/lyrics which promote or celebrate violence against another person’s religion, culture or heritage Songs/lyrics which are hateful towards another person’s religion and religious leaders, race, ethnicity, colour, sexuality, heritage or culture” will not be tolerated. I can only see that as being a positive step towards enhancement of the football experience. The police will require to police these matters sensitively, not least because there are potentially significant public safety issues. Prosecutors and the police will require to deal with juveniles sensitively. We know that they have a wide range of powers and, for the most serious offences, there are custodial sentences. We have heard about the difficulties that are associated with breach of the peace, and the legislation will certainly fill that gap. A lot could be said about that, but I fear that the Presiding Officer is about to tell me to sit down.

The suggestion that representations about the issue have not been listened to is incorrect. Freedom of expression, reporting back and the issues that have been alluded to by Patrick Harvie’s amendments are all very important and it is important that we learn from our experiences. Christine Grahame was right when she said that the focus on offensive behaviour at football rather than on threatening communications has meant the loss of an important element, which is about the shocking posts on Facebook and Twitter. They will now be picked up by the legislation. That can only be a positive thing.

Will the minister comment on the efforts made in respect of mitigation schemes, particularly those involving the removal of pylons from the Cairngorms?

As we have heard, Scots law evolves and the report builds on past work and will form part of that evolution. I would like to pose the question: whose interests are served by the proposals in the report? I commend the chapter in the report on the historical background. I joined the police service in 1976 and, as my colleague Graeme Pearson will know, the situation for suspects of crime at that time was—shall we say it?—interesting. The report states that the Thomson committee recognised that “By 1980, the situation had ... become unsatisfactory ... suspects were continuing to be effectively held in custody without charge and described somewhat euphemistically as ‘helping the police with their enquiries’.” The report also states that the Thomson committee “stressed that Scots law on police questioning was ... grounded ... on a conception of fairness and the need for the courts to control police activity.” The introduction of the legislation that flowed from that committee caused consternation not only among police “customers”—as we might call them nowadays—but civil libertarians. It was seen as being open to abuse that someone could ordinarily be locked up for six hours. Ironically, those who were previously “encouraged” to assist the police with their inquiries found that the legislation brought clarity—indeed, documented clarity—about what was going on. I suggest that perhaps, in years hence, Lord Carloway’s proposals, or at least some of them, might be viewed in a similar light. In a liberal democracy, a person’s status as a witness, suspect or accused cannot be in doubt—that is a cornerstone of the system. The proposal to have a straight arrest, the abolition of section 14 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 and the introduction of an approach in which “the only general power to take a suspect into custody should be the power of arrest” can bring some welcome clarity. I support Lord Carloway’s recommendations on defining those statuses. Graeme Pearson quoted from the report’s comments on human rights, which is an important issue. Recent cases have caused some concern about the status that human rights have in the Scottish criminal justice system. They have a very high priority. Lest anyone is in any doubt of that, I will repeat what Lord Carloway said. His report states that we “must respect, promote and protect human rights in an effective manner.” It is good to see that in print, and it is also good to see the warning not to bury “human rights deep within legal architecture.” That overt declaration is welcome, because whether it is 12 minutes, 12 hours or 12 days, if we deprive someone of their liberty, there must be checks and balances. The clear and unequivocal statement that “a suspect should not be detained unless it is necessary and proportionate” and a similar statement in relation to their detention in custody provide further reassurance. As we heard from the cabinet secretary, there are checks and balances along the way, as there is a review by an inspector. The additional powers to be granted to the police on the liberation of a suspect must also be welcome. In our future scrutiny, we should also look at voluntary attendance at police stations. Hugh Henry touched on the subject of weekend courts in reference to article 5 and the requirement for a suspect to appear promptly. The report refers to the historical situation that anyone who was arrested prior to the conclusion of the court day would expect to appear in court that day, but warns that despite all the advances in transportation and communications, that is not happening. I welcome Lord Carloway’s comments about minimising detention of people in custody. Corroboration has been much discussed in the debate. I have had informal discussions with police representatives who are, some people may be surprised to hear, very content with the law of corroboration. However, I think that that very much reflects the fact that people are often comfortable with the status quo and are resistant to change. Certainly, if there were to be change, there would have to be significant training and a strategy to roll out such training to ensure public confidence. We should not underestimate the preventative aspect of the removal of corroboration. If that deterred even a handful of folk from doing something that they might otherwise do and so end up in court, that is to be welcomed. However, as with double jeopardy, we must ensure that the public have a clear understanding of the issue. Part of the police concern is that removal of corroboration would mean that the police would be more vulnerable to complaints against them. A key test for me is public confidence. It is important that the public have confidence in the integrity of our system and that they are aware of its limitations and the checks and balances that go with it. I asked Lord Carloway about the issue of public interest, which is clearly not a static thing—like our law, it evolves. We need to address the issue of unreported crime, to which James Kelly and others referred. We need to encourage people to come forward and report crime. As we have heard, further reassurance has been given on the human rights of children and vulnerable adults. There is also the issue of continuity of evidence. In that regard, the practice of two police officers having to go to pick up an item because of corroboration should certainly be dispensed with. Whose interests are being served by all this? Any system of justice must provide fairness both to the victim and to the accused. People should be reassured that there will be no alteration—Mr McLetchie alluded to this—in the degree of proof that will be required to secure a conviction that is beyond all reasonable doubt. That remains. There is much discussion to be had yet on the matter, but I for one have enjoyed the debate.

Will James Kelly reflect on Lord Carloway’s example of a victim of a serious sexual assault who goes next door and tells the neighbour—a credible witness—what happened, only to find that that evidence cannot be used as corroboration because the victim cannot corroborate their own evidence. Under the proposed system, they would be able to do so, which would benefit victims of such assaults.

What reassurances can the Scottish Government give to those who are concerned about the future of the Highland Chieftain and the Caledonian sleeper services following the publication of Transport Scotland’s “Rail 2014” consultation?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits to the Highland economy will arise as a result of the recent announcement regarding the Nigg service yard. (S4O-00346)

Does the Scottish Government consider that the current planning arrangements will allow the economic benefits of the Nigg development to be maximised?

Does Rhoda Grant accept that co-location of teams from different spheres of the care sector is a benefit in delivery of care? We have that in the Highland Council area and it happens in Orkney, too.

Will the member take an intervention?

6. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to tackle knife crime. (S4F-00226)

Does the Scottish Government welcome the publication this week of the Scottish crime and justice survey 2010-11? Is that seen as a further demonstration of the benefit of the 1,000 additional police officers who are working to protect our communities?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Christine Grahame for her balanced resumé of the Justice Committee’s report. There has been some mention—but not a great deal—of the background to the bill. I will list a few reasons. There has been threatening mail, parcel bombs, hateful online messages, and a football manager was attacked at a game, which was screened around the world—someone was attacked at their place of work. That is on top of the usual mayhem for residents and embarrassment to the overwhelming majority of decent football supporters. Our postal workers, police and prosecutors have to deal with that. The public expected the Government to act—as James Kelly said, there was a furore in the media—and it did act. Clearly, it acted too swiftly for some and the balanced approach that has been taken by the First Minister in extending the period of consideration of the bill was welcomed and played a great part in having the general principles of the bill adopted by 103 votes to five, which is something that seems to have been forgotten at later stages of the discussion. This is a very specific bill, which deals with—

I think that that is evident. James Kelly sat through the committee with me and he knows what has been going on, although he seems to have forgotten a lot of it. The bill deals with offensive behaviour at football matches; it does not seek to cure social problems. Those matters will be dealt with in other ways, and education will be the key. The bill also deals with threatening communications. We have heard a number of members talk about public support for action—not least about the 91 per cent who, as recently as 4 September, strongly backed action to tackle sectarianism. There has been detailed scrutiny of the bill. The minister appeared twice before the committee and answered comprehensive and detailed questions. Similarly, on the Lord Advocate’s guidance, I suppose that socially people often ask, “What if this happened?” and “What if that happened?” We should therefore be grateful for the draft guidance, which clarifies many of the issues.

That is for other people to decide in the communication strategy that will flow from the bill’s being passed—as I hope it will be. There will have to be a public education process. Guidance goes to the football clubs and, as Neil Findlay knows, the supporters are engaged with the football clubs. The Lord Advocate, as the senior law officer, is someone to whom we should be turning for advice: we should also turn to the practitioners. We heard from the Scottish Police Federation representing the front-line officers who represent 98 per cent of all Scottish police officers; the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, representing the people who largely make up the match commanders; and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, which provides the strategy. We also heard very compelling evidence from the British Transport Police, who relayed the effects of the travel chaos that is visited on the general travelling public by football supporters—of whom I am one. That compelling evidence removed any ambiguity about some of the effects of the legislation on travellers. There has been some dispute about issues outwith the immediate curtilage of the football grounds, but the references are similar to those that are contained in the football banning orders, with which there have been no issues. I ask those who are unwilling to support the bill whether they are opposed to doing something about this problem. We hear that they are not, but are they opposed to helping the people who are tasked with the work—namely, the police officers? We hope that they are not. Police officers do a very demanding job, which includes defending decent football fans, our communities and the travelling public. An awful lot could be said about the evolving nature of breach of the peace—the catch-all offence. The legislation is clear and the minister covered the additional aspects of it. We are not inventing anything through the reasonable person test. Police officers are called on day in and day out to exercise judgment about situations in which they find themselves.

Police deal with additional legislation all the time and are confident that they can deal with this bill. To sum up, I will refer to the three questions that I mentioned the last time we discussed the bill. Is it necessary? Clearly, it is. Is it legitimate? It most certainly is, and the human rights aspects were clearly laid out by the minister. Is it proportionate? I attend football matches and I have nothing to fear from the bill. There have already been welcome improvements in supporters’ behaviour. I hope that that will continue and that the provisions will not need to be used. The bill will bring added value. I hope that members will support it.

Does the member accept that public safety can be compromised by behaviour that is likely to provoke public disorder?

The debate is about Scots law, not about any other system. It is about respect for the unique features of Scots law. When the UK Supreme Court commenced operations on 1 October 2009, it took on the judicial functions of the House of Lords: appeals from England, Scotland and Wales, including human rights issues. With regard to Scotland, it was envisaged that the UK Supreme Court would hear civil appeals from the Court of Session. The intention was that the High Court of Justiciary remained the highest court of criminal appeal. One unintended consequence of the inauguration of the UK Supreme Court has been that Scottish criminal case defendants can appeal to the Supreme Court on human rights grounds. That was never imagined when the court was established. As we have heard many times, unlike English and Welsh defendants, Scottish defendants can appeal to the Supreme Court without leave to appeal from the High Court. That clearly puts Scots law on a different footing from legal systems elsewhere in the UK. I quote Paul McBride QC, who is a much-quoted man in this chamber. He states: “the truth of the matter is—you can get to the Supreme Court in Scotland by-passing our Scottish courts, you can’t do that in England. That’s unacceptable.” I agree that it is unacceptable and it is also unacceptable that the UK Supreme Court has overturned decisions of the High Court of Justiciary. The UK Supreme Court should not be ruling on remedy as an ordinary court of appeal. It should be fulfilling its function as a constitutional court: interpreting and defining convention rights and relaying those judgments back to the High Court to determine remedy. This is clearly a matter of devolution not functioning correctly. The original provision in the Scotland Act 1998 never intended matters of criminality to be considered under the locus of devolution issues. A matter of Scots identity is at stake. The UK Supreme Court interferes in Scots criminal law and that impacts on the distinctive nature of Scots law. The Scottish Government seeks a position in the Scotland Bill whereby the UK Supreme Court should not have any general jurisdiction in matters relating to criminal law. My colleague Rod Campbell quoted from the Scottish Law Commission’s submission to the Advocate General’s review of devolution issues. The submission goes on to state: “The European Court of Human Rights has recognised the ... inadvisability of attempting to introduce a ‘one size fits all’ approach to disparate systems of criminal justice.” That is something that the chamber should recognise. I hope that the chamber will stand up for Scotland’s distinctive legal system and prevent further interference. I, too, welcome the report published by Lord McCluskey and his colleagues. It was announced on 5 June that there would be a review of the law and practice that currently governs the respective jurisdictions of the High Court of Justiciary and the UK Supreme Court. It is important to note that Lord McCluskey and his colleagues considered the issues within the current constitutional settlement. We have heard from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that that is not necessarily how we will see things in the future. We have also heard that we wish the recommendations to be implemented. It is agreed that the Supreme Court should continue to have “an appellate jurisdiction in relation to issues of convention rights arising in Scottish criminal cases”. However, it is important that the extent of its role should be clearly defined and limited. The High Court of Justiciary should remain the final court of appeal in Scottish criminal cases. I strongly support the view that an appeal to the Supreme Court from the High Court should require the granting of a certificate that the case raises a point of law of general importance or concerns the victim of a violation of convention rights under the ECHR. The existing system whereby the UK Supreme Court is a court of appeal within the criminal justice system is constitutionally problematic and affects the historical independence of Scots law. The Supreme Court’s role clearly needs to be defined. As we have heard, the current Scotland Bill proposals are profoundly flawed and require significant recasting to maintain the High Court of Justiciary as the apex of the Scots legal system. There is no reason to make the position of the High Court different from the position of courts elsewhere in the UK. It is disappointing that issues have been raised about the Scottish Government’s commitment to human rights. The Government remains fully committed to human rights. My colleague Alison McInnes, along with other members and the Law Society of Scotland, has raised issues about the need for an audit of Scots criminal law to ensure compatibility with the ECHR and avoid costly compensation claims. We all support that. Indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has indicated that that will occur. As we have heard, in any case, that forms part of the scrutiny of any proposed legislation that passes through the Parliament. It is important to note that the Scottish Government is not inward looking—it is outward looking. As my colleagues have said, we have learned from abroad and will continue to do so. It is important that we play our part in international law. We, like all members, are supportive of human rights and social justice, but that does not mean that we will not defend our unique legal system and prevent further interference.

Does the member accept that the Lord Advocate has, indeed, written to the Scotland Bill Committee about this very subject in a letter dated 26 October?

I thank Rob Gibson for bringing this very important debate to the chamber. We know the havoc that was wreaked by the tragic events in Japan with the earthquake and tsunami and their effect on the nuclear plant there, which prompted several countries to review their position. Indeed, the European Union declared that plants should be examined under stress tests to ensure their safety. We have heard about the positions of the Swiss Government and the German Government. The significant thing about the German Government’s plans to abandon any use of nuclear power by 2022 was the political decision of the Christian Democratic Union and the position of Angela Merkel. It is important to note that Italy had a referendum in June on whether to continue with nuclear power plants. There was a turnout of 57 per cent, with an overwhelming 94 per cent rejecting plans for the continued use of nuclear power in Italy. All of Germany’s 17 nuclear plants were built by Siemens, which, as members will know, announced on 18 September that it would no longer be involved in nuclear plant projects. Indeed, its chief executive, Peter Löscher said that the move was an answer to “the clear positioning of German society and politics for a pull-out from nuclear energy.” He added: “The chapter for us is closed.” Shortly after that announcement, as Rob Gibson said, Scottish and Southern Energy announced that it was selling its 25 per cent stake in the nuclear conglomerate NuGeneration. Regrettably, however, it did not say that it would rule out a return to nuclear energy provision. Significantly—this refers to something in the motion—it also said that its “core investment in generation should be in renewable energy.” The position in Belgium and Austria follows that line. Regrettably, the UK Government’s position has always been one of strong support for nuclear energy, albeit that the industry relies on a heavy public subsidy, as David Torrance said. I turn to one of many magazines that arrived today: Insight into nuclear decommissioning from the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority. That organisation has a budget of £12 million and responsibility for “decommissioning and cleaning up ... civil nuclear facilities ... ensuring that all the waste products, both radioactive and non-radioactive, are safely managed” and “implementing Government policy on the long-term management of nuclear waste”. The situation at Dounreay in the north of Scotland is highlighted in the magazine, with the site engineer saying: “radiation levels are still very high” with “residual traces of liquid metal coolant”. Decommissioning started in 1983 and stalled for 30 years, but we are told that the reactor has been “declared ... a major environmental hazard”. Although £12 billion may go some way towards addressing that, it will not be sufficient. I agree that “the Scottish Government target of 100% electricity produced from renewable sources” is not only achievable but vital, as is reindustrialisation, particularly in the north of Scotland to replace the big part that Dounreay played in the economy there. It is important that the Scottish Government has invested in Scrabster harbour. There is potential connected to Nigg. Renewable energy should deliver something for the people of Caithness, Sutherland and Ross because of the contribution that they have made to getting us this far. Germany has taken a great decision for the planet.

I am heartened that there have clearly been many changes since I was educated in rural north Britain in the 1960s, a part of the world where people were belted for speaking in Gaelic. I was upbeat until I heard the phrase—I hope that I have noted it correctly— “at least one Scottish text” must be taught, and I thought, “Yup, aye.” Indeed, I thought, “Glè mhath.” What are we trying to achieve with Scottish studies? It must improve our children’s knowledge. I also suggest that it is like the opportunity to clarify, strengthen and consolidate in law reform. That is the route that we are on. No one denies that much work has been done already and that it needs to be built on. The curriculum for excellence talks about “connected learning experience”. The connection that I would like to be made concerns Scotland’s place in the world—how we connect with the world and, indeed, how we connect within the complex society that is Scotland. Who could take exception to “developing a sense of identity, confidence and wellbeing”? Like most nationalists, I am first and foremost an internationalist and I welcome the move to broaden knowledge. We must recognise the different traditions within Scotland. Rob Gibson, who is unfortunately not in the chamber, touched on the situation in Caithness, where there is a conflict between some people who wish to term themselves Norse and some who wish to term themselves Gaels. We need to recognise the local dimension that learning can have. We also have the Lowland Scots and the rich mix that later joined to make Scotland: people from elsewhere in these islands, such as the two traditions in Ireland; people from the Indian subcontinent; and, more recently, people from Europe. To my mind, they should all be part of Scottish studies. Scotland has always been a refuge for people fleeing from oppression and, notwithstanding what I consider to be the heavy-handed UK Border Agency, long may that continue to be the case. That is an area worth highlighting. At lunch time, along with other people, I was part of the celebration of Show Racism the Red Card, which is an excellent example of learning that has a very clear Scottish dimension. I am delighted that Arthur Cormack, a well-respected musician and Gaelic authority is on the Scottish studies working group. There is clearly an opportunity to influence what the public thinks should contribute to teaching. A number of members have mentioned Culloden. I would like to see some concentration on Culloden, although not the misty-eyed version that we have heard referred to but the version that highlights the individual greed of aspirant monarchs, the duplicity of clan chiefs and indeed the sacrifice of the indigenous population. Jean Urquhart touched on the aftermath of Culloden; the shameful role played in that by the church and the law as it was at the time needs to be looked at too. We know that those dispossessed people were part of a positive advancement across the world, but they were also complicit in some brutal treatment of native Americans, aboriginal peoples, Maoris and the like. I wonder whether there will be a place in Scottish studies for Màiri Mhòr and the battle of the braes in Skye. I hope that there will also be mention of the tanks in George Square, but will there be mention of the British ships that were sent to quell the natives of Skye? It is important that we move away from the tea-towel representation of our citizens, despite all their many achievements, and concentrate on the broader aspects, such as the relationship with the Baltic states and Russia, and the role of mercenaries, traders and academics. We also need to look behind those roles for the shared educational experiences that continue to this day through trading with the European Union and the peace that it has brought through our role then and now. The minister touched on linguistics. There is well-documented research to show the benefit of bilingualism. It is evident in the Highlands, where there has been a Gaelic renaissance. Perhaps the curriculum could pick up on aspects of that such as the revitalisation of entire communities, particularly in the south end of Skye—the employment opportunities that have been created there; the little-known fact that some of the courses are so popular that they are provided for German speakers only; the internet opportunities; and the fact that one of the most innovative parts of the globe is in the south of Skye. I was brought up in the Highlands amid all the hydro schemes that were the excellent pioneering work of Tom Johnston, the visionary Labour Secretary of State for Scotland at the end of the second world war, but that was never taught to me. It was thought to be more appropriate that I know about Tudor England and the Romans. It is important that we all throw our weight behind Scottish studies. I am certain that the concerns about it have been dispelled. I plead that we should not do a disservice to our educational or political structure. Let us dispel the myth that any political party, even one with a majority, could or would wish to pervert our children’s minds. Have faith in the integrity of our teachers and in any revised curriculum, and Scotland will be the richer for it.

I thank Bill Kidd for bringing the motion to the chamber. I agree with Humza Yousaf’s comments about his long-standing work on the issue. I had a wee look at the UN website yesterday and saw a message that the Philippine military was to have a one-day truce with communist rebels to mark the UN international day of peace. My initial thought was, “Big deal,” but then I went on to read about peace day. The website stated: “Peace Day should be devoted to commemorating and strengthening the ideals of peace both within and among all nations and peoples.” If one life is saved, it will be a deal well done. Let us hope that it is the first of many such days. Of course, there are many advocates of peace, many of whom are politicians. I agree with Hugh Henry’s comments about the position of some of them. There is nothing more embarrassing than seeing the UK Prime Minister peddling arms at a time when nations in the middle east are trying to bring about a peaceful resolution to their difficulties. Armaments are a very big business, as is waging wars. Although we all aspire to seeing peace become big business, the reality is that not only war, but aid, is big business—just ask Halliburton, which does so well out of it. One may ask why big business is so relaxed about wars. It is relaxed about wars as long as the theatre of war is away from the US or the UK. I had a few thoughts about peace and I wondered whether an illegal war could result in a legitimate peace. Indeed, what is peace? It will vary. Many oppressive regimes have provided at least basic services for their citizens, whereas replacing the regime with ‘freedom’ has resulted in survival of the fittest. My instinct remains to support the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan, but I wonder whether that will bring about peace. There are obligations placed on the invader, obviously. Does peace mean peace at any price? Quite clearly peace means different things to different people. If there is a withdrawal of troops, there will certainly be trauma associated with that, not least for the women and girls of Afghanistan. The dodgy deal that will bring about the ultimate withdrawal will see intolerant bigots revisit the grief on women and girls there. I wonder whether the west is interested in that. Indeed, is it interested in lasting peace? It is important—touching on the comments made by other members—that we look at what we do here, because poverty creates a lot of difficulties. When, in any country, the oppressor stops its bullying, that is not real peace. To my mind, that is just a cessation of violence. Some horrendous terms have been associated with peace, including “shock and awe” and “the surge”. Those are euphemisms for death and few were spared the ravages, although, of course, the oil ministry in Baghdad was. Real peace is food, warmth, compassion and social justice. Despite the differences of opinion in the Parliament, I am sure that there is a great wish to see that. The UN has a very important peacekeeping corps. Those are the only soldiers that I would like to see on our planet. I have come across some other phrases. Peace building is an interesting phrase, so I will read out one of its lengthy definitions: “Peace building is different from ‘peace-making’ and ‘peacekeeping’ in that it focuses on creating a long-term culture of peace, rather than solving existing conflicts or preventing old ones from re-occurring.” There are many conflicts around the globe, but I will touch on three: Palestine, Kashmir and Chechnya. If those conflicts were resolved, that might be a step in the right direction. Hugh Henry asked what the Parliament can do about the issue. The mere discussion of the subject is very important. I would like to see the Parliament being a force for good in the future, and I think that that will come about.

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the situation in Finland, which moved to a regional model only to move to single force a short time later? Is there a lesson there for the Opposition proponents of a halfway house, regional model?

I intend to talk about the police reform proposals, and given that there is an oblique reference in there to police pensions I should declare that I am a police pensioner. The details are in the register of members’ interests. An important obligation that is placed on every Government is the safety of its citizens. We heard that recorded crime is at a 35-year low. Indeed, it is down 19 per cent since 2006-07. There is also a 35-year high in the detection of violent crime. The significant increase in the detection rate, from 67 to 72 per cent, is most welcome. Similarly, the two-year reconviction rate has dropped to its lowest level in 11 years. The results, as we heard, are borne out by the Scottish crime and justice survey. The Scottish Government requires to and will build on those successes, not least through minimum pricing of alcohol and police reform. Some £1.3 billion has been removed from the budget and the criminal justice sector will be no more able to sustain the status quo than anyone else in the public sector will be. Yesterday’s report from Audit Scotland was interesting and lessons will be learned and acted on, the most significant of which is to do with co-ordination across the sector. Greater use can and should be made of technology, which will involve consultation and negotiation with unions and staff associations. Police reform cannot be detached from wider public sector reform, the intention of which is to protect and improve public services and to enhance local scrutiny. It is not about protectionism—we heard from Nigel Don why there might be protectionism in some quarters. The focus must be on front-line police services and the retention of officer numbers, so that we can maintain the good figures, because 35,000 fewer crimes means 35,000 fewer complainers.

The most important point to make is that front-line police services are not delivered just by police officers. Support staff play a vital role. The matter clearly falls into the operational realm. We want the retention of front-line services, and that includes support staff. The public have been reassured by the visible presence of the additional 1,000 officers on the street, but they are blissfully unaware of the eight—if not nine, in many instances—human resources, information technology and payroll departments. An outline business case has been prepared in relation to police reform. The single force will produce savings. It will not do so instantly, because, as with any change of circumstances, there will be one-off transitional investments, the most significant of which will be in IT systems. Initially, there will be significant investment in IT convergence. It might surprise some members to hear, for instance, that there is no direct e-mail system between police officers in Scotland, which is worrying and disappointing. All members know of the tragic events in Soham. The Bichard inquiry that followed was all about the sharing of information across police forces. A single service would not only maximise savings through the sharing of support services but protect front-line resources. The key word, which has been used a lot, is “local”. That is not a word to which the SNP takes exception—it is what we are all about. Local policing with local authority involvement, local priorities and local partnerships are important. Christine Grahame mentioned that police committees are too deferential. I encourage anyone who has not attended a police committee to do so; they will see that there is evident need for change.

I understand that in relation to the transitional arrangements the costs would be less for a regional force. However, economies of scale can be made only by having a single force, although there would still be difficulties. If someone sets out by motor car from Edinburgh, they can cross five police force boundaries within a reasonably short period. Travelling criminals, international criminals and terrorists do not acknowledge boundaries, so I do not think that we should do so. That is what is meant by “bobbies not boundaries”. I drove down the A82 the other day and in a short period I crossed three police force areas—I know the area and I would not have been able to tell which one I was in at any given time, but for the road signs. It is important that we have an efficient police service. There will be an opportunity to enhance specialist services, which will be available to all forces, unlike the situation at the moment. Sharing services will also bring about opportunities for greater reporting and accountability across all areas in Scotland.

Those officers have a valid perspective on things. The reality is that there is a genuine concern about numbers. I am sure that that concern will be greatly allayed by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s announcements tomorrow. Local is important. The Scottish National Party did not invest in those additional officers to see them removed. The reality is that numbers will be retained and the service will be improved.

Will the member give way?

I, too, commend David Stewart for lodging the motion and for all his work in the field. His compassionate and detailed involvement in the issue is widely acknowledged. As members might expect, I got a load of statistics provided to me by one of my employees, but I have decided to abandon those and be unashamedly anecdotal in my speech. As a police officer, I attended many road accidents in advance of an excellent campaign that I am sure David Stewart is familiar with—indeed, his colleague Councillor Deirdre Mackay spoke about it in the media last week. Driving ambition is a scheme—no doubt replicated elsewhere—through which every effort is made to encourage responsible driver behaviour. Significantly, it also encourages responsible passenger behaviour. We need to empower people not to get in vehicles if they are not comfortable—that is important, too. I will spare members the war stories about the grisly sights from the scene of accidents—I am sure that members can imagine them. As Jackson Carlaw said, advances in vehicle design have greatly improved the situation. In the past, officers had to attend harrowing scenes involving crushed vehicles. I once dealt with five deaths in a submerged vehicle—thankfully, such incidents are extremely unusual—and the complications surrounding that. Of course, that was just part of the process. The follow-up to accidents often involved trying to deliver a death message. I have had various responses to that, from having a door slammed in my face to a situation in which I had to establish which of the male relatives in the household was the fatality in the car. Those are all harrowing situations. The statistics are frightening, but the statistics are people—they are neighbours and loved ones. It is important to say that. I am not impressed with the cost figures, although they are important. A cost can be put to some things but what cost do we put on a life? I had a brief discussion with David Stewart about that yesterday. Like me, he attended two funerals last year, those of Callum Matheson and one other young man. Schoolchildren should not be attending funerals in such numbers. If anything can be done to avoid the tragedy that unfolded in both of those cases, that is the route that we have to take. We should rule nothing out. To be unashamedly parochial again, suicide is a problem in the Highlands. An awful lot of young people—far too many young men—take their own life. I would not want a situation in which we did nothing about that either. There is an opportunity here to ensure responsible driver behaviour. I do not think that we will ever put an end to such tragedies. Training does go on, and David Stewart’s initiative in Shetland is an excellent example of how it is possible to capture a lot of interest and get a lot of community support. There is not a village or town in the Highlands that has not been touched by such tragedies, which, I am sure, are replicated elsewhere in Scotland. Anything that can be done to improve the situation must be done. I am happy to lend David Stewart my support.

I will make a few general comments, specifically on policing, and I will pick up on evident misunderstandings on the part of some members. I am disappointed that Graeme Pearson thinks that there is not universal commitment to tackling offensive behaviour at football matches and threatening communications. That is not my understanding; I think that there is public support for tackling hate crime associated with football and I think that there is public support for the criminal justice system and its ability to enforce the bill and other legislation. There are genuine and heartfelt concerns about the consultation process, but the public understand that we need to act on the matter, and that is what has happened. Members heard about the evidence that has been taken. I will talk about the evidence from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Scottish Police Federation. I am a former official of the Scottish Police Federation and I have to say that the federation often comes from a slightly different perspective. However, it welcomes the powers in the bill and, as Mr Pearson rightly said, spoke with enthusiasm about them. That is important. The police witnesses were content with the timeframe. On the resources, the figures are in the financial memorandum. Les Gray said that the financial memorandum is “way off the mark”, but that should be put in the context of what Assistant Chief Constable Corrigan said—much as I would like stronger powers for the Scottish Police Federation, Mr Corrigan holds the weight in such matters.

I will address the member’s point in my next comment, because I was about to speak about the difference in emphasis between what Mr Gray and ACC Corrigan said about the finances. ACC Corrigan talked about using a “reasonable number” of officers. As Mr Pearson understands, every event is risk assessed and the assessment relates to the resources—and all the implications of that. ACC Corrigan went on to say that it is not about tripling the number of officers—I think that his comment followed Mr Gray’s comments and were made in the context of talk about the heavy campaign on the control of alcohol in football grounds, which by its nature required a police presence. The bill will require a targeted presence. It is also important to recall that Mr Corrigan has said elsewhere that he would adopt a “preventative” approach, which involves publicising the issue. When that happened at the most recent old firm game, there was a marked reduction in the instances of sectarian singing.

With respect, that happens at the moment. I am a regular attender at football matches, and public houses are often visited by officers in considerable numbers who are dealing with other matters. That is happening in any case. It is about the difference between being reactive and being proactive. I think that ACC Corrigan was emphasising that the mere promotion of the legislation would be sufficient to address the issue. On resources to tackle threatening communications, it was fascinating to hear what ACC Corrigan said about how gang violence in Glasgow is being dealt with by police cadets who have knowledge of social media. In any case, there are resources to deal with internet crime. I want to talk about three other matters that I think are important, which other members mentioned.

Yes indeed. The question is whether the proposals are necessary, legitimate and proportional. I think that they are necessary, as has been evidenced. I asked a simple question of the Lord Advocate yesterday. I asked him whether he thinks, as the police do, that the bill will fill a gap in the legislation. He said yes. Is the bill legitimate? Certainly, everyone should welcome the aim of strengthening protection against criminal acts that are carried out in the name of prejudice. Is it proportional? It most certainly is. Guidance will be issued. I commend the bill and the scrutiny that is on-going.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on her motion. I, too, support the STUC in its there is a better way campaign. I want to pose the question, “Better than what?” It is certainly better than the £1.3 billion of cuts from the UK Government, which will affect every citizen in Scotland and will disproportionately affect the weak and vulnerable. It is better than the on-going attack against the weak and vulnerable in Scotland, which members will know about if they speak to any citizens advice bureau. I am sure that we have all had dealings on disability living allowance and the appointment shambles that goes with it, as well as the curtailing of payments and the distress that it causes not only to individuals, but to their families and friends. The proposed way is better than spending obscene sums of money on weapons of mass destruction which—as we know from recent events—threaten the communities in which they are based because of safety issues. It is certainly better than waging wars—illegal or otherwise—and the confusing position in which that puts the UK in terms of explaining our position on war to our Syrian and Yemeni brothers and sisters. I believe that there is a better way. Economists argue in many different ways. I am not an economist, but it is economists who prompt phrases such as, “There’s no such thing as society”. Economists no doubt fed the Conservative manifesto that talked about making “Britain the most family-friendly country in Europe.” The Conservatives are a long way short of that. When a statement is made, we need to ask who is saying it and on behalf of whose interests, what evidence they have, and—most important—what it means for those without a voice. Those who are most affected are, as always, the public sector workers: the very workers who, as we have heard, provide the services that are most vital to our communities. In my view, they should be our most valued workers. Is the economy threatened? It is not if you are an international speculator with offshore accounts, given the outsourcing that is going on. That is certainly the case with a firm in Inverness at present, much to the distress of many people in the area. The economy is certainly not threatened if you are an arms dealer, given the unseemly sight of the UK Prime Minister peddling arms at the same time as people were fighting for their democratic rights. It is not threatened if you are a banker, with the greed that has brought about this situation. I hear what has been said about the people’s charter, and I consider it to be an aspirational document. As with a number of other manifestos, I do not subscribe to it 100 per cent, but where would we be without aspirations? I will pick up on some of the points that the charter makes. It states that we should “Take the leading banking, insurance and mortgage industries fully into democratic public ownership run for the benefit of all.” Given the investment that there has been in the banks, many people might imagine that that would be happening at present. However, that is not the case—certainly not for any small business that is looking for a loan. The charter goes on to state that we should “Tightly regulate the City markets to facilitate lending and to stop speculation and takeovers against the public interest.” That is the interest that we in this chamber must serve: the public interest. The charter also states that we should “Restructure the tax system so big business and the wealthy pay more and ordinary people pay less.” That is what most folk would call fair and progressive, but George Osborne called his emergency budget fair and progressive, and it was widely reported as such. An awful lot could be said. We heard earlier today from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth about the attack on public sector workers’ pensions, which he rightly described as a “real and immediate concern”. He also said—which I thought was very significant—that it is not the “correct course”. That is another way of saying that there is a better way: I believe that there is a better way.

Northern Constabulary, the force that covers the majority of the region that I represent, is, like all other Scottish forces, an amalgam of several of the smaller burgh and county forces that existed in Scotland before regionalisation in 1975. I am delighted that Northern Constabulary now has 300 more officers that it did at the time of amalgamation. Now that police officer numbers have been built to a record level, no one wants to see an erosion of the very front line that has delivered a 32-year record low crime rate. Although we are very keen to sustain police officer numbers, that must not—as our Labour colleague mentioned—be done at the expense of sacking loyal support staff who have served their communities well, too. Funding for the additional 1,000 officers was not provided to have officers sit in offices to replace support staff who were paid much less. It was given to ensure that those officers were out in our cities, towns and villages undertaking their statutory duty to guard, watch and patrol. That 32-year record low crime rate is more than a statistic. It has improved quality of life for our citizens: fewer constituents are assaulted or are the victims of dishonesty, and there is less knife crime. It means safer communities. Perceptions of crime are important so, although antisocial behaviour continues to blight many of our communities, it is pleasing to know that the fear of crime is falling for the first time since devolution. That is due in no small part to constables patrolling and reassuring our communities. However, there is no room for complacency, and no reason not to consider whether we can bring about an even more effective police service for our communities, whether they are rural or urban. The present structure of the Scottish police service has existed for the past 35 years, and the time is right to review it. The Government has retained an open mind on the future, and is rightly willing to consider all options that can demonstrate long-term sustainability. As with any potential reform, it is important to have meaningful consultation with the staff associations and trade unions. The Scottish Police Federation represents 98 per cent of officers and plays a key role in feeding in front-line officers’ views. Its views are important, whereas the shifting sands of opinion of the chief officer ranks that are represented by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland suggest an element of opportunism that we should treat with caution. Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland reported that the country’s “smaller” forces “are unable to afford capacity and capability in all policing specialisms, and to do so would be inefficient ... To maintain their existence as an independent force, they need to protect the core corporate and HQ functions, which are fairly small to start with.” The report indicated that retaining those would have a disproportionate impact on front-line resources. It said that ad hoc collaborations with other forces are appreciated at one level but that they “are not well documented and often sit outside any system of governance by police authorities or the Scottish Government”. There is genuine concern about the issue. Just going from eight chauffeur-driven chief constables to one chief constable would save almost £1 million—enough to pay for 36 new officers. I am sure that that is one option that the public would support. We cannot encourage greater partnership working across the public sector and have eight police empires—it has to be bobbies, not boundaries. The Scottish Government is committed to a transparent and efficient way of providing equal access to policing services across Scotland. Crime is no respecter of boundaries, be they local or national. Democratic accountability is vital, but it is hard to evidence in the present police boards, where there is excessive deference to chief constables, who all too often hide behind statements about their “operational independence”. It cannot be right that chief constables should not be subject to the same level of scrutiny from elected representatives as directors of finance or education. They are extremely well remunerated from the public purse, hold an important place in our communities and should be accountable. Local accountability is key to local policing. The present eight forces are made up of 27 divisions. Those 27 areas could form the framework for genuine local accountability. For that to be meaningful, it would be important for the officer in charge of each division to be a budget holder, with operational autonomy. Their accountability could be to locally elected councillors. The existing police boards are not constituted in such a way as to manage national risks. Local policing must have regard to a national dimension, so the national level, too, will require an accountability structure that is open and transparent and always has clear separation between politicians and practitioners on operational police decisions. The outcome of any review will provide an opportunity to consider wider matters, such as how any new structure links with other European forces. It is also time to remove the anomaly of the Scottish Parliament not having control over Scottish police officers’ terms and conditions. It is time to constitute a Scottish police negotiating board. In the days of terrorism, international crime and cyber-crime, it is perhaps ironic that the public largely want to see the bobby on the beat. Although the preventive nature of policing is often considered difficult to quantify, it is prevention—a visible, uniformed deterrent—that the public want. I am sure that, at the end of this consultation, regardless of the model that is adopted, the Government will continue to deliver bobbies on the beat in significant numbers.

I congratulate my colleague Bob Doris on securing the debate. There is no dancing around the point: the debate gets straight to the nub of a pernicious issue that affects not just central Scotland. Sadly, it affects people in Scotland and beyond. I believe that humans are more tribal than we are perhaps willing to admit, and we often retain a deep interest in other tribes. Some people believe that our tribes are obvious—being visually apparent by colour of skin and/or mode of dress. Of course, we can never really be sure whether someone is totally loyal to one tribe. Ethnicity classification is an important part of our administrative process, but it does not tell the entire story. I have been annoyed on many occasions that a form will not allow me to say what tribe I am from. It is important not to disenfranchise anyone or their tribe. Self-classification is important. We all have our identities, and that is particularly true of children from mixed tribes—if I can use that phrase—who might elect to alter their identity, depending on parental relationships, at any given time. I like to think that I am tolerant, but I have to work at it. I like to think of myself as a civil libertarian. If truth be known, I would be happy to ban some marches—the marches that I find offensive—and I therefore have to acknowledge that inconsistency. There is a clear balance to be struck between the right to hold views that others find offensive and the right to voice them publicly with the intention of offending. The Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles has two entrances: one marked “For those with prejudice”, the other marked “For those without prejudice”. If someone elects to enter through the door marked “without prejudice”, they are directed straight back out on to the street. That is very telling. Following the tragic death of Stephen Lawrence, the Macpherson inquiry made a recommendation on the definition of a racist incident, which is that it should be “any incident which is perceived to be racist by the victim or any other person.” There are therefore clear lines for offence, which we would all recognise, and for perceptions of offence. Of course, my perceptions and sensitivities are worth the same as yours; they are not worth any more than yours. I am not an adherent of any religious grouping, but I believe that a longer view must be taken about how we have ended up where we are. When one system largely replaces another, the “We are better than them” mentality becomes an important factor for the new adherents. Those who are familiar with the blue-eyed/brown-eyed experiment by Jane Elliott, the American anti-racist activist, will understand how easy it is to corrupt minds. The reformation created anti-Catholic animosity that exists to this day and which I believe contributes to anti-Irishness, too. With no wish unwittingly to offend anyone, I warm to a comedian who expresses the view that the world’s major religions cannot all be right. What I do not find funny is the BBC’s so-called football comedy programmes that make light of religious intolerance. That attitude of playing down intolerance must end. I also remain deeply uncomfortable about the separation of our young folk on religious grounds for schooling, and about the undemocratic involvement of clergy in our local authority education committees. I believe that an independent Scotland must be a secular Scotland, if we are to have real social justice. I welcome the proposal to introduce new legislation to tackle sectarianism. The changes will be measured, enforceable and specific and will remove anomalies. For those who are wondering about my tribe, it is a mish-mash of all sorts, which is the way I want to see a modern Scotland. In the meantime, if we really are all Jock Tamson’s bairns, we should start acting as if we are.

Care of our older people has always been a priority, and older people were the major beneficiaries of the achievements of the previous Government, which delivered the lowest-ever waiting times, a fall in hospital infections and more nurses than ever. Of course, there are aspects of caring for Scotland’s older people over which, in the meantime, we have no control. The full implications of the United Kingdom coalition's benefits changes may not yet be clear, but our older folk will not escape the attack on the vulnerable, and they will not, of course, be spared the fuel poverty that continues to blight communities in our energy-rich nation while the energy companies make obscene profits. Scottish Power’s 19 per cent price rise is a case in point. I am proud to represent the Highlands and Islands and am very aware of the challenges that its geography poses for the delivery of public services, not least health and social care services. The First Minister’s assurance of continuity of care for Southern Cross residents has been welcomed in the Highlands, where the company has four homes and the local authority is a key customer. Last year, one of Southern Cross’s Highland homes was completely destroyed by fire—thankfully, the 59 residents were unharmed. That home is not to be rebuilt, which perhaps reflects the flawed business model. It was, of course, Highland Council that arranged continuity of care for the residents after the fire. It has been said many times in the debate—and I have no doubt that it will be said again—that a society is judged by how it treats its older people. I welcome the increased scrutiny that is being placed on those who provide care, not least the unannounced inspections of care homes and the valuable unofficial monitoring role that is undertaken by the various friends-of groups and, in my area, the excellent Highland Senior Citizens Network. Scotland has an ageing population, and we have a statutory requirement and, more important, a moral obligation to provide high-quality, publicly funded health and social care for them. There is no doubt that that will prove challenging in the face of unprecedented cuts from London. The largest portion of the NHS’s £3 billion-plus spend on older people is on emergency admissions, which no one wants. That compares with 7 per cent of the older people’s budget that is directed to care at home, which everyone wants. Care at home and care homes are part of our so-called mixed economy, but I am uncomfortable about profit being associated with care and would welcome greater public sector provision in both areas. I hope that local authorities’ risk registers recognise that, unlike the reassuring words of our First Minister, the market gives no guarantee of continuity of care for residents whom authorities place in private care homes. That mixed care economy works only where there is volume, of course. There was no shortage of bidders for Highland’s care at home contract for the 20-minute home visits in the towns and villages around the Moray Firth, but it is, of course, the council that continues to deal with the person with complex needs who lives miles up a glen that is accessed by a single-track road. Any public sector comparator for future work looks ridiculously expensive when compared with the apparently efficient private sector folk. I regret that care of our older folk is dealt with like grass-cutting or information technology contracts. Let no one be in any doubt that those companies’ primary statutory obligation is to maximise profit for their shareholders. The statutory obligation in relation to care rests with the local authority. Although those who become dissatisfied with the level of profit—invariably, they are the same folk who seek light-touch regulation—might come and go, the public sector must and will be there to care. In some of our remote communities, there are examples of not-for-profit models of community care working and delivering the quality care at home that reduces emergency admissions. If somebody has to be taken into hospital, any discharge is accelerated by virtue of the additional support at home. Welcome, too, are the telehealth advances, which respect people’s privacy and reduce the need for human interventions. However, although the technology has its place, social contact is vital for our older people. Lunch clubs and social groups, which are often run by volunteers, must continue to enjoy public funding. Their benefits are significant and their closure is devastating to users and to their friends and families. The social mobility that concessionary travel has given our older folk is another positive example of support. There is no disputing that we must work to move moneys from dealing with unnecessary emergency admissions to providing quality care at home, in houses that are suitable for our older people. There are good examples of that across the Highlands and Islands where, thanks to funding from the previous Government, the first council houses in a generation have been built, with more to follow. I commend the work that Highland Council and NHS Highland have done on the lead commissioning model and the support that the Government has given that project. However, it is vital that any such major change enjoys the support of staff and their unions. It is fair to report that there might be some way to go with that yet. Reassurance is key to caring. The Government cares dearly about the NHS. If the public sector focuses on agreed outcomes, any perceived barriers to integrating social care and healthcare will be avoided. I believe that the results that we should focus on will not be found in the share listing of those who are engaged in profiting from care; instead, they will be found in ensuring that person-centred, safe and efficient care is delivered to our older people, regardless of their location.