In my view, this bill is the single most important piece of legislation that the Parliament has delivered. That is a hard feat to achieve. It is bigger than the smoking ban and it is bigger than the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. The Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill will deliver real change on equality in Scotland. We have all heard about the evil consequences that are going to occur and about the effects that same-sex marriage will have on children. However, I am sure that we can all agree that continually talking about same-sex relationships in demeaning and bigoted tones will promote more harm to children, especially those who may have difficulty in accepting their sexuality. The Bible and the teachings of Jesus are supposed to promote love and forgiveness. However, throughout this campaign, I have seen little evidence of that from certain opposition groups. I ask those who are concerned about and campaign about the consequences of same-sex marriage for children: where is the campaign to stop divorce? In 2011-12, there were 9,503 divorces in Scotland. What of those children and their rights? As the Bible says, “What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate.” Is it the case that that law of God is wilfully being ignored? The Bible also explicitly forbids cutting one’s hair and trimming one’s facial hair. The Bible also supports slavery. I would like to stress at this point that I am not criticising any individual for their religious belief; I am merely pointing out the hypocrisy of certain opposition groups. The Bible has been used in representations to me as a means of reinforcing opposition to the bill. I merely point out a couple of other areas in the Bible that should perhaps be reflected on if groups want to be fair and honest and to have due regard to equality. Our society has become increasingly liberal, tolerant, accepting and understanding. I hope that that continues over the decades and centuries to come. We have also become more secular; there is a correlation between increased secularism and liberalism. The bill is stronger than it was at stage 1, although there were amendments that were not agreed to that would have increased equality for LGBT couples, especially young transgender adults. In easing the worries of opposition groups, the Scottish and UK Governments have made amendments to the Equality Act 2010 and guaranteed the freedoms that we have been asked to protect today. As I said in November, enough safeguards are already in place without needing some of the amendments that were lodged. In our current political landscape, we hear about Scotland becoming a fairer and more equal society. Today, those who perpetuate that statement have the opportunity to take a step towards ending the discrimination that same-sex couples face. Commitment between two loving and consenting adults, not the ability to create a family, should be the basis for marriage. In many cases, families are created before marriage—again, there is no precondition that must be met before marriage. In the stage 1 debate, I pointed out that single-parent families are increasingly accepted as normal and that the language used by opposition groups adds to the stigma forced on single parents, especially mothers. As we come to the end of the legislative process, let us remember that, as long as a child has a loving and stable home, it does not matter if they come from a one-parent family or their parents are a same-sex couple or a mixed-sex couple. Today, Scotland will take a massive stride in equality. We will catch up with our neighbours down south and other progressive nations throughout the world, becoming the 17th nation to make marriage equal. This Parliament has continually acted against the social and moral inequalities that discriminate against LGBT people, and today we will add marriage equality to the list of other actions that we have taken, such as repealing section 28, allowing same-sex couples to adopt and ensuring that LGBT people are protected under hate crime laws. The work of the Scottish Government and Alex Neil is to be commended. Praise must also go to Tim Hopkins and Tom French at the Equality Network, Stonewall Scotland, the Scottish Transgender Alliance and LGBT Youth Scotland. I am proud to stand up for social justice, equality and fairness, and today I will be proud to vote for equal marriage in Scotland.

There has been a huge growth in the number of people who own one buy-to-let property. What assurances will the minister give that the proposed regulations in the Housing (Scotland) Bill will ensure that single property landlords are regulated properly to protect individual tenants from unfair charges and poor standards?

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports the health of young transgender people before gender recognition is granted. (S4O-02845)

Will the Scottish Government give a commitment to consult national health service gender specialists and equality organisations to find out how the gender identities of young people can be recognised and supported?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how many new forests have been planted using forestry grants under the Scotland rural development programme 2007 to 2013. (S4O-02817)

I thank the minister for that answer. Can he tell me what the targets are for new forests over the next 10 years, in particular in my region, which is West Scotland?

I apologise for my hoarseness, Presiding Officer—I will try to keep going. The motion at the heart of the debate is similar to that for the members’ business debate on reducing reoffending that I held in May last year. I thank Baroness Goldie—and Jackson Carlaw, who stepped in so ably—for allowing us once again the opportunity to discuss reoffending. The issue must be kept alive and debated if we are to achieve the significant reduction in reoffending that we all want. The throughcare support project is a welcome initiative, as effective and well-established throughcare is an essential tool in tackling reoffending. However, we know that, too often, there are major cracks in the system, through which prisoners fall upon release. Throughcare can, if not properly thought out and—crucially—if not joined up with other services, go only part of the way towards repairing the damage caused by imprisonment to the individual, their family and the community to which they return. As I have stated clearly many times, throughcare should start as soon as the offender is sentenced. Work with the offender and their family can be effective and worth while in tackling reoffending, as research continues to show. Not only can we take steps to break the cycle of reoffending; by re-establishing bonds between the prisoner and their loved ones, we can also support the offenders’ children, who are more likely than their peers to enter the criminal justice system later in their lives. Prisoners can be placed back in the community successfully only when the stigma is tackled and they can go out and look for employment. It is absurd that when the state has a section of its population under direct supervision, it struggles to properly re-educate, rehabilitate and reskill them. There are many opinions on what meaningful activity is. I believe that Colin McConnell of the Scottish Prison Service will strive to get it right and will provide activity that truly makes a difference. Prison is the severest form of punishment that our courts have at their disposal, yet it is also the most destructive. Earlier this week, there was a timely and important intervention on the issue by Lord Carloway, who called for a change in culture in the way that we view punishment and in how we address sentencing. There were comparisons with Scandinavian countries such as Finland and Sweden, which have halved their prison populations by changing the mindset of people and the culture of the media over decades as well as by introducing creative sentences, such as having non-violent offenders serve a sentence over different periods. During my members’ business debate last year, there was consensus, which I am sure will occur again today. If members are serious about addressing the issues and advancing their ideas, I encourage them to come along to the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment on 5 February.

I thank David Torrance for bringing the debate to the chamber. One of the reasons for my support for the debate comes from an event last January, at which I spoke on a research project between Fife Gingerbread and the Poverty Alliance. The resulting report, “Surviving Poverty—The Impact of Lone Parenthood”, demonstrated the important work that needs to be carried out in order to fully support single parents in Fife and throughout Scotland. The study showed the experience of lone parenthood in rural areas. In many cases, being a single parent can be an isolating experience, especially in rural areas. The report highlighted how lone parents in Fife sometimes survive. Some would skip meals to feed their children; some would reduce their usage of gas and electricity, meaning that their homes were cold; and some would miss payments or turn to payday lenders. Fife Gingerbread fully deserves the award of almost £50,000, which will help many teenage parents in the area. Teenage parents often experience circumstances and challenges that most people who intend to become parents dare not imagine. It is widely recognised that many factors play a part in teenage pregnancy, such as alcohol and inequalities in education and health. However, it must be made clear that being a teenage parent does not alone make someone a bad parent. The Health and Sport Committee undertook an inquiry into teenage pregnancy last year and its subsequent report makes for some interesting, if not unsurprising, reading. A major part in reducing teenage pregnancies can be played by education in relation to not just sexual health, but alcohol, drug abuse and taking risks. However, services can reach those young people only when they attend school, which, evidence shows, is often not the case. Alternative sources of education and support, such as Fife Gingerbread’s project, are to be encouraged and welcomed. Modern media can and must play a better role in portraying women. On the subject of drinking and taking drugs, Robert Naylor from Renfrewshire Council rightly pointed to modern media’s often poor depiction of women and how some behave in relation to taking risks with substances. On television these days there are fewer and fewer appropriate role models to demonstrate self-respect and self-esteem to young women. Many depictions of young women show an alarming lack of both of those qualities. The same argument applies in relation to the sexualisation of TV, films and music. The teen parent project rightly seeks to identify, understand and support the needs of teenage parents and the Big Lottery funding will go a long way towards meeting any challenges ahead for the parents that it helps.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013 supports carers. (S4O-02745)

We know that the festive period can be stressful for most people and additionally stressful for carers. What steps has the cabinet secretary taken to provide additional respite and to improve access to respite for paid and unpaid carers at this time of year?

As the report—published this week—from the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Committee highlighted, Citizens Advice Scotland has said that DHPs are an insufficient means of tackling the bedroom tax because there is no uniformity in how they are awarded. Although the bedroom tax is a heinous piece of legislation, no local authority has issued guidelines on awarding DHPs. Will the Government publish blanket guidelines to ensure that people throughout Scotland are treated equally and fairly?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what services will transfer from the Royal Alexandra hospital to the new Southern general hospital. (S4O-02691)

Was any consultation done with patients, the council and patients groups before that transfer was done? If any further transfers are to be done, will consultation be carried out? A number of concerns about issues of transport and accessibility have been raised with me.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the closure of police stations in West Scotland will have on community safety. (S4O-02674)

The west of Scotland, if we include Glasgow, North Ayrshire and Inverclyde, is listed as one of the top five least peaceful areas in Scotland. If a community can put forward a compelling case for keeping a counter open, will the cabinet secretary take on board those views and listen to the opinions of local people?

Today’s motion seeks to address what has been missing from the chamber over the past 15 months: a debate on housing addressing present and future challenges. While Scotland experiences the biggest housing crisis since the end of world war two, the housing minister is absent and the Government is ducking its responsibilities on housing. Housing should be at the centre of Government policy, because it creates jobs and stimulates local economies. Scotland is on pause, as is evident from the Government’s housing portfolio. In the past year, 13,478 houses have been built. That is the lowest number since 1947. Between 2008-09 and 2011-12, the capital housing budget was slashed by 29 per cent under the stewardship of the Scottish National Party. Since taking on the role of Minister for Housing and Welfare in September 2012, Margaret Burgess has failed to front a debate on housing. Paul Martin, Patrick Harvie and the Equal Opportunities Committee have been far more proactive than the housing minister in bringing serious debates to the chamber. The lack of leadership in the Government is impacting on local communities, local people and local economies as we speak. That lack of leadership and the entrenched lack of ambition have been criticised by Audit Scotland as well as by industry bodies. Phillip Hogg of Homes for Scotland said: “Tackling this issue will require bold vision, commitment and action from all parties in order to halt the decline of what is a key national indicator.” Scottish Labour is calling for a national housing action plan that is comprehensive, ambitious and inclusive in order to invest in our communities and reinvigorate housing in Scotland. I look forward to the minister’s response to that call. Returning to the point about low ambition, I refer to the Scottish Government’s white paper on separation. In the section on housing in an independent Scotland, there is a total of seven paragraphs, or 10 if we feel generous enough to include those on fuel poverty and energy prices. There is also a very nice picture of a tenement building. That amounts to one and a half pages in a 670-page document—or 0.2 per cent—on housing.

If the member wants to talk about housing, I point out that Scottish Labour would not have wasted £30 million on the Glasgow airport rail link project, which has hardly demonstrated a fiscally responsible Government. We are calling for a national action plan on housing, and it must be comprehensive and ambitious. As regards ambition, the white paper was very light on housing matters and gave us no answers as to what the Government’s priorities will be. It does nothing to alleviate the concerns of Scottish house builders, which were raised in the recent Jones Lang LaSalle survey that showed that most house builders believe that Scottish independence would result in fewer housing developments. In fact, only one in 12 house builders thought that independence would deliver more housing. If we couple that survey with the warning in the report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies that Scotland may have to make further spending cuts, the prospect of independence does not paint a great picture of the future of housing in Scotland, especially when we already know about the potential supply and demand challenges that we face over the next 50 years. Across the chamber, there is agreement that we need more housing of all shapes and sizes. No one would disagree with the idea that well-built, affordable housing can have a positive impact on health, wellbeing, employment and education. However, there is disagreement on how we can achieve the housing targets. In its manifesto for the 2011 election, the SNP promised to build 6,000 social rented homes each year, but that has been edited to a promise to build 6,000 affordable homes a year. A year before the minister took on her role, Shelter Scotland and the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland warned the Government that unless there was a radical rethink on spending priorities, it would not meet the target that it had pledged to meet on affordable homes. That might partly explain why we now find ourselves experiencing the biggest crisis in Scottish housing since the end of world war two. To return to the Audit Scotland report, we learn that it could be 20 years before enough new homes are built to meet the changing demographics and projected population increase. That there is a crisis in housing is reflected by Audit Scotland’s reporting of the fact that the number of new homes built by the private sector has more than halved, and that councils and registered social landlords have built 14,000 fewer homes than needed since 2005.

We could all bandy statistics about, but the important thing that we must remember—[Interruption.]

If we had not lodged the motion for debate, we would not be talking about housing.

No—I have just taken one. Where was the minister when that information was reported in July? Why has there been no Government debate to discuss the crisis in housing? On the funding of affordable housing, Audit Scotland warned that the Government had yielded that its approach was flawed after it accepted all the recommendations of the financial capacity, affordability and development subsidy working group. Long before the final report, RSLs had indicated to me that the subsidy levels had been cut too much and that that was having a detrimental impact on the services that they provided and on planning for future housing developments. With £3 billion of private borrowing, there was a danger that reserves would be used, and many RSLs were struggling to gain access to new lending, unless they had significant reserves. In recent years, the housing association grant per unit has been cut from £70,000 to £42,000. The average cost of building a social rented home is around £125,000. The Scottish Government recently announced an increase in that grant but, given the extent of the cut in the grant, it is easy to see why RSLs are struggling to build new homes. The motion also raises the issue of homelessness. Statistics show that, since 2007, there has been an increase in the number of households in temporary accommodation, albeit that that is mostly down to the recession and the tough economic conditions that followed. Despite our having legislation that guarantees anyone who presents themselves as homeless access to emergency temporary accommodation, it was reported at the weekend that our largest council has been turning people away. I hope that the minister will address that. The Shelter Scotland campaign that states that 4,847 children will wake up homeless on Christmas day is to be commended. Labour members support Shelter, which, in addition to reaching out for public support, seeks to change the guidelines on minimum standards of temporary accommodation and to give families the legal right to challenge the appalling conditions that they are often forced to live in. Children and expectant mothers need to be protected from damp and dangerous accommodation. It is clear that, with 157,700 people on waiting lists and 23,000 houses unoccupied, more needs to be done. The need for a national housing action plan is palpable. There are many reasons for homelessness, such as relationship breakdown, income or job loss, and, crucially, the callous Tory welfare reform agenda. However, the effects of homelessness on many areas or aspects of people’s lives cannot be overestimated, especially for children and young people. The Scottish empty homes partnership, which was launched in 2012, has returned to use only 200 of the estimated 23,000 empty properties. Last year, only 72 were brought back into use by councils. It would be interesting to assess where those empty properties can be found. Are they in rural or urban areas? Are they in areas of deprivation or more affluent areas? Assessing the location of those empty properties could emphasise returning them to use, so we call on the housing minister to address the concern about empty homes and say whether they could be included in a national housing action plan, especially when it is reported that it costs far less to return a house to the market than to build a new one. Scotland’s census results show us that population increases and changing demographics mean that greater demand is to be expected in future. The results underline the scale of the challenge and, for the first time ever, there are more single-person households—more than one third of homes are now one-person households—which can be attributed to the increase in the number of pensioners. That figure alone creates pressure on housing policy. How does the Scottish Government plan to address the expected 80 per cent increase in the number of pensioners between now and 2050, with most of the increase occurring in the next 25 years? Also, when looking at the personalisation and self-directed support agenda, we need to meet the housing demand of disabled people, to allow them more independence and more freedom. The Parliament also faces the major challenge of ending fuel poverty. The Scottish Government has committed itself to ending fuel poverty through lower bills, which is to be achieved through the home energy efficiency programme for Scotland. Perhaps the minister can inform the chamber whether 2016 is still the target. If so, can she explain the white paper pledge to end fuel poverty? Is it an admission that the Scottish Government cannot achieve that despite its HEEPS pledges? Much was made in the white paper of ending the bedroom tax, and that is quite right. That unjust policy must be ended, but why does the SNP want to wait until 2016 and do it only in the event of a yes vote? Instead of playing political football with this horrid tax, will the minister say whether she will back Jackie Baillie’s bill to protect tenants now? Why should vulnerable Scots be used as pawns in the SNP’s attempt to break up Britain? No one in this chamber can deny that the Scottish Government can do more to mitigate the effects of the bedroom tax but, for political reasons, it chooses not to.

No, I am almost finished. We have a Scottish Government that is strategising for separation, not one that is interested in the day-to-day running of Scotland. Housing in Scotland is in crisis. More people are on waiting lists. Fewer homes are being built than at any other time since 1947. What is the Government’s response? It wants constitutional change despite having had the power to act for the past six-and-a-half years. We need action now to solve our housing crisis, end homelessness and reduce waiting lists. We need action from the Government to build homes, create jobs and stimulate local economies—that is why we need a national housing action plan. I move, That the Parliament notes with grave concern that Scotland is facing a housing crisis; understands that the number of new homes built in 2012 was the lowest since the post-war era; asks the Scottish Government to reflect on the recent Audit Scotland report on housing that reported a 29% real-terms reduction in the capital housing budget from 2008-09 to 2011-12; notes the recent survey of Scotland’s housebuilders that showed concerns regarding the impact of separation and regrets that the white paper on independence did not set out detailed plans for housing; recognises the fact that, to date, the Minister for Housing and Welfare has not led a debate on housing and is disappointed at the lack of leadership that this represents; notes that recent homelessness statistics show an increase since 2007 in the number of households in temporary accommodation, and calls on the Scottish Government to produce a comprehensive, ambitious and inclusive national housing action plan.

Is the minister saying that, when Audit Scotland, Shelter and other organisations say that housing in Scotland is in crisis, they are wrong?

Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister, recently said that the Government would build its way out of the recession. Could the member tell me when that building is going to start?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

What will be done to assist rough sleepers over the winter? What additional assistance will be given to charities that are already carrying out tremendous work with rough sleepers?

The debate is truly historic and long overdue. I am delighted to take part in it as a supporter of LGBT rights. It will also come as no surprise that I will be saying “I do.” I pay compliments to the Equality Network, the Transgender Alliance, Stonewall Scotland and all the equality groups that played their part in the campaign that now results in the Parliament making its first vote on the bill that will make marriage equal in Scotland. The debate has often been contentious, particularly when played out in the media, and I am sure that all members will be sincere and courteous in their deliberations. The Scottish Parliament was established to promote the values of social justice and tackle inequality. Since its inception, it has acted against social and moral inequality by repealing section 28, levelling the age of consent, allowing same-sex couples to adopt and foster, and introducing legislation to ensure that LGBT people are protected under hate crime laws. It is only right that we extend to LGBT citizens the rights and freedoms that many of us take for granted each day. I ask the opponents of the bill who comment that civil partnerships were introduced for LGBT people whether the suffragettes were happy when the Representation of the People Act 1918 was introduced, allowing women over 30 to vote. No, they were not. They fought for a further decade to enfranchise all women and equalise the voting ages of men and women. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender couples who wish to marry should be able to do so. They should not be told that they must accept the current two-tier discriminatory system. Adapting our marriage laws will end that discrimination with no impact on any other marriage. Our society has become increasingly liberal since 1999, and attitudes towards the LGBT community are changing, even if it sometimes feels as though they are doing so at a snail’s pace. Support for equal marriage is at an all-time high, and my vote will represent the majority of correspondence that I have received from constituents in West Scotland. Although it is widely recognised and documented that attitudes are changing, the levels of stigma and discrimination towards LGBT people remain unacceptably high. Like many, I believe that same-sex marriage will help to tackle and reduce prejudice. I will address the specifics of the bill and the Equal Opportunities Committee’s stage 1 report. Changes still need to be made and it is likely that amendments will be lodged that improve the opportunity to increase equality. However, I welcome the consideration of the Scottish Government and the Equal Opportunities Committee to report on issues such as gender recognition difficulties faced by long-term transitioned people and civil partnerships performed in another country. The committee report also raises questions about the meaning and purpose of marriage. Those who are against the bill argue that the complementarity of a man and a woman is the basis of marriage, but that suggests that the basis of marriage is really about procreating. As we know all too well, the ability to create a child does not automatically create a perfect parent or, indeed, an ideal family unit. It seems that some people are living in a different society from the rest of us, and outdated values give no justice to the children of today. As I said earlier, we have become more liberal. The number of single-parent families is increasing, and they are becoming more accepted as the norm. Suggesting that marriage is the basis for a stable environment for raising a family adds to the stigma that many single parents feel and it does no service to the tremendous work and support that many single-parent families do and give every week. Marriage is a commitment between two loving and consenting adults; whether to have children after being married, or indeed before or never, is a decision solely for the couple, no matter how the family is created. The legislation allowing same-sex couples to adopt, which came into force in 2009, was long overdue, but it gave the right to offer a child a safe, stable and loving home. Having been married for 36 years and having raised two children, I strive to understand how introducing the bill takes anything away from my marriage. I agreed with the First Minister, for probably the first and perhaps the last time, when he stated at the Scottish Government Cabinet meeting in Renfrew last year: “I personally struggle to see whose freedoms are being infringed by the move towards this legislation.” It is right that freedom of thought, freedom of religion and freedom of speech are protected. However, at what point does one person’s freedom override the equality of others? As many supporters of the bill have said, there are enough safeguards for people to express their view, as long as it is not seen to be hateful or discriminatory. The bill is a step, if not a leap, towards ensuring equal rights for all Scots. I hope that it will add to the important and crucial work carried out to tackle inequality and discrimination. I look forward to casting my vote in support of the bill.

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it will promote the culture of greater Glasgow and West Scotland before and during the 2014 Commonwealth Games. (S4O-02572)

I look forward to seeing the culture and history of areas such as my own—Renfrewshire—being promoted, as it was during the successful recent Mod in Paisley. What dialogue—if any—has the minister had with Renfrewshire Council and other councils in West Scotland to promote those areas of cultural significance?

The Government’s motion says that investment in transport projects is “vital to ... stimulate the economy now, securing long-term sustainable growth and providing a modern and efficient transport system fit for the 21st century”. No one can disagree with that. The primary focus of transport projects should be the provision of greater connectivity and easier journeys for commuters, and the creation of crucial jobs and security for families. The Labour amendment addresses the need for investment and modernisation, to benefit the consumer and the workforce. Reregulation of the bus industry is necessary to address the challenges of the 21st century. The public want and deserve better buses, which is why I support Iain Gray’s proposed bus regulation (Scotland) bill. I am a frequent bus user, so I sympathise with people who depend on buses that rarely turn up on time and are overcrowded and often dirty. Iain Gray’s proposed bill aims to give transport authorities greater power to determine how bus services are run without having to seek ministers’ consent. Too often, we hear of a bus service being reduced or withdrawn, however much the community depends on it. If successful routes were tendered with less successful routes, local people could benefit and would not have to fear that they might lose a service. If members doubt the value of the proposed bill, I urge them to speak to their constituents. During the past few months, that is what I have been doing. I asked people in Renfrewshire for their opinions on the bus services and the better buses bill. Every reply that I received backed the bill and set out people’s negative experiences on the buses—and that is in a large urban area, not far from Glasgow, so I can only imagine the misery that bus services cause for people who live in more rural areas. The knock-on effects of poor services on health, employment and education are a challenge that remains unmet in the 21st century. Given the Government’s ambitious carbon reduction targets, a rigorous national strategy needs to be developed, to get more people out of their cars and on to public transport. However, that can be a realistic goal only when we have a connected public transport system that meets the needs of people in rural and urban areas. I ask members not only to consider their constituents’ concerns about bus services, but to remember that far more bus journeys than train journeys are taken each day, despite the fact that the Government focuses more often on rail. Scottish Labour’s debate last week on the Glasgow airport rail link highlighted why an independent audit is required to investigate the loss of £30 million from the public purse. During the debate, I cited the recent Audit Scotland report “Scotland’s key transport infrastructure projects”. One of the key recommendations for the Scottish Government is that it should “refine and develop its plan for scrutinising, challenging and monitoring major investment projects”, which would undoubtedly lead to more accountability and ensure that we would not have a repeat of the waste of taxpayers’ money that was caused by the cancellation of GARL. Over recent years, a number of projects have faced delays and cancellations by the Government, undermining the development of our rail networks. Although the Borders railway project is to be welcomed, it suffered a number of delays and cost increases. That is another example of why Audit Scotland recommended that the Scottish Government should “improve” its “openness and public accountability”. However, it was not only the Scottish Government that was under fire from Audit Scotland. Transport Scotland has some recommendations that it needs to take on board, despite its having some “good corporate governance structure for major investment projects”. I await both Transport Scotland and the Scottish Government meeting the deadline that has been set in the recommendations. It is only right that, in debating the challenges for our transport system in the 21st century, we remember the wider role that the system plays in all areas of people’s lives. From health and education to leisure, business and employment, a well-connected, well-planned network of roads, rail and buses can make lives simpler and safer for both young and old.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how the help to buy (Scotland) shared equity scheme will stimulate the house building industry and help people become home owners. (S4O-02558)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer, but with the help to buy scheme in England pushing up house prices and given the housing crisis in Scotland does he agree that the help to buy scheme in Scotland could make things harder for first-time buyers over the medium to long term?

The debate is not one that is designed to maintain the usual standard political posturing that can be witnessed in the chamber, but to address serious questions that remain about the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link project, and to ensure that we have the clarity that taxpayers want about the cost of cancelling that vital infrastructure project. We on the Labour benches want to know why £30 million has been spent on closing GARL and—especially—why almost £8 million has been lost on land transactions. Those questions are why we believe that there should be an independent audit of the handling of the land transactions to expose any lack of accountability and competence. If the minister and the Scottish Government maintain that all aspects of the cancellation of GARL were above board, they should have an audit and clear the air once and for all.

No. I am sorry but as time is tight in this debate I am not minded to give way. In 2009, when John Swinney axed GARL, I was a local councillor, so I know of the anger and dismay that constituents felt when they heard that the GARL project was to close. To this day, many of my constituents vent those feelings at surgeries and on the doorstep. The more information that surfaces about the cancellation of GARL, the more local people remember that it was this Scottish Government that let them down. Not only did the local economy lose investment, but jobs that were promised to Renfrewshire were taken away at a time when they were desperately needed. For my constituents—constituents I share with George Adam and Derek Mackay—clarity is required and it should come from an independent audit. Such was Derek Mackay and George Adam’s support for the project that the then council leader recognised the transport and economic benefits of the rail link and continued to support the project until his boss axed it. I am not sure which position Derek Mackay takes these days when standing up for Renfrewshire. The same goes for George Adam, who was also a councillor at the time and was also in full support of the project.

No. I am sorry, but time is too tight to take an intervention. When John Swinney made his announcement, he maintained that we could not afford the project. The viability of the project was never questioned and the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Act 2007 has never been repealed. With that in mind, and given the sale of the land at ludicrously lower prices than it was bought for, I urge the Scottish Government to listen to Scottish Labour and allow an independent audit to take place. Looking at next week’s business, the Scottish Government has scheduled a debate entitled “Modernising Scotland’s Transport Infrastructure, Meeting the Challenges of the 21st Century”. What a shame that the country’s largest airport experiences poor connectivity to all our rail networks. To ask visitors who land at Glasgow airport to take a bus to get a train to travel 9 miles hardly seems like a country that is meeting the challenges of the 21st century. The GARL saga really embarrasses this Government. The information that led to this debate being sought was obtained only after sustained use of parliamentary protocols and questions in the media. A recent Audit Scotland report shows that the Government needs to improve its reporting to the public on major projects. The GARL affair best exemplifies the lack of accountability and transparency of this SNP Government. Let us have an independent audit and find out why £30 million of taxpayers’ money was wasted on GARL.

Like all my colleagues in the chamber, I fully support the development of a national play strategy. Play and recreation are essential to the health and wellbeing of children. They promote the development of creativity, imagination and self-confidence as well as physical, social, cognitive and emotional strengths and skills. Through their involvement in play and recreation, children learn by doing; they explore and experience the world around them and experiment with new ideas, roles and experiences. In doing so, they learn to understand and construct their social position in the world. Scottish Labour pledged to develop a national play strategy in our 2011 manifesto. l hope that the Scottish Government delivers on the broad range of commitments and outcomes that are included in the action plan. Play and recreation are very different now compared with what they were when I was growing up. Children in all regions of the world are spending increasing periods of time engaged in play and recreation on various digital platforms and media, and information and communication technologies are emerging as a central part of a child’s daily life. Today, children move seamlessly between offline and online environments. The use of modern technologies such as tablets and personal computers to learn and play provides children with benefits around learning cognitive skills, albeit spending hours on games consoles and in front of the TV is often children’s primary use of technology. We need a balance. A recent survey of 13,000 children for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde found that one in four children spends as much as 12 hours a day in front of the television or on a computer. Moreover, a 2011 report by International Play Association Scotland suggested that only 35 per cent of children felt happy and safe when playing in their streets. It is easy to see from that why children are spending more time using digital media. I welcome the commitment in the action plan for children and young people to be able to find clean, safe and welcoming spaces in which to play and gather near their home. There is a duty on parents and adults in our society to provide safe platforms on which our children can grow, develop and enjoy themselves. The action plan can, I hope, help us provide those safe platforms for our children, but a number of issues need to be addressed. The right to play is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which states that children have the right to relax and play, and to join in a wide range of cultural, artistic and other recreational activities. In the consultation on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, the Scottish Government committed to give the UNCRC a statutory basis in Scots law by placing a legal duty on ministers to give due regard to the UNCRC in all its decisions. However, the wording of the bill requires ministers only to “keep under consideration” matters relating to the UNCRC and to act “if they consider it appropriate to do so”. The wording is ambiguous and I am disappointed that the Scottish Government will not make a stronger commitment to the legislative incorporation of the UNCRC in the bill. Every child should be able to enjoy those rights, regardless of where he or she lives, his or her cultural background or his or her parental status. According to Children 1st, one in five Scottish children is officially recognised as living in poverty. Save the Children’s research demonstrates that children who grow up in poverty are more than twice as likely as their better-off peers to experience developmental difficulties by the time that they reach school age. There is a substantial evidence base to suggest that access to high-quality play experiences from a very young age can support the healthy development of some of our most vulnerable children and nurture literacy and key skills that can unlock their potential and help address the gap in educational attainment. I agree with Save the Children’s view that the Scottish Government should prioritise in the play strategy action plan support for families experiencing poverty and endeavour to join up commitments in the national parenting strategy, to prioritise support for parents to provide a good home-learning environment. Many of the actions in the action plan apply to local authorities that have already had to absorb significant cuts to their budgets and local authorities may struggle to increase leisure services beyond current levels. Last year, the Scottish Government committed to providing £3 million for play through the early years and early intervention change fund, which supported projects to help children play safely in their local area. In light of budget pressures on local authorities, I would like assurances that the measures contained in the action plan will be backed by the financial resources to turn those ambitions into reality. The play strategy action plan can be used as a tool to help vulnerable children in certain sections of society. Families Outside estimates that 28,000 children in Scotland have a parent in prison. The incarceration of a parent can have an adverse effect on a child’s development and increase the likelihood of them growing up to offend later in life. The play strategy action plan, coupled with the early years and early intervention change fund, could be used as a tool to support that vulnerable group of children by providing quality play and recreation time with their incarcerated parent.

I thank the minister for that clarity. Those families are an important section of society, and I am pleased that they will not be overlooked. I fully support the development of the national play strategy, which I feel can have an integral role in a child’s development and become an invaluable tool in helping society’s most vulnerable children. With on-going support and commitment, we can turn those ambitions into reality.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how its small business bonus scheme has helped businesses in West Scotland. (S4O-02473)

Does the minister agree that Renfrewshire Council’s retail improvement scheme has been successful as a creative and innovative scheme that is designed to support small businesses and shops and to improve the appearance of our high streets? Will the Scottish Government roll out the scheme throughout Scotland as part of the town centre review?

I thank Nigel Don for securing today’s members’ business debate. The motion pays tribute to Energy Action Scotland for achieving a remarkable milestone of 30 years in existence. In the current economic climate, we need such organisations to help to reduce the cost of heating homes and to promote energy efficiency. With fuel poverty figures stagnant in recent years, and the target for the Scottish Government’s pledge to eradicate fuel poverty, where practicable, only a few years away, we should be concerned that not enough action is being taken. The sustainable housing strategy is to be welcomed. However, we must ensure that the help that is offered goes to those who desperately need the assistance. Although the Scottish Government has invested almost £150 million on fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes since 2009-10 and 2011-12, it is estimated that the net gain to households was £700 million, while 300 million tonnes of CO2 have been saved. Since 2008, more than 540,000 homes have received free or subsidised cavity wall or loft insulation measures through the carbon emissions reduction targets. The Scottish house condition survey showed that 125,000 homes upgraded their boiler in the year leading up to the strategy. However, I have had concerns raised with me about the efficiency and sustainability of the retrofit programme, the buy-in to that programme and whether it will achieve its aims. Fuel poverty cannot be looked at in isolation. We also need to take into account climate change targets. Progress has been made, but we are still well short of the mark. We have annual targets that must be achieved each year until 2020. However, those targets have not been met and the emissions from 2009-10 increased by 5.8 per cent, or 2 per cent when we take into account the European Union emissions trading system. Emissions from the residential and transport sectors were higher in 2010 than they were in 1990. As has been mentioned, an important factor in fuel poverty is rural poverty. I recently met Calor Scotland, which mostly covers off-grid and rural areas. I was alarmed and surprised by some of the information that I was given. I was told that “UK energy efficiency schemes continue to fail rural communities” and that “The UK Government’s Energy Company Obligation ... is in the hands of the ‘Big 6’”. The Government’s hands are tied and there is very little help that it can offer. Calor went on to say that “Funding earmarked for rural areas—the Carbon Saving Community Obligation—is for settlements with a population size under 10,000 and will unlikely cater for small communities”. Finally, it said that “Previous schemes such as CERT and CESP, targeted at rural areas, were not spent and there is danger of history repeating itself if lessons haven’t been learnt.” In considering fuel poverty, we must also take into account child poverty. The link between the two is inextricable, so they cannot be looked at in isolation. Child poverty figures remain too high and too many of our children are fuel and food poor. That is not a situation that anyone in this chamber should be proud of in 2013. However, I finish on a positive note and once again pay tribute to Energy Action Scotland on achieving its marvellous 30-year milestone.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take to ensure that looked-after children who have been in multiple placements have access to a stable education. (S4O-02452)

GIRFEC and a stable home life are indeed important factors in stability for looked-after children. However, we know that looked-after children are significantly more likely to use our colleges than to use our universities. Does the minister agree that, with college budgets being cut, we must do more to support looked-after young people with their second-chance education?

As members know, the rehabilitation of offenders and the impact on the family is an issue that I have raised repeatedly and will continue to raise. It is right that we should modernise rehabilitation in our prisons for the benefit of offenders and their victims. In April this year, the SPS chief executive, Colin McConnell, said at the offender management conference: “for and on behalf of the victims of crime, there can be no more powerful justification for tackling re-offending and supporting re-integration, than doing so in their name and to try as best we can through the intelligent work we have yet to do, to ensure that there are far fewer victims in future.” Mr McConnell is right, as long as we remember that the families and children of offenders are victims, too. In taking into account the barriers to reducing reoffending, support for the family remains a major concern. There are many issues that affect families, one of which is the loss of family income, which often leads to changes in the housing situation, which in turn has a detrimental impact on the behaviour and educational attainment of children. Research shows that supporting families as well as working with the offender helps to break the cycle of offending. Before the summer recess, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice attended a meeting of the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment. I thank him for attending that cross-party group. It was a valuable meeting, at which members of the group heard from Mr MacAskill and, in turn, had the chance to ask questions on supporting families to reduce reoffending, which remains our key goal. With the changes in family units and in society in general since the introduction of the 1974 act, it is right—and overdue—that we seek to modernise the legislation. However, we must take into consideration the fact that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to tackling reoffending. My members’ business debate in May placed a focus on the need for person-centred approaches to reducing reoffending. In opening the debate, I stated that all prisoners have assets and that we can, if we work with them to utilise those assets, tackle reoffending. When I say “asset”, I mean nothing financial or material; I mean assets ranging from education qualifications and work experience, to hobbies and interests to—of course—families and friends. In modernising, we need take risks and come up with new ideas. As Einstein said, insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. Earlier this year, I met a group of ex-offenders in Glasgow and heard how the many different agencies that are involved in tackling reoffending do not work well together in supporting newly released offenders. I also heard about how throughcare should start at the beginning of the sentence. Another aspect of tackling reoffending and readying the person to be integrated into society is the provision of meaningful activity while they are in prison. Meaningful activity creates a sense of belonging in prisoners, as long as they can get involved in a work programme, training or an education course that reflects what they want to do on release and can see themselves benefiting from that. One of the ex-offenders whom I met in Glasgow told me how they had worked in finance for many years but could be offered only an art class in prison. How is that meant to rehabilitate anyone from the cycle of reoffending? Instead, using the ideology of utilising prisoners’ assets, a prisoner with an accountancy skill could teach other prisoners, which would tackle the low level of numeracy in our prisons. Rehabilitative programmes have their place in our prison estates, as long as they are well funded and achieve the outcomes that they are meant to achieve. A freedom of information request shows that the SPS uses seven rehabilitation programmes. One, the female offending behaviour programme, has annual funding of almost £92,000 and offers 14 places, which means that the cost per prisoner place is £6,564. The substance-related offending behaviour programme has annual funding of almost £500,000 and has 173 places—a cost per prisoner of around £3,000. We need to evaluate those programmes to determine the effectiveness of the funding and whether they actually tackle offending behaviour. The demonisation and public labelling of people as criminals after they have paid their debt to society remains a key concern for many people who work to tackle reoffending. Stigmatisation in communities, much of which is perpetuated by print media, affects reintegration. Headlines in bold capital letters slating someone as being a beast, a crook, a con or an animal are unhelpful and inflammatory. When the court has sentenced a person, he or she should be left to serve their punishment, and not demonised by people who are trying to sell papers. Only a few weeks ago, the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment had members of the print media in attendance and heard that papers and politicians have a role to play in tackling the stigma that ex-prisoners face in communities. We need a culture change. Other countries have managed it and, indeed, view someone’s being sentenced as the community failing that person as much as the person failing their community. Reintegration can happen only when people feel safe in their communities. The recent fall in reoffending rates has to be welcomed, but we need to be cautious that we do not see it as meaning that the current system is working because the figures are not a definitive measure of all reoffending. The current system lacks consistency and co-ordination and we need fully to welcome modernisation and reform. Let us also remember that Audit Scotland’s report told us that reoffending costs us £3 billion each year. How many schools, hospitals and public services could that money fund?

With an estimated 29 per cent of Scottish households currently living in fuel poverty—a level that has failed to drop below 25 per cent since 2007—can the minister inform us how the national retrofit programme will ensure that Scotland meets its 2016 target? Is the minister supportive of the Labour Party’s energy price freeze commitment?

Before I make my contribution, I will take a few moments to thank members of the Equal Opportunities Committee for their hard work on and dedication to the report that we are talking about today. I also thank my fellow committee members for the support that they gave me—and give special thanks to the clerks and staff for all their tremendous support—during my time as convener. Scottish Labour welcomes the report and supports the findings and recommendations. However, throughout the report—and the report on “Gypsy/Travellers and Care”—there is a recurring theme of a lack of national leadership. In its briefing for this afternoon’s debate, the Equality and Human Rights Commission Scotland stated: “relations between Gypsy/Travellers and the settled community is the single greatest community relations challenge the country faces.” The EHRC added that “These problems are not insurmountable, but require leadership and resources”. One potential reason for that theme of a lack of leadership, which runs through the report, is the lack of political will, not just in central Government but in local government, and public apathy. The minister said in her opening speech that the issue “is constantly being looked at”. If that is the case, I wonder at the lack of progress that is being made. Respectable racism is one challenge that the Gypsy Traveller community faces. If we were to replace the two words “Gypsy Traveller” with any other ethnic group we would not be having this debate, as action would have been taken long ago and leadership would have been exhibited in haystacks. The following quotes were brought to my attention by MECOPP, and they show that we are some way from tackling the discriminatory attitudes seen throughout the country that are perpetuated by the media and local politicians. One Aberdeen councillor is quoted as saying: “Putting a gypsy travellers halting site next to a school is morally wrong.”

This is not a party-political issue; as Mark McDonald will know, it crosses all parties. A Dundee councillor is reported to have “called on Dundonians to play their part in deterring travelling people from visiting the city”, and further called on the people of Dundee to refuse to give work to Gypsy Travellers so that “we” may “see an end to these people coming to Dundee.”

I thank Christian Allard for his point. However, my point is that such attitudes exist throughout the country and unless we highlight them we will never get rid of them. It is not a party-political issue; it is an issue that affects everyone. I am aware that people from all parties make such remarks, but how can we expect the public to change their attitudes when politicians get away with it? Unless we publicise such discrimination, we will never end it. There are great examples of positive quotes from local and civic leaders, but the level of coverage that they receive is often of a different grade. Scottish Labour recognises that many Gypsy Travellers in Scotland continue to face discrimination. Although the population of that ethnic group is unknown, with estimates ranging from 2,000 to 20,000, the level of discrimination is greatly disproportionate. This week we have heard a lot about the Government’s programme for Scotland, and we have repeatedly heard from the First Minister and his Cabinet about the need to create a fairer country and empower communities. However, it appears that the Gypsy Traveller community is often overlooked. Page 50 of the programme places great emphasis on the Government’s view of “equality and social justice as central to its vision for a fairer Scotland”, and all four bullet points in section 19 relate to Gypsy Travellers. However, nothing on the Government’s agenda aims to improve the lives, experiences and environment of that overlooked group. During evidence sessions, as the report highlights, we heard that many Gypsy Travellers have to hide who they are, which means that such a rich cultural heritage is cloaked for fear of persecution. How can any Gypsy Traveller feel that that can be overcome when the Government will not take steps to tackle the discrimination that is often perpetuated by the lack of understanding of some in the media? Having visited sites in different areas of the country, I have witnessed the shocking standards of living that Gypsy Travellers face: overflowing septic tanks, children bathing in freezing-cold amenity blocks, poorly lit paths, a lack of bus stops and outside toilets. Nobody should be expected to live in those conditions. During those visits I met some strong Gypsy Traveller women who have overcome a lack of education and taught themselves to read. They are strong women who care for the elderly and the children in the community with little help from services that many others would require. The report raises some grave concerns about how Gypsy Travellers live in Scotland, and we are concerned about the apparent lack of progress since the previous inquiry into Gypsy Travellers in 2004-05.

Co-operation from COSLA during the evidence sessions was poor and left a lot to be desired. However, the follow-up response from the COSLA chief executive created a bit more positivity and hope that we can find solutions to tackle the real issues. Scottish Labour supports the inquiry report’s recommendations and hopes that the Government will take them forward to make a real difference to the lives of Gypsy Travellers.

The next year is without doubt an important year for Scotland but, if yesterday is anything to go by, it will not be about what really matters to the people of Scotland—jobs, security, shelter and hope. Instead, the year will be plagued by the on-going fight about the constitution. Like many Labour members, I became involved in politics through trade union activism, to help people in our communities and workplaces—not to debate the constitution. Yet here we are with Scotland on hold to hear how the legislation that the First Minister and his Government propose will boost the agenda to separate from the UK. Scotland stands still and suffers under the SNP’s separation agenda. We heard yesterday that Scottish Labour MSPs plan to bring forward a wide range of bills in the coming year. Each will tackle issues in the real world—they are about better buses to benefit communities and people, not the Brian Souters of Scotland; greater and improved services for deaf children and families; and changes to the organ donor system that would save lives. Scotland faces a housing crisis—the biggest in more than 60 years and since the end of world war two. New housing supply is down by 14 per cent, the new completed housing rate is down by 13 per cent, and the number of affordable houses is down by 13 per cent. Perhaps SNP members can inform the chamber, people waiting on housing lists and those who need an affordable home why their clear manifesto pledge from 2011, which was to build 6,000 socially rented homes each year, was abandoned and replaced with references to affordable homes.

No, I am sorry. Yesterday, I listened to speech after speech from SNP members that were about their jam tomorrow plans for separation. To be honest, it got a bit like groundhog day. We should have been talking about the real issues, which I want to talk about, so I will not take an intervention. Housing lists across the country remain unacceptably long, while Audit Scotland reports that we need another 500,000 houses over the next 25 years. A PhD is not required to assess that, as house-building rates are falling and demand is increasing, housing will continue to be in crisis until the Scottish Government accepts that it needs a vision that is deserving of those whom it aims to help.

No, I am sorry. The housing—

No, I am sorry.

The housing bill that is due over the coming months will be closely scrutinised and the true detail revealed. Although the First Minister promised to strengthen protection for tenants in the private rented sector, security of tenure must be a priority for the Government. Yesterday we also heard the First Minister offer us a glimpse into statistics that clearly get him excited. Perhaps he could act on the statistics already offered to him and to his housing minister by Audit Scotland. Since coming into office in 2007, the First Minister and his Government have slashed the housing budget by more than half. We also heard yesterday about the groundbreaking legislation brought in by Scottish Labour to tackle homelessness. The 2012 target set out to rehouse only those who became unintentionally homeless, but we need to move towards tackling the issues of so-called intentional homelessness. Let us be clear—no one aims to be intentionally homeless, but more has to be done. Without any fixed abode, what hope is there for anyone to access employment, improve their health and wellbeing and tackle the cause that leaves them homeless? As a country, we are failing those individuals. As a Parliament, we need to have a cohesive and comprehensive strategy to help those individuals who are sleeping rough across Scotland. Many this coming winter will face the choice between fuelling themselves and fuelling their homes. At least 28 per cent of all Scottish households are currently living in fuel poverty, and we need to go further and invest more to ensure that the Scottish Government’s target of abolishing fuel poverty “as far as practicable” by November 2016 can be achieved. That means further investment, as Energy Action Scotland called for in October 2011. It argued to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that there needed to be greater investment to reach that target—a message that the Scottish Government has failed to heed. Sandra White asked yesterday what Labour members were doing in their constituencies during the recess. I am happy to inform Mrs White and the rest of the members on the SNP benches that I was out across my area carrying out street surgeries—

The single biggest issue that was brought to my attention was housing. I visited housing associations and heard how cuts to the housing association grant have damaged new-build programmes, reduced the reserves and contributed to such a poor record in house building. New builds and starts have dramatically reduced over the past year, leading to Shelter Scotland commenting that “even with recent additional cash injections Scotland simply isn’t building enough new homes” and that the Scottish Government could use its budget to make housing a priority. Philip Hogg from Homes for Scotland said that the 25 per cent reductions “reinforce the fact that Scotland is mired in a housing crisis.”

Finally, I paraphrase Clement Attlee. When Nye Bevan asked him, “Where are all the people I need for my programme?”, Attlee responded, “Looking for houses, Nye.” Perhaps the First Minister, when not conducting his own polls, should ask, “Where are all the people I need for my independence?” The answer would be similar to Clement Attlee’s—“Looking for houses.”

16. To ask the Scottish Government what the annual cost is of prescribing drugs for prisoners with depression. (S4O-02247)

I am disappointed that there are no centrally held records. NHS Health Scotland and the Scottish Government class depression as a mental illness. However, the Scottish Prison Service does not, stating that only 14 per cent of the prison population has an enduring mental health issue, despite the wealth of information suggesting that the percentage is far higher. Will the minister re-examine the mental health strategy for Scotland’s prisons, with a view to including in it depression as an enduring mental illness to ensure that prisoners can access the correct level of help and support?

I congratulate my friend and colleague Hanzala Malik on securing this members’ business debate on an issue that affects many individuals in black and ethnic minority communities, not only here in Scotland but across the globe. It would be naive of any member to suggest that Scotland is a haven for racial equality and that the campaigns implemented by the current Administration and previous Administrations have tackled stereotypes and negative attitudes towards race and religion. As we all know, there is still a long way to go. The motion makes specific reference to the I speak for myself campaign: a very emotive campaign put forward to the public in a very simple way. The campaign uses real people and real-life examples to help show that Muslim women are just like any other members of society, in that they drink Irn Bru and are interested in their local football clubs. Such campaigns help to bring about community cohesion and continue to show that Scotland is a welcoming and inclusive nation for anyone who wishes to come here. Every member in this chamber, as well as individuals across the UK and around the world, is aware of the death of Drummer Lee Rigby. That has led to the increased presence of far-right groups that seek to paint a single religion as the perpetrator of that atrocity. Those groups have used a single event caused by two individuals who just happened to be from a certain religion to fuel tensions and reinforce negative attitudes and stereotypes. Leaders of various faith groups have rightly stood side by side to declare that that was an attack by two people, not an attack by a religion. That solidarity of support is a beacon of hope and unity, which was recognised by the majority of the population across the United Kingdom. Having said that, there has unfortunately been an increase in the number of Islamophobic incidents. Attacks and crimes of any kind are terrible, but those that are motivated by malice or ill will towards a specific group in society due to people’s religion and beliefs are downright despicable. I commend the work undertaken by various groups, such as Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre. The group’s campaign, I speak for myself, has enabled it to help raise awareness of discrimination and issues that the Muslim community faces, and I whole-heartedly support the idea of an integrated and systematic approach to tackling negative stereotypes and discrimination. With more organisations collaborating together, they will be able to reach various societal groups and bring their message to various parts of the country, and in doing that they will pave the way for a more equal, respectful and tolerant Scotland. As Dennis Robertson mentioned, the Equal Opportunities Committee has completed two inquiries into Gypsy Travellers in the past year and a half. One of the key messages in both reports is that Gypsy Travellers, as an ethnic group, are frequently stereotyped and discriminated against, often as a result of media coverage. We found evidence of newspapers encouraging the nimby attitude to Gypsy Travellers, and television programmes portraying them in a bad light and promoting stereotypes. I sum up my feelings on the motion and debate by quoting the former United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, who said: “Ignorance and prejudice are the handmaidens of propaganda. Our mission, therefore, is to confront ignorance with knowledge, bigotry with tolerance, and isolation with the outstretched hand of generosity. Racism can, will, and must be defeated.” With that, I gladly lend my support to the motion.

I am delighted to open the debate as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee. The inquiry entitled “Having and keeping a home: steps to preventing homelessness among young people” began before I joined the committee. I thank all the members who served on the committee between September 2011, when the inquiry was launched, and the date when the report was published; they included Stuart McMillan, Annabel Goldie and my predecessor on the committee, Claudia Beamish. I also thank all the organisations and professionals who gave evidence and, most important, the young people who provided life experiences at committee and those whom we met in supported accommodation in Inverness and North Ayrshire and at a community project here in Edinburgh. As I said, the inquiry started before my time as convener and its remit had already been set. The remit aimed to explore the existing good practice in local authorities and other agencies in and beyond Scotland that is effective in preventing youth homelessness; and to identify the gaps in preventative service provision and establish how they could be closed. I believe that the report, which was launched last October, meets those aims. We found examples of good practice and of gaps in service provision, and we requested the minister at the time, Keith Brown, to report on how the Scottish Government would close the identified gaps. In the Scottish Government’s response to our report, dated 29 November 2012, we heard from Margaret Burgess, the new Minister for Housing and Welfare, how the Government would meet the committee’s recommendations. In the inquiry, the committee heard about the principal causes of youth homelessness. That allowed us to explore the prevention work that is undertaken and its effectiveness; the particular predicament of care leavers; the role of life skills; and young people’s experience of tenancy. In a round-table evidence session, the committee heard accounts of personal experiences of homelessness services from Yvette Hutcheson of Quarriers, who painted a bleak picture of family breakdowns, addiction issues and mental health problems—issues that are principal causes of youth homelessness. We heard from Yvette that young people had remarked that going through supported accommodation was “like a rite of passage”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 129.] She also pointed out that some people had secured a tenancy but did not have the knowledge to keep it. Support to enable young people to maintain a tenancy was a recurring theme throughout the evidence sessions. Financial pressures on families can result in young people having to leave home. That was highlighted by Rhea Nicolson, whom the committee met in supported accommodation in Inverness. Rhea had to move out after she turned 16 because her benefits had ended and her mother, as a single parent working part time, could not afford to keep her. Her story, like others, is a cruel tale of the age that we are in and something that should not be happening in the 21st century. Research that was done by Heriot-Watt University identified trigger points that emerged in young people aged 14 to 17, which included “school-related issues like truancy and exclusion, parents with alcohol or drug problems” and parents who were homeless as a child. Suzanne Fitzpatrick of Heriot-Watt also referred to “a clear evidential link between someone’s displaying a pattern of running away and their becoming homeless as an adult.” That was backed up by Shelter Scotland, which said that “the rate of running away among young homeless people is 84 per cent, in comparison with 11 per cent for the general population.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 154, 145.] Given the clear identification of those vulnerable young people, the committee then looked at the role of the education system for young people. On the issue of prevention, mediation and respite were clearly identified as tools for tackling youth homelessness. The minister said in her response to the committee’s report that the supported accommodation implementation group had taken into consideration the report’s recommendations on respite, and I am keen to hear how much progress has been made on mediation and respite over the past six months. Mediation was cited in the report as having an important role in prevention. Janeine Barrett of North Ayrshire Council, Clare Mailer from Perth and Kinross Council and Kate Sanford of Quarriers each provided the committee with examples of where and when mediation can work to prevent youth homelessness. Kate Sanford said: “young people have talked about situations in which family members simply got on top of one another and it was difficult to take a reasoned and rational view of what was going on.” Perhaps with more mediation services available, fewer young people will find themselves homeless. When mediation cannot work, respite must be made available to give parents and young people space. Respite is an extremely important tool. Young people recognise that, as Kate Sanford backed up when she said that according to young people, “a break away from the situation for both their parents and them might have stopped the escalation of emotions getting completely out of hand” and prevented “the vicious cycle of homelessness.” Byron Carruthers of Quarriers described a personal experience and added: “Respite—some time apart—would be brilliant.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 12 June 2012; c 512-3.] The committee concluded that mediation, education and respite are vital elements, and we noted that although the value of respite was recognised, we heard much less about it in comparison with mediation and education. We believe that respite should be integrated into the mediation approach and I hope to hear more from the minister on that. I will not say too much on the role of education in the prevention of homelessness, as it took up a good part of the report and I am sure that other members will pick up on it. However, preventing homelessness through education can play a significant role, as long as all children in each school receive the same guidance. During the evidence sessions, we heard that there was inconsistency throughout local authorities. In some local authorities some schools carry out in-school preventative activity, yet in other local authorities all schools do such work. Concerns were raised about resistance from headteachers. Grant Mackintosh from East Dunbartonshire Council, which is part of the west housing options hub, agreed that there should be “stronger links with education”, although they depend on the reception that is given by school management and whether headteachers view such links as a priority. It appeared from the evidence that a roll-out might be required in line with the getting it right for every child approach, and as such we recommended that the Scottish Government work with local authorities to collect data on which schools young homeless people attend; identify what preventative work is undertaken; establish which schools carry out no preventative work and why; and take steps to remove obstacles identified. Given that more than six months have passed since the minister’s response, I am keen to hear how far those recommendations have gone. For any young person, leaving the care system when they are ready should be a new start that offers an exciting challenge into adulthood. However, we heard that that is rarely the case. Automatic homelessness exists as a result of disjointed care and housing services. Nick Bell from the Scottish Council for Single Homeless told us that “in some local authority areas, young people are still routinely discharged through the homeless route, rather than with a pathway plan that has been worked out for them.” Heather Gray from the Prince’s Trust echoed Nick Bell by stating that “there is a very inconsistent picture of support for young people before, during and after leaving care and we need to manage transitions much better.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 131, 130.] She added that looked-after children left care “far too early”. I believe that someone of 16 or 17 is too young to leave the care system, especially given that many looked-after children are vulnerable young people with different levels of maturity who are still developing mentally, possibly as a result of having suffered traumatic life experiences, often through no fault of their own. Byron Carruthers, a former care leaver, explained why he believes that the age limit is too low. He said: “It is impossible that people, even if they have lived with their mum and dad, would have the appropriate life skills at that age. The age limit for people going into homelessness should not be 16; it should be 18. That would give people more of a chance to learn skills that help them to look after themselves.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 12 June 2012; c 492-3.] Concerns surround not only age limits, but the availability of support to ensure that young people cope in their transition. Keith Brown recognised that in his evidence to the committee. Ms Burgess stated in the Government’s response that, following the consultation on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, the Government is considering how to improve legislation around throughcare and aftercare. I welcome that and look forward to hearing how that legislation will be strengthened. As Byron Carruthers pointed out, a lack of appropriate life skills exists not only in care leavers, but across the general population of young people. The committee heard various examples of where the problem lies. Much of it appears to stem not only from education, but from a young person’s level of confidence and awareness. A few weeks ago, I heard from a young constituent who is not homeless but who backs up the report in the sense that they think that schools do not teach the life skills that are required to find and maintain a tenancy. Dr Paul Monaghan and Sharon Munro, of the Highland Homeless Trust and Barnardo’s Scotland respectively, said that many young people do not have the life skills, experience or support to make transitions easier, which leads to many of them becoming alienated and having a very dependent outlook. Basic skills, such as budgeting and skills in how to cook, wash clothes and clean the house, could be taught in schools or through other forums, but there is already an issue with the educational attainment of many young homeless people. We heard about the catch-22 for those young people in addressing their education and skills gaps, possibly through college. Losing benefits is not an option for many who are in desperate need of clinging to that financial support. Great focus was placed on school education in addressing life skills through the curriculum for excellence. We heard about financial education and learning programmes, such as the tackling debt, talk money, talk solutions and small change initiatives. Those initiatives are to be welcomed in preventing money problems for young people, but I think that many young people will fall through the cracks, and although the initiatives are preventative, they may not improve life skills if there are already literacy and numeracy issues. As the report asked how the outcomes are measured, I will wait to find that out before I add anything further. Since the report was launched, community care grants have been devolved to the Scottish Government. There had been issues around the time that was taken to process applications and the amounts that were offered. I hope that those issues have been resolved or, if they have not, that considerable improvements have been made. However, it may be too early to tell, because anyone who applied for a community care grant when those grants were devolved at the start of April may only just have received, or may be about to receive, the support that they need. Serious concerns were expressed about the amounts that were provided to furnish flats. We heard from Yvette Hutcheson that “people who apply for a community care grant may get £100 with which they are supposed to furnish their entire property.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 136.] Kate Sanford of Quarriers spoke about people having to sleep on floorboards, because of the timing of the grants. I am sure that that would apply to someone who had to buy beds, furniture, white goods, carpets and curtains on £100. We also heard from Kate Sanford that, given that community care grants are now devolved to the Scottish Government, “we have an opportunity to look carefully at and do something about a situation that is genuinely setting up young people to fail.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 12 June 2012; c 495.] The committee heard about issues relating to maintaining a tenancy. Accommodation quality and isolation play a major part in young people keeping a home. I have touched on some areas of the report and placed a great focus on others. I have no doubt that members will pick up on different parts of the report, too. I look forward to a positive debate and to hearing from members across the chamber. Finally, in one of the evidence sessions, the young homeless witnesses were asked what their ambitions were. Their answers brought it home to members that they are just kids like any other kids, who are being expected to go through a lot and to cope with stuff that other, very similar kids do not have to cope with.

I am delighted to hold my first members’ business debate on a topic that I have raised on numerous occasions in the Parliament and about which I feel strongly. Before I move on to the substance of my speech, I will thank a couple of people for their assistance in researching the debate: Dr Nancy Loucks; Charlie Martin; members of the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment; and the offenders and families I have met. I also say a special thank you to Gareth Brown, Dan Cairns and Lucy Connelly for their tireless research and support in these matters. Without the support and help of all those people, I doubt that we would be having the debate, which brings a focus to supporting families and offenders and aims to develop new ideas about reducing reoffending. As the title of the motion suggests, I have a different ideology about how we can reduce reoffending. All prisoners have assets other than financial or material assets, which can be anything from educational qualifications and work experience to hobbies and interests, family and friends. As one prison officer pointed out to me, someone—a mother or a father—will have loved and cared for the offender at some point. How do we recreate that bond? I accept that, for different reasons, some families break down, which leads to bonds being broken, but when there is still a chance for the relationship to work, we must utilise that asset in the interests of the offender, their family and society. Research shows that supporting the family, as well as working with the offender, helps to break the cycle of offending. As well as keeping the offender out of prison in the future, it can support the children of offenders who, statistically, are more likely to end up in a life of crime. The children of prisoners are a group in society that is often overlooked, even though more children will face a parent’s imprisonment than will face their parents’ divorce. They are silent victims who—I repeat—are more likely to enter the criminal justice system. A study by Joseph Murray of the University of Cambridge in 2007 found that the imprisonment of a parent predicted that a boy would be involved in antisocial behaviour and would suffer from mental health problems during the course of his life—in some cases, that continued well into adulthood and even up to the age of 48. The same study found that 48 per cent of boys who were separated from a parent because of imprisonment between birth and the age of 10 ended up in prison as an adult. Therefore, looking at families as an asset and maintaining bonds can play a crucial role in reducing reoffending. The motion welcomes the investment of £70,000 in a pilot throughcare programme in HMP Greenock. Effective and well-established throughcare is an essential service if reoffending is to be tackled. At a recent meeting with ex-offenders in Glasgow, I heard about the lack of joined-up working among different agencies that should be better at supporting newly released prisoners. One of the men said that throughcare should start as soon as someone who has been sentenced enters the prison estate. Another major issue that came out of the time that I spent with ex-offenders was the lack of meaningful activity in prison. Over the past month or so, I have highlighted concerns that I have on the issue, which are to do with incentivising activity, joined-up working and the purpose of the activity that is undertaken. Crucially, that is what my motion aims to address and highlight. Are prisoners being offered work or educational courses that suit their needs, that utilise the skills that they possess and which improve on the knowledge that many prisoners have? It has been said to me more than once that some prisoners are among the most entrepreneurial people that one could meet. I do not doubt that for a minute, but the issue is how we can use that lawfully and for the benefit of the offender. Creating a system of meaningful activity around the assets of prisoners is seen as a costly process, but we should look at what reoffending costs Scotland socially and economically. One ex-offender whom I met who had previously worked in finance ended up in an art class, as that is all that was on offer. How is that the best way of rehabilitating prisoners? I am sure that that was not an isolated case, but given that the offender in question had financial qualifications and that the majority of the prison population have trouble with reading, writing and numeracy, would not utilising his assets have benefited other prisoners as much as it would have benefited the offender himself? While I am on the subject of mentoring, I would like to welcome the funds that the Scottish Government has announced to establish a national network of mentoring schemes. I have witnessed the work that the Wise Group carries out through its routes out of prison project, and I am delighted that it can carry on with its good work. On my visits to prisons, I have seen at first hand the terrific work that is undertaken to give prisoners work experience. In Greenock prison, I was interviewed for the prison radio station by a young man who had never previously thought about sitting in front of a microphone. I was extremely impressed by the questions that he posed on the spot and how he took to questioning a politician. Taking part in the course had started a passion for him. As I listened to that bright young man, I could hear how he wanted to change and better himself, yet had never thought that he could. Projects that give confidence to an offender are required and essential for someone to turn their back on offending, as long as all the other dots are joined up. Everyone has a history and a story to tell. How we tap into those positive aspects of someone's background can offer change to that person and their community. A greater holistic approach is essential for a population with all manner of mental health problems. I can imagine that the right-wing types and their press will view this approach as a hug-a-hoodie type of soft justice, but we know that the current system is not working. When the country spends £128 million per year on reducing reoffending, which costs us £3 billion, we have to look at other means of tackling the crisis, which affects families and communities across my region and the country as a whole. I hope that the points and concerns that I have raised can feed into our justice system, and I look forward to hearing from other members. The debate is only a small part of what the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment set out to achieve. I hope that many members will consider coming and feeding back to the group ideas on how we support families on the outside.

I am proud to support the Labour motion, and I fully back the calls for the creation of a Scottish childcare commission to investigate and deliver the best childcare possible to families across Scotland. I am disappointed that the Government has omitted reference to a commission from its amendment. The delay in introducing the 600-hour early years provision is having a damaging impact on families now. Despite the rhetoric, the SNP must be deemed a failure for waiting more than six years to bring in a key manifesto commitment for Scottish families. The Equal Opportunities Committee is continuing its inquiry into women and work, in which childcare has been a key focus. It is clear from the evidence received so far that women’s entry into the workplace can be highly dependent on access to a range of affordable and quality childcare places for children and young people up to the age of 15. The Scottish Childminding Association’s written submission states that there was a rise in available child-minding services in 2011 and a rise in attendance of children aged 0 to 15 that equated to 3.2 per cent of the population. However, it is very revealing that there were more childminding services per head of population in remote small towns in comparison with large urban areas and that childminding services were less abundant and slightly smaller in the most deprived areas in comparison with more affluent areas. In addition, a parent survey commissioned by the Daycare Trust and Children in Scotland showed that some childcare costs are higher in Scotland than in England. That signals that more needs to be done to improve access to childcare and demonstrates the need for a Scottish childcare commission. At last week’s Equal Opportunities Committee meeting, the important issue of access to childcare for disabled children was raised. On average, it costs three times as much to raise a disabled child as it does to raise children with no disabilities. With Scotland having some of the highest charges for childcare in Britain, affordability remains a key issue for many families and a major barrier to employment for many women. Average weekly childcare costs equate to more than half the gross average part-time weekly earnings, and there is a strong link between inconsistent supply and varied and high costs. The First Minister announced in March that, post independence, there will be a transformational change in childcare in Scotland, with a European-style system. The need for affordable and quality childcare exists now, and this Parliament has the powers to improve childcare now, so long as the Government shows political will—

I am sorry but I have only four minutes—I am very tight for time. The Government must show political will if there is to be cross-party work on the issue and work with organisations and people already involved in childcare. Scandinavian levels of public services but American levels of taxation will not guarantee any improvement. I look forward to the Government addressing that point. At the women’s employment summit last September, the Deputy First Minister said that childcare should be viewed in terms of infrastructure. I could not agree more with Ms Sturgeon. Children in Scotland clearly agrees with her, too. In its submission to the Equal Opportunities Committee, it said: “considerable investment is required”, and went on to say: “Children in Scotland has encouraged the Scottish Government to explore the possibility of using European Structural Funds to invest in the infrastructure of childcare.” As reforms to the welfare state and increased living costs make the lives of and conditions facing families more and more difficult, we need all-party work to help working families now and to help mothers and fathers back into work.

Today’s debate seems premature given that the consultation finished only two days ago and we are awaiting the responses and conclusions. However, like other members in the chamber today, I would like to give my views on the redesign of community justice in Scotland. First, I express my disappointment that the Government motion makes no mention of the excellent work of the CJAs. I am expressing the views of members of the CJAs, who feel that their work is unappreciated and undervalued. Looking at the three options that are proposed in the consultation document, I have concerns about how a national model will best meet local needs and reoffending patterns.

I think that CJAs work in broadly the same manner in different local authorities. I am perhaps fortunate in that I was a local authority member before I came to the Parliament, so I knew who the CJA members were. That may explain to Sandra White how I know about that. Although most offenders come from the poorest backgrounds and communities, which often share similar levels of poverty, addiction and inequality, there must be a local focus that meets local needs in addressing crime and rehabilitation. Centralising the community justice system and creating a national body could remove the ability of local services and local authorities to develop the best action plans to reduce reoffending. Although I agree that there must be reforms that improve efficiency and effectiveness, any changes should equip communities with the best tools and guidance on how to keep people out of prison, support families in need and create a safer country. The Government’s consultation is to be commended for reaching out to a wide range of stakeholders and partners. However, the three options that the Government outlined offer no guarantee of improved outcomes, and the case for such structural reform needs to be clearly outlined.

I thank Christine Grahame for her intervention—I will hold my decision on option D for a bit longer, if that is all right. Before the debate, I had the opportunity to preview two responses from CJAs in West Scotland. The south-west Scotland CJA has concerns that the overall approach to redesign “will not deliver the changes required, for a number of reasons”. It goes on to list the reasons for its concerns, stating that “The redesign does not appear to be connected to other reforms or policy developments”, such as getting it right for every child, the road to recovery and health and social care reform, among others that it names. It states that “The redesign has removed the opportunity to capitalise on the current momentum and positive direction of reducing crime, convictions, and re-offending” and, most critically, that “the whole consultation is based on a false premise that change will in itself deliver the required improvements.” The main theme of the south-west Scotland CJA’s response is that none of the stated options will deliver the 15 key characteristics, support the four pillars of public sector reform or tackle the key barriers to progress. The CJA offers instead its own model, which aims to retain the best existing arrangements and to continue to build on good progress and the expertise developed by CJAs, as well as address the barriers to progress that CJAs have individually and collectively experienced over the years since their inception. Once the Government evaluates all the consultation responses, I look forward to its response to the south-west Scotland CJA. The north Strathclyde CJA also expresses concern that the consultation and redesign will reduce the current momentum towards reducing crime and reoffending. If we are serious about continuing that progress, the Government has to address those concerns as quickly as possible. Indeed, many of the concerns highlighted by the south-west Scotland CJA are shared by the north Strathclyde CJA. Another major issue with the redesign is the lack of costing provided so far, and both CJAs link that with the warning offered by the Christie commission. I turn from the consultation to discuss why we need strong community justice, an effective prison system and well-designed throughcare. Reoffending rates are too high, which is a fact that we are all too familiar with hearing. However, what is being done to reduce the rates? Freedom of information requests to the SPS show that a total of seven rehabilitation programmes are used in Scottish prisons. However, each prison will run no more than four of the seven and most will provide only one or two programmes, with limited spaces. When we consider the annual funding and the places provided, it is not surprising to hear that reoffending is at the level that it is. One programme receives annual funding of £188,000 for 52 places, which means that the total cost per prisoner is approximately £3,300. Last month, I met a group of ex-offenders, and one of the key themes that arose from that was the lack of purposeful activity and joined-up working that they had experienced. For example, one ex-offender told me that he had decided to take up an education course to improve his chances of employment on release. He received £6 per week for attending the course, but if he had taken up a vocational course, he would have received £15 per week, with the possibility of a bonus. There is therefore no incentive to take up educational activity, which is deeply worrying, given the literacy levels in prisons. Also, when he completed the course, he was transferred between prisons and he has yet to receive his certificate, which prospective employers require. That is an example of the lack of joined-up working. If we are serious about reducing reoffending, throughcare should start as soon as the offender enters prison, as many feel the need to reoffend on release because they have little support or money, or they do not have a home to go to. We on the Labour benches support the need for reform, but it needs to be reform that meets the needs of offenders, their families and the community as a whole.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it evaluates the throughcare and support given to prisoners. (S4O-02036)

I recently met ex-offenders and was alarmed to hear of a fragmented system of support and throughcare that does little to support offenders and their families. Given the current level of reoffending in Scotland and the difficulties that many prisoners face in integrating back into society on release, does the cabinet secretary agree that throughcare should start from the first day that the offender spends in prison?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to prisoners wanting to study for educational qualifications. (S4O-01992)

When I met some ex-offenders a few weeks ago, one of them raised with me the issue that someone who is on an education programme receives £6 per week but someone who carries out manual labour, such as building picnic benches, can receive up to £18 per week. Does the minister agree that that is a disincentive for education in prisons and that it does nothing to rehabilitate offenders and reduce reoffending?

10. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to improve services for people with neurological conditions and their carers. (S4O-01934)

People with neurological conditions are often at the mercy of a postcode lottery. What steps is the Government taking to tackle that postcode lottery in care for people with neurological conditions?

7. To ask the Scottish Government how much it has spent on public sector severance payments in the last five years. (S4O-01868)

A freedom of information response from Renfrewshire Council shows that, as a result of budget cuts of around £30 million between 2008 and 2012, Derek Mackay, who was then leader of the council and is now local government minister, spent more than £39 million on exit packages—

One hundred and twenty-eight staff members received half of that £38 million. At a time of swingeing cuts, transport charges being brought in for adults with disabilities, teachers losing their jobs and directors’ pay increasing, is this—

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, as an area of EU work is of particular interest to me in my role as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee. Part of the EU framework is the national Roma integration strategy, which is relevant because of that committee’s work on Gypsy Travellers. I will return to the work of the committee later, but initially I will focus on the Roma people in Europe. The situation of the Roma has increasingly become the centre of political attention for Europe. The Roma make up Europe’s largest minority, of about 10 million to 12 million people. They are often victims of racism, discrimination and social exclusion and live in deep poverty, lacking access to healthcare and decent housing. Many Roma women and children are the victims of violence, exploitation and trafficking—including within their own communities—and many Roma children are on the streets instead of going to school. Better integration of the Roma is therefore a moral and economic imperative across Europe. The member states have the primary responsibility and the competence to change the situation for marginalised populations. That is why the European Commission adopted “An EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies up to 2020” in order to improve Roma people’s lives tangibly. The framework identified four key areas, which are mirrored by our committee inquiry on Gypsy Travellers. The first area is education. The EU goal is to ensure that all Roma children complete at least primary school and have access to quality education. The next area is employment, in which the EU goal is to reduce the employment gap between Roma people and the rest of the population. Healthcare was a huge issue when we were doing our inquiry, and the EU goal is to reduce the gap in health status between the Roma people and the rest of the population. The final area is housing, for which the EU goal is to close the gap between the share of Roma people who have access to housing and to public utilities, and that of the rest of the population. The framework calls on all member states to include in their strategies strong monitoring methods to evaluate the impact of Roma inclusion. A recent survey highlighted the stark inequalities and discrimination that the Roma people suffer, many of which are mirrored here. Members may be aware that there is a large population of Roma people living in the Glasgow area. The similarities between the Roma and the Gypsy Travellers are stark. Several pieces of work have already been done on Gypsy Travellers. However, there has been little perceptible change. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to eradicating racial discrimination and its recognition that Gypsy Travellers and Roma communities are among the most disenfranchised and discriminated against in Scotland. I will briefly return to the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee. We have recently completed our inquiry on Gypsy Travellers and care and we are still working on our inquiry into Gypsy Travellers and where they live. Our inquiries have identified many issues that are similar to issues that have been identified in the work that is being undertaken by the EU: lack of access to housing, health, education and employment are part of the daily lives of Gypsy Travellers in Scotland, and discrimination, victimisation and lack of understanding among the settled community impact on their lives daily. The Equal Opportunities Committee has agreed to adopt the EU Commission’s recommendation on fostering the implementation of the national Roma strategy as a continuing priority, and to continue to take the UK national strategy into account in the context of our inquiry. I welcome the work that is being undertaken to promote equality for the Roma people. We will continue to monitor the success of the strategy to help us in our work here.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when a Scottish passport system will be in place if Scotland separates from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4O-01824)

On doorsteps and in surgeries, I have been asked by constituents what will happen to their passports in the unfortunate circumstances of a yes vote in 2014—[Interruption.]

Can the minister tell members and the people of Scotland what will happen to their current British passports? Will there be a cost involved in changing over by 2016? Will the British Government honour people’s current passports? Will Scottish people have access to British embassies around the world after separation?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what steps the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment is taking to tackle rural poverty. (S4O-01739)

A few weeks ago, the Poverty Alliance launched its report into rural poverty and its impact on lone parents. Can the cabinet secretary inform Parliament what measures he has taken to improve the welfare of lone parents in rural communities, who are more at risk of extreme poverty as a result of welfare reform?

I welcome the Government’s mental health strategy, but I strongly believe that some issues related to mental health and specific sections of the population have been massively overlooked or have gone unrecognised. The last time I spoke during a debate on mental health I put a particular focus on children. Today I will continue on the subject of children and mental health, but with a greater emphasis on children of prisoners as well as prisoners themselves. I welcome the recognition of the link between mental health and offending in the strategy, but the focus is primarily on women offenders. I am not complaining that that often-forgotten section of the prison population has been highlighted, thanks to the report of the commission on women offenders, and I was pleased to hear the minister’s mention of women offenders. However, the strategy misses the glaring fact that 94.7 per cent of those in prisons are male. Commitments 30 and 31 both target female offenders and commitment 32 looks at community payback orders. That shows either that there is a lack of will to address the mental health of prisoners or that it is not fully acknowledged that if we can tackle the mental health of prisoners we will be on a strong footing to reduce reoffending. Tackling mental health in prisons is a complex process, which is made all the more complex by an ever-increasing prison population and overcrowded prisons. It is estimated that 90 per cent of prisoners have some form of mental health problem. That figure was estimated by the Office for National Statistics in 1997, based on a review of English and Welsh prisons, but it would be hard to argue that the estimate does not apply to today’s prison population. I recently asked the Scottish Government for the number of self-harm cases in Scottish prisons from 2008 to 2012. The answer showed that reported—I stress reported—self-harm incidents increased by 62 per cent over the four years, and yet the 2012 figure included incidents only from January to November. It is likely, therefore, that the final figure will be higher than the 244 cases reported in the first 11 months of that year. Given the increase in self-harm, the fact that nine in 10 prisoners have mental health issues, and the complexities in tackling mental health in prison, I am disappointed that the strategy barely scratches the surface of the issue of mental health and offending. There is also a serious issue that the Government does not know how many prisoners in Scotland have mental health problems and what treatment they are currently receiving. The gaps in the information held on prisoners are extremely concerning and do little to improve the mental health problems in Scotland’s jails. While the Government lauds its strategy, it has sidestepped a section of the population in which poor mental health is high and disproportionate to the rest of Scotland. Families of prisoners are often victims as well. That statement is even more significant for children of imprisoned parents. Families Outside reports that 60 per cent of all women in prison have children and that there are two and a half times as many children of prisoners as there are children in care. Even so, little attention has been given to the children of prisoners, who can suffer mental health problems that affect their development or behaviour. There may be some looked-after children in care as a result of a parent’s imprisonment. The 2012 to 2015 strategy targets those children, but it excludes other children of imprisoned parents.

I acknowledge the member’s comment. GIRFEC goes a long way to support children but a huge amount of work still has to be done to recognise children with mental health problems, who need help and support. Evidence shows that children of imprisoned parents are more likely to become offenders themselves later in life. That is attributed to poor mental health as a result of parental imprisonment, leading to developmental and behavioural problems, which further restrict the future social and economic prospects of each child. The strategy has no mention of children of prisoners and their mental health. The CAMHS targets may include children of imprisoned parents but that group of children is often as isolated as looked-after children, with similar behavioural and developmental issues. Given the Government’s focus on early years and reducing reoffending, it is beyond belief that there is no specific action or commitment to improve the mental health of those children. Children who have a parent or even a relative in prison often experience feelings of worry, shame, anger, fear, depression, grief and burden. Those feelings can contribute to the poor mental health of children in many cases but are more commonplace in children of imprisoned parents. There is also a serious concern about the stigma attached to those children, so I stress the importance of promoting the wellbeing of prisoners’ children. The early years agenda promotes the idea that children must be supported to become successful learners, effective contributors, responsible citizens and confident individuals. On the basis of the three-year strategy, it is clear that we have missed an opportunity to tackle the poor mental health of the prisoners’ children.

Finally, the Royal College of Psychiatrists has welcomed the waiting times target for CAMHS, but I agree with it that no child should be waiting up to six months to access mental health services.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to make prison visiting times child friendly. (S4O-01673)

As the cabinet secretary is well aware, father-and-child visit contracts are being used at Shotts prison. Looking at the detail of the contracts, I note that visiting times are 9.30 am and 1.15 on Thursdays and Fridays. Does the cabinet secretary agree that such timings further disadvantage already vulnerable children, particularly when they should be in school or nursery, and disadvantage the parent on the outside, who may have to take extra time off work?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on prisoners being issued with contracts for father and child visits. (S4O-01589)

I have with me a copy of a contract that is given to prisoners in Shotts prison, which clearly states that father and child visits are a privilege and not a right. That is in direct contravention of article 9 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Through answers that were given to parliamentary questions in April and June, the previous and current SPS chief executives have given conflicting statements on whether such visits are a right or a privilege. In September, I received a letter from the current chief exec, in which he stated the reverse of what he told me in June. Can the cabinet secretary clarify exactly what is going on in Scottish prisons?

I am glad of this chance to debate policing in Scotland and to raise critical issues and concerns that we have about the new single police force. Given that I did not have the opportunity to speak in any of the stages of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, I am also glad to be able to air my concerns this afternoon, particularly in light of recent stories about who will have overall control of the single force. The ASPS is right to call for an “outbreak of common sense” to clarify who will have control of the key functions of the force, the establishment of which is only months away, and the Scottish Government must set out a clear deadline for resolving this dispute instead of saying that it will be “ironed out ... in good time”,—[Official Report, 29 November 2012; c 14126.] as the First Minister said last week.

I do not dispute what the cabinet secretary says, but the fact is that throughout this process we have raised a number of concerns and have received certain assurances. We need clarity about what will happen in taking forward this police force, not more confusion and uncertainty. We are talking about the future of policing in Scotland and ensuring that we have the best service that meets the local needs of the people in all our communities should be a priority for the First Minister and his Cabinet. Again on the subject of unhelpful language, I point out that using the term “creative tension” to describe the reasonable points that the chair of the Scottish Police Authority and the chief constable have made is inappropriate for such a serious matter and undermines the issue at hand. Looking back at the Unison Scotland briefing for the stage 3 debate on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, I note that it raised issues about MSPs voting on a bill without seeing a final business plan—which is, indeed, what we did. Although I support the principle of a single police force, the lack of detail in the bill is a problem for the cabinet secretary and his party and—

No, I am sorry—I have already given way and I do not have any time. The problem must be resolved immediately, and not “ironed out ... in good time”.—[Official Report, 29 November 2012; c 14126.] The new chief constable of Scotland’s national police force is being held almost in a political straitjacket by the SNP Government’s promise on police officers. Since 2010, almost 1,000 police civilian staff have been cut and, according to Unison, 53 per cent of those posts are being covered in part or in full by police officers. With a budget shortfall of £70 million for the single police force, the new chief constable, Audit Scotland and Unison all agree that up to 3,000 police civilian staff could be cut from the new national service. The front line of the police force does not extend merely to police officers and their deployment on the streets, but includes essential services such as information technology, human resources and finance. It betrays a lack of understanding of the nature of policing to describe those elements as support staff. Those people are highly trained individuals who are vital to police officers carrying out their duties in the community. It will affect the service and logistics of the new national police force if those positions are filled by backroom bobbies. I agree with Audit Scotland, which in its recent report stated: “at a time of continued financial pressures there is a risk that” backfilling “is not an efficient and sustainable use of resources if adopted longer term.”

We need a balanced workforce in which the skills of police civilian staff enable police officers to do what the public wants them to do, where it wants them to do it.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what reduction there has been in the number of female college students in the west of Scotland since 2006-07. (S4O-01541)

Given that women are often responsible for childcare, does the minister agree that the reduction in part-time college places will have more of a detrimental impact on women?

I welcome the members of the refugee women’s strategy group who are in the public gallery for this debate, along with staff from the Scottish Refugee Council. I met the refugee women’s strategy group a few months ago, and found the meeting not only informative but inspiring. I heard harrowing tales about what refugee men, women and children have endured not only in their own countries but here in the UK, where they thought that they had found comfort and safety. I heard that many asylum seekers find themselves living on £30 a week, which comes in the form of a pre-loaded card, so many do not have access to tangible, hard cash. I also heard that, as many of us know, some people are stuck in the asylum process for many years, which leaves them destitute and often alone, with, in some cases, mental health problems or learning difficulties. There needs to be a radical change to the way in which asylum seekers are treated when they come to the UK. However, I fear that public misconceptions about asylum seekers make that difficult for policy makers in both the Scottish and UK Parliaments. The open your eyes to destitution in Scotland campaign is a significant and important one and I am pleased to add my support to it. The complexity of the asylum process is a major reason for the number of asylum seekers and refugees who are destitute, as is the refusal of the right to work. What I find concerning is that many highly skilled asylum seekers and refugees will lose their skills if they end up spending a decade in the complex asylum process. I will focus on women in the asylum process. Although many women flee their countries for the same reasons as men, many flee due to issues that are gender specific—rape, sexual violence, forced marriage, domestic abuse and female genital mutilation. Women in the asylum process must be treated in a manner that recognises their particular needs as women. I remember being told of examples of women who had to explain their need for asylum with their children in the room. Can anyone imagine the mental and emotional turmoil that that must create for women, especially if they have to discuss issues around abuse, rape and genital mutilation? Women, who are the primary care providers in most families, are predominantly the sole care provider in many asylum-seeking families. The stress of surviving on as little as £30 per week would take a serious toll on anyone’s health, never mind someone who has travelled thousands of miles to escape persecution. I will tell the Parliament the story of a destitute refugee woman. Mrs B fled from Zimbabwe when she found herself on the wrong side of the Mugabe regime. She sought asylum in the UK five years ago, but her case was refused, as was her appeal, despite a Supreme Court ruling this summer that it was not safe for anyone who opposed the Mugabe regime to return to Zimbabwe. Her appeal was refused earlier this year, which meant that she was destitute for five months. She was homeless, penniless and not entitled to emergency accommodation such as a hostel bed. She suffered from poor mental health and the antidepressants that she was given did not help. On occasions, people from her church were able to offer her a bed for a few nights. On other nights, she was left to sleep on a floor mat, in a sleeping bag, in a temporary shelter. During the day, she volunteered in a charity shop, and when the shop closed she walked the streets with her bag, having no idea where she would sleep that night. Sometimes she was able to borrow money from friends for essentials such as sanitary products, but she felt that begging was deeply shameful. Some people suggested that Mrs B could perhaps meet a man who would “take care of her”. Although she rightly did not take that advice, the Scottish Refugee Council informs me that women regularly feel forced into sexually exploitative situations. Mrs B lodged fresh evidence and in recent weeks she has been granted support. As positive as the support will be, it seems that she is back at square one. As a result of being destitute for five months, there has been a serious impact on her physical and mental health. Mrs B’s story brings to life why the open your eyes to destitution in Scotland campaign is so important and needs all our support. On a final note, I hope to re-establish the cross-party group on asylum seekers and refugees in the new year and I look forward to the support of those members who are in the chamber. Thank you.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and, like my colleagues in the Labour Party, agree that air passenger duty should be devolved to the Parliament, as it has been devolved to Stormont. Although I agree with much of what the Government’s motion says about how the duty has increased since 2007 under Labour and Tories and the impact that that has had on families, I am concerned that it makes no mention of climate change. I wonder whether that might have something to do with the fact that the Government has failed to hit its widely heralded climate change targets. I agree that the duty should be frozen while it is reviewed and, I hope, devolved. I am interested in how the level of APD would be determined and whether the SNP Government would lower the rate, which would conflict with its climate change targets. As the Labour amendment—which I am glad to support—points out, Scots who use hubs such as Heathrow currently pay APD twice. That is unfair on Scots, who are hard pressed to afford family holidays, and backs up the amendment’s point that the Scottish Government should work with airports and airlines to explore further incentives and create new routes that remove the need to go to Heathrow in the first place. My constituents in West Scotland are not short of airport choices. However, in some cases, they are left with no choice but to use Heathrow or Manchester airport because of the limited long-haul flights that are available from Glasgow, Prestwick or Edinburgh, which is easily accessible from my region. I am disappointed that the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities refused to reassess the tax increment financing project at Glasgow airport, which would have created around 3,000 jobs and increased the renewable energy manufacturing sector there and throughout Renfrewshire. The refusal to consider the project is another blow to the local economy.

I thank Mr Adam for that intervention, but I am disappointed. The project would have brought a considerable number of jobs and huge economic benefits to my area. The jobs at Doosan, which were much heralded in the Parliament by the First Minister, were lost. That was another huge economic blow to my area. The refusal also goes against the Government’s plans to create a greener Scotland. Only last week, Glasgow airport announced that passenger numbers for October had increased by 4.6 per cent compared with the same period in 2011. As the airport acknowledges, that increase is due in part to football fans travelling abroad. It also shows that APD does not deter people from flying. Overall passenger numbers have increased every quarter in recent years, so we must be careful about calling for the duty to be lowered or criticising the current levels when the current rate does not discourage flying. Some use the statistics from the report on the increases since 2007 to their own advantage, but the restructuring of the duty in 2007 must be welcomed, as it recognised the different impacts that different lengths of flight have on the environment. A greater balance is needed between aviation taxation that limits CO2 emissions on the one hand, and inward investment and tourism on the other. Given that Scotland and its economy are often reliant on tourism, we need to get the APD levels right so that people are encouraged to come to Scotland and Scots are encouraged to holiday at home. That said, we must also remember that, as highlighted in the York Aviation report, airports are a massive employer in Scotland, hence the need for a balance—a balance that must be addressed in any business impact assessment on the future of APD. There appears to be general consensus in the motion and the amendments and in the chamber that APD should be devolved. That would be another step in strengthening devolution and the tax powers of this Parliament.

I, too, thank Jim Eadie for bringing this debate to the chamber and giving us the opportunity to discuss this important condition. Seventy families in Scotland are registered with Action Duchenne, but that does not mean that each family has only one son with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. We know what can cause DMD and we know the symptoms of the disease, but not enough is known about its treatment and cure. Small steps are being taken, and it is encouraging that new gene therapy techniques such as exon skipping could be on the market in the UK by 2014. However, that is likely to help only 14 per cent of DMD sufferers. We need to think about different models of care while a cure is found. Denmark has the same population size and birth incidence of DMD as Scotland, but the difference in the life expectancy of those with DMD is striking. Denmark has twice the number of adult DMD survivors—79 compared with 39 in Scotland. In Scotland, adult patients can live until their early 30s; in Denmark, they can live into their late 30s. There is no difference between Denmark and Scotland in the treatment that is delivered or the drugs that are available. The difference appears to be down to levels of care. I hope that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill will help us to make improvements in that regard. In Denmark, all DMD patients have round-the-clock care, and their houses are adapted to make them suitable. If the house cannot be adapted, the family is moved to a new home. It would appear that Scotland is lacking in expert care provision for DMD patients. The UK has two centres of excellence in treating DMD: one in Great Ormond Street hospital in London and one in Newcastle. According to Action Duchenne, in the past 18 months it has been found that life expectancy for DMD patients near Newcastle is much better than life expectancy for those in Scotland. DMD patients can experience respiratory problems, motor problems and, in some cases, scoliosis. Those who live near the centres of excellence have the advantage of access to a core team of experts who are on hand to help them. It is not only in times of crisis that the centre helps. The teams carry out routine check-ups of DMD patients in the surrounding area and monitor their condition. It is worrying that Scottish patients do not have access to the same expertise in their own areas. In Scotland, patients have to wait to weeks and sometimes months to be individually assessed by different doctors. In Northern Ireland, the recent McCollum report, which was based on NHS data, found that emergency unplanned admissions to hospital of neuromuscular patients, including those with DMD, cost £2.27 million a year. The report states that 40 per cent of that cost could be saved with better monitoring of the condition. Investing in and joining up neuromuscular services would lead to a large overall saving, while also helping those with DMD to live longer and to have a better quality of life. I feel that it would be to the benefit of all DMD patients if we had a centre of excellence in Scotland—a place that could offer expert care, advice and information. Once DMD is diagnosed, a comprehensive care plan can be created for the child that details everything from the early years up to the teenage years. It can also be used to liaise with the local authority in order to give maximum support. Even then, however, there is a postcode lottery when it comes to local authority services. Stirling Council provides free hydrotherapy sessions for DMD patients, whereas patients in the Renfrewshire Council area either have to pay or receive their hydrotherapy through private medical care. Scotland has gaps in its care for DMD patients. Small but important initiatives such as the free provision of hydrotherapy can extend life expectancy, and important research is being carried out to find a cure for DMD. Until a cure is found, however, we need a care model that is structured around the needs of sufferers. That will give patients a better life expectancy and a fighting chance.

In recent months, figures have been released from the Government and leading experts in drug policy that have given us all food for thought. According to last month’s Holyrood magazine, 59,600 people in Scotland are problem drug users, which is twice the prevalence in England and Wales. In Scotland, 53 per cent of problem drug users are not currently receiving treatment, in comparison with just 33 per cent in England and Wales. A staggering 24,500 people are now on the Government’s methadone programme, and it was revealed last month—as has already been mentioned today—that methadone has been implicated in 275 out of 584 drug-related deaths. Methadone is prescribed as a substitute to heroin and other drugs so that the patient can wean themselves off all illicit drugs and start their recovery process. However, that is not necessarily the case, as many are using methadone as a top-up to the drugs they are already taking. I understand that methadone can have a stabilising influence on people’s lives. However, there have been reports of some programme users being on methadone for up to 10 years. There is now a culture of long-term methadone use, which creates a psychological dependency that can be more controlling than any substance. Methadone use needs to involve a programme of stabilisation and detox with a view to moving towards abstinence. The BBC reported in 2010 that some methadone users have been spitting out their methadone to resell. The practice, which is known as spit-meth, helps addicts to pay for heroin. The failure of the methadone programme is not the only problem with the Government’s drug strategy. It was announced only at the weekend that the Scottish Recovery Consortium has called a meeting to discuss the issue of residential rehabilitation. As has also been mentioned this afternoon, some rehab centres are only at half their capacity and Beechwood house in Inverness is only at 40 per cent capacity. I recently had the privilege of spending a day with the people from the 218 centre in Glasgow. Again, that centre has already been mentioned. I commend the 218 centre for the excellent work that it does and the lives that it saves. The Government strategy clearly has its failings and after four years it is now time for another approach. The Scottish Recovery Consortium has had its funding cut by more than a third in two years, from £398,000 in 2010-11 to just £262,745 for 2012-13. Before the Scottish National Party came to power, it was quick to criticise the previous Administration’s perceived lack of effort in tackling Scotland’s drug problem. It was good to see that a comprehensive drugs strategy was published by the Scottish Government a year after the SNP came to power, but we need innovative approaches.

I have a lot to get through—if I have time I will come back to Mr McDonald. We need innovative approaches if we are to tackle, for once and for all, the drug problem that we have. There must be a cross-party approach to tackling drug problems. The rise of new party drugs or legal highs is changing the drugs market too quickly for the methods that we have at our disposal to control drugs and treat drug misuse. Although I applaud the Scottish Government and the NHS for meeting the three-week waiting time target ahead of schedule, I feel that three weeks is too long for vulnerable people who have identified a need for help to wait for treatment. Three weeks can make a huge difference in a drug user’s life. Treatment should be at the point of need if somebody is going to tackle addiction, and the treatment and support should remain in place and not be interrupted throughout the entire recovery process. Drugs policy does not take into account the different reasons why people take drugs and become addicted. Drug problems now need to be seen and addressed within their wider social and economic context. Entrenched drug problems appear to be significantly linked to inequality and social exclusion. Too many homes and communities are being devastated by drugs, so we cannot only support the drug user—we need to support the community. For example, sending drug users to prison removes them from their social and family environment. That individual is reformed and stays clean for the six months of their sentence, but they are then put straight back into their social and family environment, which is where they took drugs in the first place. We need to support people and families in the long term or we will never solve the revolving door of drug users and reoffending.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. As is widely known, recovery differs between individuals. To support recovery a wide range of treatment, mutual aid and locally based community approaches are required. One key factor that needs to be taken into account in any rehabilitative program is the role of family support. People with drug problems are more likely to achieve recovery if they have a family that is supportive and which itself receives support. The involvement of adult family members of people with drug problems can promote recovery for their drug-using relative, but they also need support in their own right. The UK Drug Policy Commission estimates that more than 1.4 million people in the UK have been adversely affected by their relatives’ drug use. The impact can also spread more widely, affecting family members’ employment, their social lives and relationships, and the family finances. Close working between local authorities and COSLA should be seen as a unique opportunity for local approaches that can set single outcomes and be properly evaluated. We need to look at what works in the world of rehabilitation and get rid of what does not; we need to fight for decent housing and work opportunities that can enable individual recovery and improve society.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I commend the Government’s three-week waiting time for treatment. My point, which was a personal view, was that three weeks can mean the difference between someone committing to coming off drugs and not committing to that. However, I welcome the three-week waiting time.

I, too, thank my colleague Kezia Dugdale for securing this debate on the living wage and I commend the work that both she and John Park have done on the issue. I am proud to come from the party that introduced the minimum wage, which brought about fundamental change in our society and how we value the workforce in the UK. For many, the minimum wage enhanced living standards, wellbeing and the idea of being a valued member of the workplace. However, the minimum wage only goes so far and, to some extent, it is discriminatory because of the different pay brackets for different ages. Why should a 16 or 17-year-old who does the same job as a 22-year-old colleague be paid less? That situation is why the living wage rightly goes further. The living wage is not only about improving the standards of living of the lowest-paid workers. It also ensures that they are treated equally and fairly in the workplace. In its inquiry into the living wage in Scotland this year, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee discovered that, where the living wage was introduced by local authorities, more women than men benefited from the change. For example, in East Renfrewshire, 76 per cent of women were affected, of whom 84 per cent were in part-time employment. However, it must be accepted that East Renfrewshire does not have the same socioeconomic problems as parts of Glasgow and other parts of west Scotland. As a society, we have progressed from the post-war era when women stayed at home to look after house and home, to a society that actively promotes women seeking employment. However, women still face the same barriers as they did then, because they are generally seen as the primary caregivers for their families and they often have to juggle going to work with looking after their families. Childcare is a large expense for some families and its cost can negate the income received if both parents work, so a family can be better off if only one parent works while the other stays at home to care for the children, which often comes down to the woman staying at home. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s 2011 report on a minimum income standard in the UK showed that, on average, couples with two children aged between two years and primary school age pay around £205 a week for childcare. That means that women working part time with the current minimum wage would have to work 32 hours just to pay for their weekly childcare costs. When we look at the sectors that are usually low paid, such as catering, clerical, cleaning and childcare, a pattern emerges: it is primarily women who fill positions in those sectors. Given that many private sector companies are involved in those sectors, it is to be hoped that, as the motion indicates, more public sector employees receiving the benefits of the living wage will mean that the living wage becomes the norm rather than the exception in the private sector. The fact that women are far more likely to be in low-paid jobs than their male counterparts highlights another key issue, which is child poverty. A Scottish Government report on poverty figures shows that around 23 per cent of single working-age women with children live below the poverty line before they even pay for their housing costs; some will be able to claim state benefits alongside their income, but what of those who are not entitled to anything from the state? The only way to tackle child poverty and improve living standards is by ensuring that women and other low-paid workers are paid at a rate that is beneficial to society—that is, the living wage. I acknowledge that the minimum wage is a starting point on the way to the living wage, but if we are to have fairness and equality in society for the lowest-paid workers, we must ensure that the living wage becomes the new national minimum wage. I commend the work of the living wage campaign and the work that takes place in living wage week to raise awareness of the issues that affect people in low-paid work, with the aim of improving their living standards and lifestyles.

I, too, feel the need to confess that I am not a member of the Justice Committee. We are a growing band of people who are watching the backs of members of that committee. I would like to focus more on part 2 of the bill, but I have some words to say about part 1 first. The creation of the Scottish civil justice council is important for the efficiency and effectiveness of civil justice in Scotland. It will help to raise the level of civil justice to that of a modern system. I welcome the creation of such a body, which will enable the justice system to move on and implement more court reform legislation. As I understand it, the council will have a wide remit to contribute to the on-going improvement of the civil justice system. With the creation of the new council, there is further hope that the groundwork is being laid for real change. We are embarking on a long period of reforms to our civil courts system and I agree with the statement from Lord Gill that “The next few years will be a period of transition”. However, I share the concerns that David McLetchie expressed about the fact that the Government has chosen not to make the council a non-departmental public body. In the next few years, the council is expected to help to implement wide-ranging reforms to our court system and I feel that it will be lacking that extra level of scrutiny that NDPBs have. The report from the Justice Committee says that the council will not be “exempt from scrutiny and we do not anticipate that in practice it will be.” What scrutiny will be in place in practice for a body that will have an important role in the implementation of reforms to our court system? With the make-up of the council yet to be agreed, I seek a response from the minister on the gender balance within the council, given that women are involved in at least half of civil cases that involve matters of the family and relationships. Part 2 of the bill, on criminal legal assistance, is my main focus today. At first when I heard that plans were to be put in place to take contributions from those seeking legal aid, I was extremely concerned and I continue to have some reservations. I hope that those can be eased throughout the stages of the bill. Protecting legal aid is paramount, especially in times of recession. Civil legal aid applications are up 26 per cent since 2007-08—there is a clear link between that rise and the effects of the recession on families, for example. I appreciate the need to address how we protect legal aid, but asking some quite frankly disadvantaged people—I do not simply mean that in the financial sense—to contribute is of concern. Although exceptions are made for some people and certain factors are taken into consideration, I feel that the proposed level of disposable income is too low. The reason for that is simple—the classification of disposable income appears to include paying for energy costs, food bills, transport costs and other day-to-day costs that sometimes we do not account for. Living costs are rising on an almost daily basis and leaving those costs within disposable income does not favour working people. If we look at appendix 1 of a submission from the Scottish Legal Aid Board, we see examples of the likely contributions for certain people. Case 4 gives an example of someone with an assessed disposable income of £160 per week. Although that may appear a lot over the month, there is a failure to look at the cost of food, transport and energy for the parent and child, yet the person would be expected to pay £470 for summary criminal aid. The case is acknowledged as being fictional, but if it were real, that would not appear to be fair on the parent. I am also concerned at the lack of evidence on or investigation into whether it is fair or appropriate to take the income of a spouse or a partner into account when calculating eligibility for legal assistance. That view was also expressed by the convener of the Justice Committee. Undue hardship must be applied in all cases, and I commend the cabinet secretary for disregarding disability living allowance—soon to be personal independence payments—in income assessments for criminal legal assistance. That would have had a further devastating effect on the welfare of disabled people when combined with the Tory attacks. However, the cabinet secretary has given a lifeline of support to disabled people who find themselves in the criminal justice system. With the changes to legal assistance expected to go through, the debate moves on to the collection of contributions. It would be unjustified to expect the Scottish Legal Aid Board to make those collections on behalf of law firms, given the reductions in its own administrative budget. Law firms already have the means to collect fees from private clients, and only 18 per cent of those on legal aid are expected to make contributions. That amounts to firms collecting contributions from between 29 and 167 cases per year, the cost of which analysis shows to be between 2.6 and 6 per cent of earnings from criminal cases. There has been much discussion about the perversion of people pleading not guilty in order to have their fees paid for them, but I have concerns that some people might plead guilty if their contributions will be lower than they would be for pleading not guilty. That could be a dangerous effect of the proposals that would harm the right to a fair trial and twist the perversion in the reverse.

When the Contempt of Court Act 1981 came into force, people received news through the print and broadcast media. At that time, the print and broadcast media were information services that delivered facts to people. However, in the past few decades, the media have become far more gossip driven. With the creation of the internet and social media, we now live in an information and gossip-intensive age. I have grave concerns about the use and influence of Facebook and Twitter in our courts and I have reservations about the broadcasting of criminal trials on television. The main priority of any discussion about involving the media in court procedures needs to be the administration of justice, because our court system looks only at facts and not at gossip. In the past, cameras have been allowed in courtrooms with the express permission of the presiding judge and of all the parties involved. On occasion, we have had live televising of judges during sentencing proceedings but, crucially, that has been without witnesses present. The justice system needs to ensure that potential witnesses are protected and do not feel intimidated. I agree with the point that Victim Support Scotland made in evidence to the Justice Committee that going through a court case as a victim or witness can be traumatic. As I understand it, it is already difficult to get witnesses to come forward. Donald Findlay QC, in his evidence to the Justice Committee, raised the fear that relaxing media restriction on the reporting of criminal cases might harm the people who are on trial. Currently, when someone is acquitted, that is because the justice system and a jury of their peers have listened to evidence and reached an informed decision. It is not fair to say that a person has been acquitted but that people can decide for themselves and watch it on television. That could also harm the offender’s rehabilitation. If we want a Scotland that is a progressive beacon, those who commit offences in our society should be given a fair trial and, if convicted, should be judged on their actions, not vilified on prime-time television. Many court cases involve the most vulnerable people in society, whether they are the victims or perpetrators. If we allow cameras into court, court cases could become voyeuristic. Regardless of the crime that is committed, we have a duty to ensure that justice is carried out in a fair and measured manner. We must ensure that victims, witnesses and the accused, and their families, are protected from retribution and retaliation. We need only look at examples from across the Atlantic to see what might happen if we relax the restriction on media broadcasting of criminal trials. The trials of O J Simpson and, more recently, Casey Anthony were broadcast to every home in America and everyone had an opinion on whether they were guilty. Is there any evidence in America to show that the general public have a greater understanding of their justice system as a result of watching those high-profile cases, or does televising simply fuel more gossip? Although I feel strongly that the general public need to be educated about how our justice system works, I am yet to be convinced that that can be done through the broadcasting of criminal trials. In evidence to the Justice Committee, Mr Steven Raeburn made the point that televising criminal trials could help to educate the public on criminal proceedings such as the double jeopardy and corroboration rules. However, I remain unconvinced that televising trials with no explanation of process or legal jargon will help to educate the public. Before I became a member of Parliament, for many years I sat on employment tribunals. Tribunals do not involve nearly as much legal jargon or process as criminal cases, but I found that many people who brought cases to tribunals and many witnesses who were called to give evidence did not understand the process and found the legal jargon difficult and complex. If the process is difficult to understand at that level, how much harder would it be for the public to understand criminal proceedings? One example that has been overlooked is the Leveson inquiry. It is not a criminal trial but, although it has heard evidence from many high-profile politicians and celebrities, there has not been a huge interest among the general public in its proceedings. If a member of the public has a great interest in criminal proceedings, they can attend court in the gallery. However, I am not aware that there is a great public clamour to attend criminal trials unless the case has a high profile or is particularly salacious. Although I understand that a five-minute summary on the evening news might focus on one particular issue in the case, the general public would rather watch that than four hours of a criminal court case. I am pleased that we are considering ways to educate the general public better on how our justice system works. However, broadcasting criminal trials is not the way forward. Any changes to the media reporting of criminal trials must not jeopardise the administration of justice. They must also protect the victims, witnesses and the accused.

I add my thanks to Linda Fabiani for securing today’s debate. Last week, I was one of thousands of people to join in the world’s biggest coffee morning in aid of Macmillan Cancer Support. I was delighted that the people of Erskine who attended helped to raise more than £160. I say a big thank you to everyone who came along on Friday. Today’s debate is very sensitive, as breast cancer affects almost every family across Scotland and further afield. I speak as someone who has benefited from genetic testing. Because of a genetic breast cancer in my family, I know only too well how crucial the research into and advances in detection and treatment of cancer are. This month, many charities and organisations are helping to raise awareness of breast cancer, from Macmillan Cancer Support and Breakthrough Breast Cancer in Scotland to the White House and the National Football League in the States. It is right that we have the chance to debate how we raise awareness in this chamber. Last month, the Scottish Government launched a new advert, fronted by Elaine C Smith, which has been mentioned by other members in this debate. Some people have referred to the advert as “shocking”. I would prefer that the likes of the BBC used adjectives such as “vital”, “necessary” or “crucial” to encourage women to look for early signs, not to scare them—suspecting that one has breast cancer is already a frightening experience. I want to focus on tackling inequalities in screening. In NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, it was found that women with learning difficulties were less likely to take up screening than those in other NHS regions. Those women are more likely to wait longer before seeing a doctor or less likely to attend screenings. There needs to be more effort to encourage women with learning difficulties to have regular screening. How we target that group of vulnerable women is a serious issue that the Parliament must address—with regard to screenings not only for breast cancer, but for all cancers. Recently, the Equal Opportunities Committee launched its report into Gypsy Traveller communities’ access to healthcare, which included access to screenings by Gypsy Traveller women. Another report suggested that the best way to educate younger generations of Gypsy Traveller women is to go through the matriarch, who is normally the grandmother in the family. I look forward to working further with the committee and the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on improving access to healthcare for Gypsy Traveller women, especially to improve the early detection of cancers, which can save the lives of many. There appears to be a decline in the number of women who access screening when we look from the least-deprived areas to the most-deprived areas. As with women with learning difficulties, there is a lower uptake among women from the poorest areas of society. Although it is good practice for mobile breast-screening units to be parked near community centres and libraries, we must remember that those facilities are often the first to be closed as a result of budget cuts, especially in poor areas. That means that poor women will continue to have the lowest uptake of breast cancer screening. In closing, I commend the work of Breakthrough Breast Cancer and its excellent touch, look, check campaign.

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to introduce rail links to towns in West Scotland that currently have none. (S4O-01329)

The Minister for Local Government and Planning believes that there should be a rail link to Renfrew. Does the Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs agree with that and will he guarantee the funding for that?

I would like to start by thanking my friend and colleague Hugh Henry for securing the debate. The NSPCC has a long and well-documented history of protecting and helping children when they are at their most vulnerable, starting from the beginning of the industrial revolution. With prioritisation for the most vulnerable children at its core and by ensuring that its activities that are driven by the principles that were put forward by the Reverend Benjamin Waugh, the NSPCC has contributed significantly to child protection in its 128-year history. As other members are, I am absolutely delighted that the NSPCC is rolling out its trial programme—improving parenting, improving practice—and that Renfrewshire is part of that roll-out. However, the fact that we are debating this issue shows just how far we have yet to go in protecting those who are most vulnerable in our society. In the 21st century, we might not expect so-called civilised countries such as Scotland and our counterparts in the rest of the United Kingdom to still have problems such as child neglect or abuse. However, the NSPCC estimates that around one in 10 children has suffered neglect from his or her parents during their childhood and, as of 31 July 2011, there were 2,571 children on the child protection register, with an estimated 50 per cent of those children being aged between zero and four. That is why the early-intervention element of the improving parenting, improving practice programme is absolutely key to helping to reduce the number of children who are affected by neglect. Research has shown that those in the youngest age category are at the highest risk, but we should also consider the children who are slightly older and may themselves have been in the high-risk category at one point. At present, the amount of research that is conducted around young adolescents is nowhere near the same as the amount of research that is conducted around children in their early years. It was found that, in some parts of the UK, around a quarter of young people who ran away from home did so due to being forced out of the family home, and that some had been completely rejected or abandoned by their parents. For some people, it may be that their parents cannot deal with their behaviour, or even that their parents do not have the skills to look after them. For others, it can be that their parents have rejected them due to their religion or even their sexuality. The issues for young adolescents may not be the same as those of younger children, but the issue draws attention to the idea of having a holistic approach to tackling child neglect. We need to stop using a one-size-fits-all model. That is something that the improving parenting, improving practice programme aspires to. We should also note the tremendous amount of pressure that social work departments are under to ensure that children and vulnerable people are adequately protected. With local authorities making cuts to their budgets, it is imperative that we recognise the work that is being done by the NSPCC and other voluntary sector organisations. Those organisations are themselves under budget constraints, but they are also doing more than their fair share. We should also remember that Government has a duty and should not just leave matters to charitable organisations. Issues of neglect can stem from the likes of substance abuse and domestic violence, but it would be wrong to suggest that those are the only factors that are present. In some cases of neglect, poverty is also present. It is not uncommon or unheard of for parents to leave children at home while they go out to work to help to support their families. With parents unable to afford sufficient childcare due to low wages and local authorities having to cut childcare places due to budget constraints, we can see how the spiral of neglect can—and does—happen. Coupled with cuts to after-school and breakfast clubs, those factors lead to parents having to make difficult decisions that may, in turn, put them in the care of our justice system, which takes the debate around child neglect even further. I, too, would like to commend the NSPCC and the excellent work that it does.

I was eager to speak in the debate in order that I could highlight my concerns about Lord Carloway’s recommendations on arresting and detaining suspected offenders. I have spoken many times in the chamber about the need for a uniform approach to the forgotten victims of the justice system—children. I was pleased by and I welcome Lord Carloway’s recommendations on child suspects, but I am disappointed that none of the recommendations on arrest and detention mentions children. Sadly, Scotland lags behind many of its counterparts on that. Poland and many jurisdictions in the United Stated have police protocols for arresting a suspect in the presence of a child. According to a study by the University of Illinois, when a child witnesses their parent’s arrest, they often feel anxiety, suffer post-traumatic stress and feel scared, because nobody has explained to them what has happened and what will happen. Not only that, but the effect of witnessing a parent’s arrest can differ according to the child’s age and their stage of development. Many members might not know that, last week, the UK published its response to the United Nations universal periodic review of human rights. One recommendation of that review was to “Ensure that the best interests of the child are taken into account when arresting, detaining, sentencing or considering early release for a sole or primary carer of the child”. The UK welcomed that recommendation, and being part of the UK means that we need to ensure that it is taken into account. I welcome many of the recommendations that Lord Carloway made, but there is not, in all his proposals on arrest and detention, one mention of the rights of a parent and a child. If changes are to be made to arrest and detention of suspects, the rights of the child should be considered as well. Even simple things such as allowing a parent to arrange for someone to care for their child while they are detained, or taking the child into another room when their parent is arrested, can make a huge difference to the child. Such action minimises disruption and unnecessary trauma to children by providing the most supportive environment possible during and after an arrest, and it cuts down intergenerational reoffending. I feel that the review is lacking in its recommendations on arresting and detaining suspects, but I agree with Lord Carloway that corroboration should be abolished. Corroboration is an ancient and archaic law that is preventing justice from being served in some of the most heinous crimes, such as rape and serious assault. Judges and juries should be free to consider all the relevant evidence, and to say whether they are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused person committed the offence. Abolition of this outdated rule will bring Scots law up to date and into line with the law of many other countries, on how to approach evidence. However, if corroboration is abolished, it will be vital that we give careful consideration to the introduction of new safeguards to minimise miscarriages of justice that are based on uncorroborated allegations. As many of my colleagues have pointed out, research by the Carloway review group found that, if corroboration had been removed, 81.7 per cent of rejected cases in 2010 could have proceeded to trial, with a reasonable prospect of conviction in 58.5 per cent of those cases.

I thank Christine Grahame for her knowledgeable intervention; I may take advice. This is a grey area. We can only speculate on what might have happened and I can work only with the figures that were in the review document. In 2009-10, 276,000 prosecution reports were submitted to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, of which 242,000 were submitted by the police and involved 278,000 people. When corroboration is abolished, there will be many more court cases, and many more convictions and offenders in prison or serving community sentences. Scotland’s prisons are already overcrowded, and the number of prisoners is predicted to hit 10,000 by 2019-20. Abolition of corroboration will mean that more cases will make it to court. I was, therefore, surprised to hear that the Scottish Government is looking to close many sheriff courts and justice of the peace courts. If corroboration is removed, that will have an impact on the work of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service as well as on the Scottish Court Service and the prison sector. There being fewer courts in which to prosecute offenders will mean that victims, witnesses and accused persons will have to travel extra distances, which will make it more difficult for people to attend court. That will result in the threat of more delays and disruptions to cases. This does not seem to be the time to close courts while taking away a rule that has seen so many cases in the past rejected for trial. When that is coupled with the budget cut of £10.9 million over the next three years, which the Scottish Government has just announced, we could be looking at serious delays and disruptions to many court cases. Cases will be rushed through because of the backlog and many people will not receive the justice that they deserve. Although I agree that corroboration should be removed from the Scottish legal system, the justice minister needs to look at the implications that its removal will have for the courts and prisons, or many cases may be delayed and the prison system may become overcrowded. If some of the proposals that have been mentioned today are enacted, we could be looking at a crisis in the courts and prisons in the years to come. Our justice system needs reform, but that reform must be carried out with care and consideration, with the protection of vulnerable people at the forefront of that deliberation.

Given the concerns that I have shared with Parliament in previous debates on care, I welcome the chance to take part in today’s debate. Like my Labour colleagues, I welcome the bill and the general principles that are enshrined in it. The hope must be—as, I am sure, it is—that the bill will increase uptake of direct payments, which has slowly increased in the past decade. It is welcome that carers groups, service users and trade unions have been supportive of the bill and that they have been involved with the Health and Sport Committee through the evidence-gathering process. After stage 1, changes will be proposed. I feel that an amendment is needed to include in the bill a right of access to independent advocacy. In his response to the committee, Michael Matheson said: “The Bill will place a duty on local authorities to give people information and advice about the decisions that they make and point them in the direction of independent advocacies.” I take a slightly different view from the minister; I feel that local authorities will not have the impartiality that independent advocacy services can offer from the outset.

If I have time later, I will take an intervention, but I am really tight for time and I have a lot to get in. In its submission, Independent Advocacy Perth and Kinross said that it had “concerns regarding the quality of information ... provided to people making decisions around whether they should use this method of personalising their care. In some instances”, it has been noted “that the person has not always been made aware of the responsibilities connected with direct payments and has only been informed of the benefits”. For the bill to work, service users and carers must know all aspects of what they will be taking on. In the past year, there has been much discussion about carers and the carers strategy. We all appreciate the important role that carers play, and the bill provides the best opportunity to give something back, by creating a duty instead of a power to offer carers self-directed support. In its submission to the committee, Carers Scotland pointed out that a power will “result in ... significant variances in practice, and ... across local authorities ... By legislating for a statutory duty rather than simply a power, this Bill presents an opportunity to deliver a limited right to some practical support, subject to assessed need.” The creation of a duty would give some carers back their normality, let them be themselves again and ensure that their own health and wellbeing are paramount. I listened with interest to the minister’s comments on personal assistants. I accept that the use of PAs has decreased in recent years, but I still have concerns about their training and qualifications and about monitoring them. Some of my concerns were highlighted by others in evidence to the committee. The Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland called for “some basic level of accreditation for Personal Assistants, and as a minimum a requirement that they be made subject to PVG checks.” The Scottish Social Services Council added that “agencies providing personal assistants, and indeed other social service workers should be regarded as care services and required to register with the Care Inspectorate.” The need for regulation is a safety net not only for service users, but for the workforce. During my time on the Health and Sport Committee, many stories that related to care of the elderly attracted national press coverage. To ensure that cases of neglect, abuse or poor care provision do not occur, regulation of PAs is a must. I have a reservation about the employment of family members, which concerns how they are trained and regulated. Much of what I said about PAs can be applied to family members. However, what is most important is that employment of a relative must be in the service user’s best interests. Much unpaid care is provided by family members, so it is right to reduce the restrictions, but training and regulation must balance that reduction. A constituent contacted me to ask me to use the following quotation in my speech. It is fitting, because it reflects carers’ uncertainty and feelings about the bill. My constituent said: “As a carer for my husband who has a spinal injury, I find myself increasingly worried for the future. What happens when we really do need support? What hoops will we have to jump through? It took five months and four different professionals when all we wanted to do was put an emergency plan in place. We gave up, and did something ourselves. The first professional we met didn’t know about Direct Payments. So when things get worse—as they will—will we be able to get help to lift my husband? To get him to bed? Support that means I can continue working? Or will I have to give up a job I enjoy? Will any help we get in future work around our needs as a family? We don’t mind paying for services which support us ... but they need to work around my husband’s life and let him have some dignity. Will the SDS bill enable this to happen? I watch with sadness some of the battles my friends have had to go through to get help with caring—and I know some for whom self-directed support has been a godsend. So I want it to be easier for others to get the help they need. So my plea is to recognise that carers need their own rights—the SDS bill provides a starting point.”

12. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide additional funding to local authorities in West Scotland to deal with unemployment, deprivation and poverty. (S4O-01257)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that cutting the revenue allocation to Renfrewshire Council, which received the fifth-worst cut, will have a serious impact on services on which the most disadvantaged people depend?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received regarding Read classifications for general practitioners. (S4O-01166)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that somewhat pre-emptive response. I recently met Stonewall Scotland and was horrified to discover that gay men are classified under mental health and paedophilia. In the 21st century, that should not be the case. I look forward to that changing quickly.

As convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am pleased to open this debate on women and work. The subject of women and work is a key element of the committee’s work. We have held a round-table evidence session with the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s women’s committee, and I will touch on some of the points that were raised during that. The Equal Opportunities Committee will continue its inquiry into women and work later in the year. Today’s debate is an opportunity to hear views and concerns from members, which will be invaluable to the committee in making progress with the inquiry. Last week, in a debate on women’s representation, the Parliament heard from my colleague Jenny Marra that women make up only 25 per cent of executive non-departmental public body boards, 36 per cent of advisory boards and 11 per cent of Scottish public limited company boards. Those are shocking statistics. The Parliament needs to take action to end gender inequality and imbalance, as equal female representation will struggle to improve organically. Recent research has shown that women hold less than a third of the United Kingdom’s top jobs and that, in the police service, only 16 per cent of top jobs are held by women. Around the same time last month when BBC research found that women are in less than a third of top jobs, research from Cranfield University showed that candidates for board-level jobs are generally hired based on their fit with the existing, mostly male, directors. There is a need for Government to legislate for greater representation, as much research shows that the imbalance will not correct itself. As Ms Marra pointed out, the Scandinavian countries are an example of what can be achieved when quotas are set. The glass ceiling continues to exist for women in the workplace, as was highlighted during the Equal Opportunities Committee’s evidence session and excellently by Annabel Goldie, who told us of us her experiences during her time as a partner in a law firm. Even in workplaces that are predominantly run by women, there is a struggle to advance, as Margaret Boyd from the STUC women’s committee found during her time in employment with a major biscuit company. Ms Boyd stated clearly that, no matter how clever a woman is, men still get the top jobs in shop-floor management, and the most that a woman can get is a position as a supervisor or team leader. That is in a workplace that is dominated by women and has been for many years. There is not only a boardroom glass ceiling, but a glass ceiling in management. It is no surprise to me that that still exists, but it is shocking when women tend to excel more at education than men. As women become more qualified than men, why are women underemployed or segregated in the workplace? Kirsty Connell, the vice-chair of the STUC youth committee, said at the round-table: “We now have a generation of women who are coming through who are highly educated: they’ve had a lot of investment in their education at every level, and they’re outperforming boys both at school and at university.” That is what I have said before, and continues to be of no surprise. However, in relation to the glass ceiling, Ms Connell added: “it is to do with having access to career support throughout their working life in terms of going for promotion, and to softer skills, such as networking, mentoring and working with more senior men and women in the workplace, which is crucial.” Influences on young people making career choices mean that there is a need for positive female role models from an early age, which is becoming increasingly hard in this age of celebrity. The committee also heard from Linda Somerville from the Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology, who said: “All too often, careers advisers and teachers are blamed for guiding young people up the wrong avenue, but it is parents and parental influences that most commonly reinforce people’s attitudes to or stereotypes about gender and employment.” Ms Somerville then described a situation at a national economic forum at which employers were blaming others for the reputation that they had. However, when she asked them whether they had taken steps to rectify their reputations with schools, they said that “they thought that taking such steps was beyond them.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 21 February 2012; c 240-1.] Proactivity must be at the heart of the policies of those employers that struggle to recruit females, especially graduates who hold the same skills and qualifications as their male counterparts. In fact, we must all be proactive. In “Tapping all our Talents—Women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics: a strategy for Scotland”, which was published by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, one of the key recommendations was that the Scottish Government should “take the lead in committing itself to a national strategy for Scotland—an Action Plan—aimed at retaining and promoting women in STEM and led by a Cabinet Secretary”. In fact, Linda Somerville stated that “The Government could bring in a proactive programme that gives meaningful work experience and tries to move both sides into non-traditional industries.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 21 February 2012; c 241.] She went on to highlight a pilot project in the north of England that has used college experience to move young men and women into non-traditional areas, such as beautician work for men, with positive feedback and evaluation. Similarly, a local engineering employer in my area runs a successful apprenticeship scheme every year, which has made a significant effort to recruit and retain women. However, no matter how much we praise modern apprenticeships, there are some people who take issue with the programme, saying that it appears to reinforce occupational segregation. That is something that I hope that we can consider further. During the round-table session, we heard great examples of good practice in the areas of apprenticeships, career advisory services and work experience programmes. Kirsty Connell mentioned the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations third sector internship programme, and Dennis Robertson praised a modular programme in a school in his constituency aimed at secondary 2 pupils. There are many more great examples like those across Scotland. One of the main themes that emerged was the lack of flexible childcare, particularly for women working shift patterns. In my opening remarks at the round-table discussion I noted my history as a Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers representative and the experiences that I shared with many women who worked part-time shifts or antisocial hours, especially those who are often asked to work at short notice or are forced to take time off due to lack of affordable childcare. Indeed, many of those who gave evidence in February declared that childcare should be flexible, widely available and free at the point of delivery, or at least much lower in cost. However, we all know that we are some way off that target. Flexible childcare can bring women out of unemployment, as many struggle to find flexible jobs. It also reduces the stresses of juggling family and work life as women, especially single mothers, are traditionally expected to. For many large employers, flexibility depends on their corporate governance, on the size of their human resources office and on budgets and targets. I worked for a large retailer, and my colleagues and I were lucky because we had a good union agreement and representation, as well as an employer who would listen to and negotiate about flexible working requests. However, the attitude of many employers to flexible working is to offer either a zero-hours contract or a flexible contract. As I said at the round table, both examples give flexibility to the employer, but absolutely no flexibility to the employee. It appears that employers experience fear when employees request a change in their hours—a fear that must be exacerbated because of the recession, as companies increasingly struggle. It is not only employers who experience fear. Women are too frightened to request changes to their hours, as employers may use threats against the employee—and have done so—when such requests are made. There must be a change in culture among employers and a change in attitudes. Many public sector bodies such as Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs are years ahead of the private sector in their willingness to accommodate flexible working. However, as I mentioned, budgetary constraints make it easier for managers to turn down such requests. In many sectors, such as customer service, performance targets also have a negative effect on flexible working requests. Emma Ritch, from Close the Gap, underlined that point when she provided the example of a team in the financial sector for whom the financial performance targets were the priority. I have touched on only some of the barriers and issues that women face in the workplace. I look forward to hearing speeches from members across the chamber in what I am sure will be a constructive and consensual debate.

As I said in the stage 2 debate, the bill is needed to remedy the judgment in Petch and Foye v Her Majesty’s Advocate. I do not have a legal background, so I welcomed members’ input in assisting my somewhat limited understanding of a complicated bill. It is disappointing that there is a loophole in our justice system that means that a prisoner who has committed a crime that is so serious that it merits a life sentence could be eligible for parole earlier than people who are serving sentences of a fixed length. Many members talked at length about that. I am satisfied that the bill will close the loophole, but I have reservations about how it will do that. It will remedy a loophole in the sentencing structure, but does not give a clear legislative solution, because what is being proposed is too similar to what has gone before. The new legislation will be every bit as difficult to understand and interpret as the existing legislation. Sentencing needs to be less prescriptive and sentencing requirements need to be clearer and more appropriate in order to make it easier for the public and victims of crime to understand how and why a sentence has been given. Most of my Labour colleagues who are present were also in the chamber last week when we debated support for victims and witnesses. I agreed with the suggestion that victims and witnesses need to be given more information to help them to understand why decisions are made and why sentences are handed down. The provisions in the bill are unnecessary complex and will make it harder for victims, witnesses and offenders’ families to understand why a sentence has been given. The addition of such a complex piece of legislation to our justice system will also make it harder for lawyers and judges to interpret the law. I agree with the Justice Committee and the Law Society of Scotland that the bill is acceptable as an interim measure to address the concerns that immediately arise from Petch and Foye, but an opportunity has been missed to simplify a complex part of law. Our sentencing legislative framework should be reviewed in its entirety and made much clearer and easier to understand. Part 2 of the bill was intended to allow publication of the reasons behind the decision to refer the Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi case to the High Court as a possible miscarriage of justice. Arguably, part 2 of the bill has now been made redundant, because the reasons for the appeal’s being dropped were leaked and published in the press. I agree with the Justice Committee that the publication of the statement of reasons in the Megrahi case might serve a relatively limited purpose, but the main reason why part 2 was introduced was to facilitate the Megrahi case. The bill’s scope is very general and can apply to cases in the future other than the Megrahi case. That gives the Scottish Government an opportunity to consider whether the bill’s provisions are strong enough to apply in other cases. There needs to be as much transparency as possible so that the public can have a greater understanding of the appeals process. The general principles of the bill are decent. They set out to solve a couple of issues in our justice system, and they will do that successfully, but I still think that the bill may add complexity to an already overly complicated area of law. However, I will support the bill, as will my colleagues in the Labour Party.

When I first heard about the PIP silicone scandal, I was shocked. I still cannot comprehend the feelings of anguish and worry that must have been—and still are—going through the affected women’s minds. They would have been asking themselves whether they had received faulty PIP implants, and, if so, whether the implants would rupture, when they would rupture and whether they would cause lasting damage to their health; they would have been asking when their implants could safely be removed. The conflicting views of the French and UK Governments, as well the inaction of the Scottish Government, have not helped those women. A public inquiry is long overdue. It is vital that any public inquiry is conducted by an independent member of the judiciary, as happened with the Penrose inquiry and the inquiry into C diff at the Vale of Leven hospital. So far, official investigations into the PIP scandal have been concerned only with maintaining public confidence in the Government. Labour’s seven-point plan, which was introduced this morning by my colleague, Jackie Baillie, is the best and only way to help PIP victims and to avoid this happening again. The Scottish Government argues that the matter is reserved and therefore that it cannot hold a public inquiry. However, the Government has a duty of care to the Scottish people and it has a primary responsibility for the nation’s public health issues. Earl Howe’s report does not adequately answer all the questions that are posed by campaigners. They deserve answers. Critical questions remain, such as the extent of the scandal in Scotland and what can be done to avoid something like this happening in the future. That is why Earl Howe’s report cannot be a substitute for a public inquiry. Statistical evidence needs to be gathered to discover the extent of the scandal in Scotland. A public inquiry would help to determine a minimum standard of care that private health clinics must provide to operate in Scotland. It would also determine whether more could and should have been done by the Scottish Government and Scottish health service in this matter, irrespective of the restrictions imposed on the Scottish Government. It would give clear and unequivocal regulations, going forward. I agree with the view that a thorough public inquiry could determine the practicality of forming a Scottish procurement body for all medical products that are brought into Scotland. As many of my colleagues will highlight today, such a body would consider clinical issues specifically for Scotland. As the amount of reconstructive and cosmetic surgery continues to rise in Scotland, with thousands of procedures conducted, it is imperative that we introduce uniform regulation of private health providers and that they are held to the highest of standards. The Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy must put herself into the shoes of the 4,000 women in Scotland who received faulty implants, including Jenny Brown and Emma Hardie, who are in the public gallery today. Their health has been put at risk and they are still suffering today. That group of women are asking why this happened in the first place and what their Government is doing to ensure that it does not happen again. The Scottish Government has a duty of care for the health and wellbeing of the people of Scotland. Currently it is letting down those 4,000 women. There is a dire need for an independent, transparent and comprehensive public inquiry so that the best justice is given to one and all.

Support for victims and witnesses is paramount. It is good to see that the Scottish Government has finally, after five years, got the issue on the agenda. A proposal that I feel would benefit victims and witnesses is that we improve the information that is given to them. Case-specific information can help victims and witnesses to understand more about their cases and make it easier to understand the sentences that are handed down to offenders. However, the proposal on improved case-specific information should be extended to help the families of the accused as well as victims and witnesses. More information about cases being provided will make the whole justice system easier to understand and more transparent at a particularly stressful time in people’s lives. Provision of more information would also help to improve public confidence in the Scottish justice system. However, the Scottish Government needs to ensure that victim and witness information is adequately protected. The proposed online information hub will need ample protection to ensure that information on victims, witnesses and accused persons is not stolen, and that it complies with data protection laws. I welcome the proposal that there be a victim surcharge. Scottish Labour proposed a similar idea in its 2007 manifesto. It is essential that the money be reserved in order to help the victims of crime and to make a difference to their lives. Our justice system should be supporting victims and witnesses while handing out appropriate punishment to offenders. In his ministerial foreword to the consultation paper the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said: “How we treat victims must be a measure of the success of our justice system as a whole.” I agree. However, what concerns me is the lack of support in the justice system—and the lack of rhetoric on them in the consultation report—for children who have incarcerated parents. Children are the forgotten victims in the justice system. Last week marked the third European prisoners’ children week. The European Network for Children of Imprisoned Parents estimates that one in 100 children in the EU has a parent in prison. That vulnerable group receives little support from governments or justice systems across the EU. In Scotland 27,000 children a year will experience one of their parents being sent to prison. Children of prisoners suffer the consequences of the parent’s offence without being guilty of it. The problems that those traumatic experiences cause in a child’s development can be felt well into adulthood. Children experience a family member’s imprisonment as a bereavement. Their responses can include acting out or becoming withdrawn, deterioration in performance at school and increased risk of substance misuse. They suffer mental health issues at three times the rate of other children.

When it is appropriate, children should be told why their parent has been incarcerated. The matter is age sensitive; the amount of information would depend on the age of the child, just as would giving children information about any topic. I would welcome more information being given to children. Studies in America have found that children who have a parent in prison are 71 per cent more likely to commit crime later in life. Nobody can deny that those children are victims. There is little support from the Scottish Government for such children during a time when their homes are being torn apart and it is difficult for them to comprehend why. The Scottish Government provides funding of £137,712 to Families Outside to support children and families who are affected by imprisonment. That amounts to £4.92 a child, which is not nearly enough. If how we treat victims is “a measure of the success of our justice system as a whole” I ask the cabinet secretary why no support is given to vulnerable children who suffer the consequences of a crime that they did not commit. Just a few changes could go a long way to help those children while reducing the risk that they will commit crime later in life. I have spoken before about the need to introduce child impact assessments, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will meet me to discuss them. Children’s interests should be represented in decisions about custody and release, even if the child’s best interests are outweighed in individual cases. A child impact assessment would provide essential information to ensure that the child is cared for and supported appropriately. There is a key role for solicitors in flagging up such information to the court. The information might or might not affect the judge’s sentencing decision, but its provision will fulfil a duty of care to the child under the Children (Scotland) Act 2005. That is something that the adult-focused criminal justice system tends to overlook. The child is also overlooked during their parent’s arrest. Guidelines should be introduced for the police so that, when they arrest a parent, they minimize disruption and avoid unnecessary trauma to children by providing the most supportive environment that is possible during and after the arrest.

I do not think that the first step should automatically be for the child to be placed in some form of care. Often, when a parent is arrested, members of the wider family are around but are not given the financial, emotional or psychological support to care for the child. A package of support around the child might mean that they were able to stay within the wider family rather than be taken into care.

The Scottish Government has an opportunity to help all victims of crime, including the children of offenders. They are innocent and they should be treated and respected as such. I hope that we will not miss the opportunity to help that vulnerable group. With the right support, children of incarcerated parents will not be left behind and will not continue to be the forgotten victims of the justice system.

I am a proud and patriotic Scot. I am proud to be in the union and I am proud to take part in this debate. Over the next two years, I expect that there will be many debates like this in this chamber about Scotland’s future—debates in which the SNP will gloss over the real issues and concerns that ordinary Scots have regarding separation by telling us, “Take the gamble and it will all work out.” Since the yes campaign launched, I have received many e-mails from constituents concerned about the future that the SNP fails to express in a separated Scotland. One particular e-mail was from a gentleman in Erskine who fears that his job with Hewlett-Packard will be lost as the contract that he is employed under depends on work coming from the UK Government. More than 30,000 jobs in defence and the civil service are located in Scotland. How many will remain if Scotland separates? The people of Scotland deserve an honest answer and, honestly, the SNP does not know.

No, I am sorry; I do not have time. The SNP needs to make clear its stance on NATO. Scotland, with or without the union, is best served and defended by NATO, one of the most successful alliances in modern history. Since devolution, 12 countries have joined NATO because of its role in the promotion of democratic values; the prevention of conflict, where possible; and the encouragement of consultation and co-operation on defence and security. Why would the nationalists want to walk away from NATO when other nations would jump at the opportunity to join? On Sunday night, many of us watched the BBC’s big debate. The SNP needs to clarify its position on electing a representative to the Bank of England, as other speakers have said. Although the debate on Sunday night was often contemptuous and contentious, it lacked a focus on the big issues. However, one issue that generated much heated debate was EU membership and the euro. Most of the audience accepted that Scotland would have to apply to become an EU member but the Deputy First Minister refused to accept that. She continued to state that professional advice had been sought, even when the Tories produced a letter showing that the SNP had not sought advice from the European Commission. Given the crisis in Europe, the people of Scotland deserve to know what legal advice the Government has received on joining the EU and on the adoption of the euro, which is a must for all countries joining the EU, including an independent Scotland.

No, I am sorry; I do not have time. What is clear is that the SNP refuses to use the powers that are currently at its disposal. The Scottish Government has the power to increase or decrease income tax by 3p. Even an increase of 1p could be used to protect vital services for disabled people, the elderly and the poorest in society, as members of the previous Renfrewshire SNP-Liberal Democrat coalition suggested in a recent hustings with carers. Instead, we have a nationalist Government that wants to lower corporation tax to help businesses to raise their profits and compete with our neighbours in Carlisle and County Durham and across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. If Scotland separates from the UK and enters the EU, what safeguards does the First Minister have to ensure that his plan for a corporation tax cut would be allowed under EU rules? As an important aspect—

Over the past couple of centuries, libraries have evolved to become important institutions at the heart of communities across Scotland and the United Kingdom. Libraries’ importance can never be underestimated and they should not be evaluated as being costly or ineffective. They have provided the working class with the tools to self-educate, enhance its knowledge and improve opportunities for gainful employment. In my area, where child poverty is at 27 per cent, the previous Renfrewshire administration closed Gallowhill community library despite a wall of opposition. The administration brandished the closure as being cost effective, but at what cost was that to the children in the area who needed the tools and opportunities that would give them hope in the future? The closure of the library has also been a great loss to the area’s older residents, many of whom have been avid readers and users of library services all their lives. However, we know that in times of austerity libraries are often the first things to be axed. The bill is welcome in respect of reform of the National Library of Scotland, but what is unwelcome—as has been said—is the centralisation of powers to the relevant Scottish minister. With the previous bill being almost 90 years old, it was right to produce a new bill to repeal the National Library of Scotland Act 1925. After almost a century of social and economic advances, the new bill should enable the NLS to adapt to modern times, as it has been doing over the past few years with the use of new technologies and digital resources. The reduction in the size of the NLS board of trustees is a must and was even backed by the NLS in its response to the consultation. The idea of reforming its governance was raised by the last Labour Executive in 2006, so I am glad to see that it has finally come to fruition. Yet, that reduction cannot be effective when the power of ministerial direction is implemented, no matter how general or specific that power is. The independence of the NLS board must not be compromised by the interference of a Scottish minister. As the NLS stated in its consultation response, it is appropriate for ministers to indicate how public funding is used, especially during austerity, as long as a minister does not impede curatorial independence. As Neil Findlay has pointed out, curatorial independence must be maintained at all times, especially given the record of the current Scottish Government. However, like my colleagues on the Labour benches, I am concerned by centralisation—irrespective of who is in power. The NLS has a prominent role in promoting and preserving our national culture and heritage, but I fear that if powers are given to Scottish ministers in the present Government, they will be tested to promote the nationalistic views of the First Minister and his bandwagon. We cannot stress enough the importance of libraries, whether local or national, nor can we allow their freedom and independence to be damaged by Government interference.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how it takes account of the rights of the child when a parent is being sentenced. (S4O-00983)

Child impact assessments ensure that the child’s interests are represented in decisions about custody and release, and they highlight the needs of the child at those points. Does the cabinet secretary agree that such assessments are vital for the long-term protection and wellbeing of children, and that they possess the opportunity to rehabilitate the parents, because they know what will happen to their child after sentencing?

This is a vital debate on how to get the best out of our public services in times of economic difficulty. Now that we have re-entered recession it is crucial for the Finance Committee to assess how to protect those public services—a lifeline for many—that bear the brunt of cost cutting by government: in Westminster, in Edinburgh and locally. Although the debate is not specific to any one report from the Finance Committee, it is timely. With the Tories in Westminster cutting whatever they like, the deficit hawks in the coalition have waited for the financial crisis and subsequent recession to implement their ideologically driven cuts. Their slash-and-burn approach will destroy many of the public sector services that we desperately need in the UK. In Scotland, we have the SNP, which has passed on the Tory cuts to local authorities without haste, and has acted as carrier pigeons for the Tory coalition. Then we have the Lib Dems, who—I am going with my previous comparisons—are dodos and soon to be extinct, especially after last week’s elections. They are propping up a right-wing Government that is intent on destroying the lives of the most disadvantaged in the name of deficit reduction. We can all agree that to many people in Scotland, public services are a lifeline—whether through employment in the public sector, the education that our children receive, the hospital care that we need, or the home help that our elderly require. We have to start looking at how we continue to fund public services, and although the Scottish Government has claimed that it will not use private finance, that position is not shared by the Minister for Local Government and Planning, Derek Mackay. In response to Michael McMahon’s question on the Scottish Government’s consideration of social impact bonds, Derek Mackay said: “The Scottish Government is committed to working with stakeholders to find new ways of adding value to, and improving the delivery of, public services.” Of course, the private sector has a huge role to play in improving the delivery of public services in partnership with the public sector. Mr Mackay added: “This includes exploring the potential of innovative approaches from social investment.”—[Official Report, 19 April 2012; c 8227.] I believe that social impact bonds could be extremely useful in getting the best out of our public services. However, I await the results of the trials of the scheme in England. Partnerships between the public sector and the private sector could be essential in dealing with the complex problems that many people have, and where the responsibilities overlap, partnerships are a must. Such partnerships are also vital when engaging with the local community. We all know the problems that we face due to the changing demographics. However, the biggest challenge is how we, as policy makers, manage that change. There needs to be a greater focus on bringing social and economic objectives together in deciding policies, as was highlighted by the Poverty Alliance at the Finance Committee. However, when policies are adopted to serve the economy and the financial markets, those at the bottom will always suffer, as will public services. Ken Macintosh made the excellent point that the Tory Government has an obsession with maintaining the UK’s AAA credit status, yet the credit rating agencies failed massively in the financial crisis. While the SNP Government focuses on its separation agenda, it fails to tell the Scottish people the realities of independence. What would be the credit rating of a separated Scotland?

I point out to the cabinet secretary that I did not say that the Tories were obsessed with credit ratings—that is not what I said. If the cabinet secretary has chosen to take it that way, that is up to him. What would be the credit rating of a separated Scotland? What would be the sustainable tax rate, and what would be the level of public spending under the currency union that the SNP boasts about? Those are questions that the Government cannot answer, and the result is uncertainty for the Scottish economy.

No, I am in my last minute. Those issues inhibit the long-term fiscal sustainability of our services at a time when we need to manage the demographic changes that further threaten our public services. What we need to do—and what we have the powers to do—is to target policy towards social goals. Reducing child poverty, creating full employment and improving public services are three targets that the Government should be working towards. Instead, the decline in child poverty has stalled under the SNP; unemployment—especially female unemployment—has increased, causing child poverty to increase; and public services are under attack due to cost cutting by the deficit hawks. One of the main themes to come out of the Finance Committee appears to be that job creation is essential for fiscal stability. Reducing unemployment is a target that we must all share—but apparently we do not, given that jobs for the new Forth crossing are going abroad. As I and others have pointed out, the public services on which we depend also provide people with jobs. Our fiscal sustainability is hampered by the Tories’ wish to slash up to 500,000 jobs and especially by the SNP’s cutting of 25,000 of those jobs.

15. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase the number of jobs in the renewable energy sector in West Scotland. (S4O-00963)

I thank the minister for his brief answer. Following the announcement that Doosan Power Systems is shelving 200 jobs in my home town of Renfrew, which the Scottish Government knew about four months before the news became public, what assurance can the minister give the people of Renfrewshire that no more jobs will be lost on that scale and kept from public knowledge?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to tackle child poverty in the west of Scotland. (S4O-00917)

In my local authority area, child poverty has remained static for the past five years. The SNP-led Renfrewshire Council has failed to report on the progress of the anti-poverty strategy, although it set out to report every year. Does the minister agree that we need a national focus to reduce child poverty and that single outcome agreements are failing children in Renfrewshire?

I add my voice to those who have already supported the report from the Angiolini commission, but I have one main criticism: its lack of focus on the families of female offenders. Families have an integral role to play in reducing reoffending among prisoners, and both families and offenders need support from the point of arrest right through to release, and after. Until now, there has been a distinct lack of action to halt the increase in female incarceration, particularly given that there has not been a similar increase in the number of crimes committed by women during the same period. Last year, when the Government announced the creation of the Angiolini commission, I hoped that it would be the start of a new era in tackling the problems that are inherent in female offending. I still have that enthusiasm, and we now look to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to take the recommendations forward. I hope that real, meaningful and long-term change will come out of the report. One recommendation that I was happy to hear announced last Tuesday, at the launch of the report, was the recommendation that Cornton Vale be replaced with a smaller specialist prison. It is not the first time the Government has been told that Cornton Vale has served its purpose; after all, it was the state of the art in 1975, but Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons in Scotland announced last year that it was overcrowded and no longer suitable as a prison. Earlier this month, I was given a tour of Cornton Vale in my capacity as the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee. I was told by the deputy governor that 80 per cent of the prisoners suffer from underlying mental health issues and that 60 per cent suffer from drug and alcohol misuse. The women are clearly being locked up for the wrong reasons—they are incarcerated for not paying fines, for example—so there needs to be a concerted effort to find alternatives to imprisonment, which are essential for the future wellbeing of women who are suffering from mental health issues and/or addiction problems. The commission recommended alternatives to prosecution through fiscal work orders. Such alternatives can be effective only when authorities and services such as the courts, the police, the SPS and social work departments work collectively to divert women from the courts, when that is best for the community, the victim and the offender. I have often talked about the important role that families can play in reducing reoffending. The commission’s report did not cover the importance of that role and the influence that families can have on a prisoner’s rehabilitation. The alternatives to prosecution that are highlighted in the report must include the woman’s family—only, of course, if it is safe for the child to be involved. Only by incorporating the family into efforts to rehabilitate the prisoner and prevent reoffending can we halt the increase in female imprisonment and reoffending rates. More support is needed for the families of the imprisoned mother or father. We must remember that mothers and fathers are imprisoned: we are focusing on mothers, but it is worth reiterating that fathers need support, too. Support in relation to housing, benefits and employment is essential if family members are to continue their lives as normally as possible. If such support is in place, the chances of the prisoner reoffending on release are reduced. However, support is not being extended to the family. Communication with families is essential during a female offender’s time in prison, but for the families of many women in Cornton Vale, travel to the prison is impossible, given the cost and time involved and the availability of transport. That is especially the case for people from northern and southern Scotland. I endorse the use of videoconferencing to enable prisoners to maintain contact with families and rebuild broken ties, so that on release the prisoner has a home to go back to. The technology is used in many countries, so it is unfortunate that, in the use of technology and innovative measures to maintain family contact, Scotland falls behind many countries that would be classed as being less developed than we are. Child or family impact assessments at the point of arrest or custody are required if we are to reduce female imprisonment rates and shift the balance towards alternatives to imprisonment. If such assessments were made, judges and courts could make more informed decisions about sentencing offenders, especially mothers, who in many cases are the primary givers of care to their children. However, last week, in response to a parliamentary question that I lodged, the Minister for Children and Young People said: “The Scottish Government has no plans to introduce child impact assessments”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 18 April 2012; S4W-06327.] I will continue to make representations on assessments, for which Families Outside and other charities have called. I will be keen to hear from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in six months about progress on the commission’s recommendations. We must place greater focus on rehabilitation and education through alternatives to prison, especially for women who have substance abuse issues and mental health problems. As the cabinet secretary said, if we do not do that, we will be having this debate again in 10 years.

The Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill is needed to remedy the judgment handed down in Petch and Foye v Her Majesty’s Advocate. The bill seeks to deal successfully with an anomaly by which prisoners who are given a mandatory life sentence could apply to become eligible for parole earlier than those serving sentences of a fixed length. It is disappointing that we could have a loophole in our justice system today that would allow prisoners who have committed a crime so serious that it merits a life sentence to be eligible for parole earlier than those serving sentences of a fixed length. I take this opportunity to thank Christine Grahame, who is not here just now, for her succinct examples earlier of sentencing and parole. Like some other speakers, I am not a member of the Justice Committee, so I found what she said quite helpful. However, I read diligently all the briefings for the debate and I am satisfied that the bill will successfully close the loophole, although I have some reservations about how it will do that. I understand that part 1 is necessary because of the Petch and Foye judgment, but it only adds complexity to an already complicated area of the law. The current legislation has caused much debate and it has been subject to various interpretations by the courts. Although the bill remedies a loophole in the sentencing structure, it will not give a clear legislative solution, because what is being proposed is too similar to what has gone before. In general, approaches to sentencing need to be less prescriptive and sentencing requirements need to be clearer and more appropriate. That would make it easier for the public and the victims of crime to understand how and why a sentence was given. I understand that the Justice Committee has asked the Scottish Government to ensure that victims and witnesses fully understand the sentences that are handed down by courts and how they are put into practice. I welcome that proposal, but the sentencing should also be made clearer to the families of the offenders and it should be put in such a way that they will be able to understand the sentence during what is a traumatic time. The Law Society of Scotland made a valid point that proposed new section 2B(5) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 will give the sentencing judge discretion as to the length of the punishment part of a sentence. The Law Society is concerned that there is provision in the sentence calculation exercise for the sentencing judge to increase the punishment part period, having regard to the same features that could have been considered when that period was first identified. The Law Society feels that someone sentenced in that way might appeal on the basis that it leads to double counting. I feel that the Scottish Government should look into the potential for double counting in the bill. I agree with the Justice Committee and the Law Society that the bill is acceptable as an interim measure that addresses the immediate concerns arising from the Petch and Foye judgment. However, the opportunity to simplify a complex part of our law has been missed. Indeed, our sentencing legislative framework should be reviewed in its entirety to make it clearer and easier to understand. Part 2 was intended to allow the publication of the reasoning behind the decision to refer the case of Mr Abdelbaset al-Megrahi to the High Court as a possible miscarriage of justice. The reasons were originally not published because the Megrahi appeal was abandoned. Arguably, part 2 is now redundant because, as members heard earlier, the reasons for the appeal being dropped were leaked and published in the press. I agree with the Justice Committee that the publication of the statement of reasons in the Megrahi case might serve a relatively limited purpose. However, there needs to be as much openness as possible about why Megrahi was allowed to make his appeal. The main reason why part 2 was introduced was to facilitate disclosure in the Megrahi case. However, it is general in scope and can apply, in future, to cases other than that of Megrahi. That gives the Scottish Government an opportunity to consider whether the provisions are strong enough to apply in other cases. If part 2 can apply to future cases, there will have to be a strong public interest in the case for publishing the reasons for appeal. There needs to be as much transparency as possible so that the public can have a greater understanding of the appeals process. The general principles of the bill are decent. They set out to solve a couple of issues in our justice system. However, an opportunity has been missed to make the sentencing procedure more transparent and easier to understand. I also hope that part 2 is robust enough to apply to future cases.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what guidelines there are for police on how to treat children when arresting a parent. (S4O-00845)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response. However, the recent Quaker United Nations Office report highlighted that children are 73 per cent more likely to suffer from post-traumatic stress if they are present when a parent is arrested. Does the cabinet secretary therefore agree that clear and unambiguous guidelines should be in place for when the police arrest a parent when a child is present, and that more support and counselling should be available for children in that position? What steps will he take to ensure that support and counselling is available?

I thank the Liberal Democrats for bringing the issue to the chamber so that we can have a serious debate on how we address reoffending in Scotland. Reducing reoffending is a major issue in all countries throughout the world and there have many been many attempts to tackle it. I will touch on the innocent victims of imprisonment: children. Children of prisoners are a very vulnerable group in society and the facts show that more children in Scotland experience a parent’s imprisonment than a parent’s divorce. Ensuring that children have the rights that they are entitled to while a parent is in prison can be an effective tool in tackling reoffending among the parents. Brigadier Hugh Monro said that if good contact is maintained between prisoners and families, the risk of reoffending is dramatically lowered. Maintaining good contact between a child and their parent can be good for the child’s development as well as the level of recidivism among parents. There are no definitive statistics on the number of children who have a parent in prison. However, in the UK alone, there are 17,000 children with mothers sent to prison each year; the total of incarcerated parents is estimated to be two and a half times the number of children in care and six times the number on the child protection register. The time from the principal arrest of a parent to the court case and subsequent imprisonment can be traumatic for a child, who often does not understand what is happening in the judicial system. The effects are often many and varied, and each child is uniquely affected. Children can suffer a range of emotional, behavioural, educational and financial problems, many of which the average adult would be unable to cope with, and which lead to developmental problems and antisocial behaviour later in life. If such children are not supported, they are left standing outside the revolving door of reoffending, just as many parents are. Prison visits by children are limited, for a number of reasons, and we need to encourage the use of family visits, but there are also opportunities for video and telephone calls. Those things do not, however, replace the relationship that a parent can have with her children or the relationship that children need if they are to grow and develop. Before Christmas I had the pleasure of visiting HMP Perth, and was given a tour of the refurbished visiting centre and also the external visitors centre that provides support and advice to families who have a relative in jail. The external centre, which is run by CrossReach, provides emotional support and advice on benefits, health and care. External visitors centres are valuable, and they should be mandatory in Scotland, as they are in England. I commend the Government’s guarantee that all new prisons will have improved centres for family visits. Yesterday was the most recent meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on families affected by imprisonment, which works closely with Families Outside. The speaker, Oliver Robertson from the Quaker United Nations Office, gave a fantastic update on the recent day of general discussion with the UN children’s rights committee. The day provided many recommendations for a set of international guidelines on how to handle children with incarcerated parents, with much focus on reoffending. A few examples of good practice were discussed, from countries that are less developed than Scotland. One example from Jamaica was the creation of PrisonBook, a heavily regulated form of Facebook, through which parents and children can have regular contact. In Poland, the police are given guidelines and protocols on how to handle children, and when they arrest a parent they take the child into a separate room. Those are just some of the examples of good practice that were discussed during the UN’s day of general discussion and then raised in the cross-party group. While we are looking at our justice system and assessing reoffending in Scotland, we must also look at good practice internationally to keep people, especially parents, out of prison and away from a life of crime. If we keep parents out of prison, we have a better chance of keeping future generations out too.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, as the report on the regulation of care for the elderly is the culmination of months of work by the Health and Sport Committee, which I was a member of before I moved to the Equal Opportunities Committee. I fully welcome the report. The regulation of care for the elderly has had a lot of attention in the past year. Improvements in care for the elderly need to be made quickly. The importance of inspections and a robust and thorough inspection process has been highlighted. Another thing that can contribute to better regulation and care is a robust complaints procedure. Every care home and care service must have a fit complaints system at its heart so that service users, relatives and carers can feel confident that any issue that they raise, internally or externally, will be considered seriously and resolved. That is a must for driving improvements in our care service across Scotland and will benefit the service users as well as giving comfort to families that their loved ones are being looked after well. Many people do not feel confident about complaining to a care provider directly, partly because of the lack of profile of the complaints process. I therefore welcome the cabinet secretary’s response, during the evidence sessions, that the Scottish Government will continue to support the care inspectorate in raising the profile of the complaints process. I was also happy to find, in the Government’s response, that it accepts the committee’s finding that there is a need for a single point of entry for integrated services. I hope that that is given full attention as the Government focuses more on the integration of health and social care services up and down Scotland. I take the opportunity to discuss regulation of the workforce—in particular, those who provide care services to the elderly through self-directed support. Will those care providers be regulated? The registration of workers is vital to ensure the highest standard of care. What assurances can the cabinet secretary give the chamber that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, which will come before Parliament in the near future, will ensure that all staff who are taken on by service users are fully trained and registered, as those in care homes and the care sector are? Members will know that, last year, I raised many concerns about cuts in the third sector, the impact of which was felt acutely by staff in organisations such as Quarriers, whose level of care is of the highest standard. In its report, the committee shares those concerns that the social care workforce has long been undervalued. The Quarriers case was a perfect example of that. Those at the bottom, who provide essential care to our elderly, bear the brunt of cost cutting at every level of government. A worker’s pay should reflect their output, and no one can doubt the excellence of the care that many care workers in Scotland provide, yet they do not receive what they should, nor do they have relevant terms and conditions or a chance of training and development. In addressing the regulation of care for our elderly, it is essential that we assess the procurement process to guarantee that staff and service users do not suffer due to a race to the bottom in tendering services. Regulation and procurement are very much entwined in how services are run. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s response on the living wage and hope that the Government can do more than support it in principle. I hope that it will introduce legislation to bring a living wage to everyone in Scotland, not only in the care sector. The living wage is essential to bringing people out of in-work poverty, which is the position of many workers in the care sector, particularly women who work part-time. I, too, await the outcome of the inquiry into the living wage in Scotland by the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. Although we all welcome the report, I hope that every member will continue to work to improve the lives of our elderly, our vulnerable and our disabled, no matter what constitution is in place. We all know—

In a speech that he recently delivered in China, the First Minister said that climate justice is “vitally important”, adding that it must be “at the very heart of the decisions we make on energy policy and economic and social development in the coming months.” As has been previously mentioned, he went on to say: “I believe we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to enshrine” the “important principle ... that economic development should be linked to human rights”. The first part of those comments reminded me of the words of the former First Minister, Jack McConnell, who said in 2002 that he believes that “the biggest challenge for the 21st century is to combine economic progress with social and environmental justice.” That was 10 years ago, and the Scottish Government has yet to introduce that combination of social, economic and environmental justice. In 2009, the UK ratified the Aarhus convention. On backing the convention, the UK stated that it understands the right of every person “to live in an environment adequate to his or her health and well-being.” The UN Aarhus convention, which Scotland has signed and ratified through the UK and the EU, requests the implementation of three pillars. Those three pillars give individuals the right to be informed and have access to information about the environment, the right to participate in environmental decision making and the right of easy and effective access to justice if the former rights are denied. The Scottish Labour Executive met the first two principles of the convention with the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and the Environmental Assessment (Scotland) Act 2005. It is now 2012. Why has the Scottish Government not yet set legislation that meets the third pillar of the Aarhus convention? The third principle ideally should be protected by the implementation of judicial review. Access to that remedy can often be the only way to challenge an executive act that might cause climate injustice. Judicial review allows a petitioner to challenge otherwise unconstrained administrative decisions and to ensure that the rule of law is adhered to for the benefit of the people and the environment.

I am really sorry, but I have a tight six minutes and have a lot to get through. Climate justice has not received special status in Scotland. The Gill review into the Scottish civil courts says that the current law on standing for judicial review is too restrictive. If a petitioner were able to challenge decisions that cause climate injustice, it could lead to a broad change in administrative practice. Further, if there were a high-profile case, it could raise public awareness of a particular environmental injustice and educate the public at the same time. Scottish Labour has always pushed for more to be done to reduce our carbon emissions, and it was a Labour Government in Scotland that first introduced renewables targets in the Scottish Parliament. Labour members have continued to support the Scottish Government’s general approach to climate changes issues. However, why has the SNP reduced the annual carbon emission targets from the proposed level of 3 per cent a year to 0.3 per cent this year? The effects of climate change can be seen every day. From the polar ice caps melting in the Arctic to the prolonged droughts in the deserts of sub-Saharan Africa, climate change is having a genuine effect on our planet. It is reported that, in 2008 alone, more than 20 million people were displaced because of natural disasters. In Scotland, we have a varied geographical landscape, and climate change will affect us all in a variety of ways, whether through flooding or—dare I say it?—heat waves, which are something that Scotland, at its best, lacks. The impact of climate change globally will hurt the poorest countries and the poorest in our communities. The effects on health and wellbeing will be staggering for the poorest, and there is no justice in that, as it is not the poorest who have caused the threats that lie ahead. We must act on the final stage of the Aarhus convention and ensure that we meet all the requirements, so that not just the Donald Trumps of the world, with their tens of millions of dollars, but the poorest, who will be hit hardest, have the chance to challenge an environmentally damaging decision or act. Climate injustices impact directly and indirectly on human rights: the right to life, to adequate food, to the highest attainable standard of health, to adequate housing and to safe drinking water and sanitation. Thankfully, those issues do not affect the lives of 99 per cent of people in the UK. However, they affect the lives of millions of people around the world, and if we do not do something about climate injustice now, it will affect our country in the next century. Scotland is a relatively small country, with a relatively small population. However, we can set an example for the rest of the world to follow by acting on our promises, not by grandstanding.

I welcome and support all the input into today’s important debate. Human trafficking is a gross violation of fundamental human rights. It is a heinous crime that needs to be addressed globally as well as in the UK and right here on our doorstep in Scotland. As described by many professionals and reports on the issue, human trafficking is fast becoming the world’s biggest example of organised crime. It is a disgusting crime that involves vulnerable people being exploited for the benefit of criminals. Those vulnerable men, women and children are exploited with empty promises or violence and are then desperately trapped and forced into prostitution, slave labour and criminal activity. The report that was published by Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People said that 80 children in Scotland have been trafficked within Scotland and that many more child victims who have been sold, stolen and transported thousands of miles remain unidentified. The report draws on many sources and the research revealed that awareness of child trafficking in Scotland is low. That lack of awareness may have led to a significant number of cases remaining unidentified, with vulnerable children not being referred to relevant agencies. Those children are the most vulnerable people in our society and we are not doing enough to identify, locate and help them. As many members know, Scotland recently had its first conviction for human trafficking. However, that is only one conviction. There are many more traffickers in Scotland and the UK who are getting away with this awful crime. One reason why Scotland has such a low conviction rate is that there is no separation between the crime of human trafficking and immigration crime. Victims of trafficking do not want to be referred through the national referral mechanism because they are afraid of retribution by their traffickers or fearful of the consequences of being brought to the attention of the authorities because of their immigration status. That situation must be addressed. The report by Baroness Kennedy QC highlights many problems in Scotland and gives several recommendations that the Equality and Human Rights Commission thinks will help to tackle human trafficking in Scotland and get more of these repulsive criminals convicted and sent to jail. The report asks many questions, some of which are vital given the approaching London 2012 Olympic games and, more important, the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow. I recently asked the Scottish Government how it plans to tackle possible increases in human trafficking to Scotland that might arise from the 2012 Olympic games and the 2014 Commonwealth games. Shona Robison answered that the Government is working closely with the police and that “There is currently no intelligence to indicate that human trafficking will be an issue for Scotland from either games.”

No. I have got a really tight six minutes. I am sorry. However, Baroness Kennedy’s report warned that human trafficking will increase in Scotland around the time of the London 2012 games and significantly in Glasgow in 2014. It also said that there is a significant gap in police intelligence on the issue of human trafficking. We have two years in which Scotland can tackle human trafficking and make this a hostile environment for traffickers. Helena Kennedy’s report raised many issues, provided much information and asked many questions. I have asked the Scottish Government many of those questions and I hope that the Government will give me and members a straight answer. Many organisations that have helped victims of trafficking agree with all the inquiry recommendations, especially the recommendation that consideration be given to introducing a human trafficking bill in Scotland and the call for greater leadership from the Government. During the past year, Northern Ireland published the organised crime task force “Annual Report and Threat Assessment 2011”, as a tool for researching and assessing human trafficking in Northern Ireland. Wales appointed an anti human trafficking co-ordinator, to monitor anti-trafficking efforts and to make recommendations for improvement. When will Scotland get an anti-trafficking monitor or, better, a multi-agency task force to tackle human trafficking in Scotland? Baroness Kennedy recommended that the Scottish Government run a nationwide campaign to raise awareness of human trafficking in Scotland. The blue blindfold campaign is one of many initiatives that have helped to raise awareness of human trafficking in England and Wales but, unlike our neighbours south of the border, we in Scotland have not had a concerted campaign to raise awareness of human trafficking. A vocal campaign would raise public awareness of the issue and enable people to know what to look for if they think that they have spotted a sign of human trafficking. A campaign is a crucial measure that we can take to help to rid our nation of the crime of trafficking and make Scotland a hostile environment for traffickers. In a debate last year I said that Phil Taylor, the UK Border Agency’s regional director for Scotland and Northern Ireland, had criticised the criminal justice system for being too slow to deal with sex and labour trafficking. Such comments must be taken seriously. I hope that MSPs, who are representatives of Scotland, can take collective action to vanquish human trafficking and all other forms of modern slavery. The inspector general of the United States Department of Defense said in 2008: “for those of us who are in a position to do something to combat human slavery, however small our contribution, neutrality is a sin.” I say to all members of the Parliament that we are in a position to act not only to combat human slavery but to take the lead on human trafficking, so that such a monstrous crime has no place in Scotland.

How does the cabinet secretary plan to retain probationary teacher numbers while local authority budgets are being slashed? In Renfrewshire, teacher numbers have fallen by 14 per cent under the SNP and Lib Dem coalition. Does he agree that the current scheme to give new teachers a one-year probation is failing, given that very few end up in full-time teaching jobs?

I register my concern at the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s plans to abolish prison visiting committees, which have a vital role in our prison system. The service model is envied throughout the United Kingdom and Europe. The decision to abolish the prison visiting committees seems to have been taken solely by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, with a push by the SPS. That was the only body that called for their abolition in the consultation. The voices of the majority of the other correspondents are being ignored. Fifty-nine out of 60 favour keeping the prison visiting committees. The majority of those who are in favour of keeping them are, like me, not opposed to an advocacy service, on two conditions: first, that it works in parallel with the prison visiting committees; and, secondly, that any new body is independent of the Scottish Prison Service. The work of those who volunteer for prison visiting committees is being undermined and the removal of the statutory protection of prisoners’ human rights is further punishment for those who are serving any length of sentence. Independent inspections ensure the wellbeing of prisoners and highlight areas of concern that prisons and staff must address. Prison visiting committees have a statutory right to visit prisons at any time to address issues that affect prisoners and their wellbeing. An advocacy service would have no such role. That adds to the gap that was left by the abolition of the Scottish Prisons Complaints Commission in 2010. The proposals make no economic sense. The advocacy service would cost an extra third of the cost of the prison visiting committees. There is also the human aspect. Families of prisoners need peace of mind that their loved ones are safe and are being looked after in prison. The prison visiting committees help to give such clarity to families. They know that the prisoner can highlight any complaint and that prison visiting committees can detect any abuse in the prison system. Prisoners can be confident that the issues that they raise with prison visiting committees, regardless of their nature, will be dealt with appropriately. Prisoners with mental health issues can speak in confidence to prison visiting committees, and their families can be assured that the support that they need is being provided. Governors regularly meet members of prison visiting committees and they give comprehensive reports on a number of issues. The independence of the prison visiting committees gives them their strength. Their loss is at odds with the Government’s commitment to fairness, compassion and social justice. Over the past few weeks, I have received many letters of concern about the proposal to abolish the prison visiting committees not just from prisoners’ relatives, but from volunteers. Some are concerned that the proposal is being seen as an attempt to abolish public bodies. There are 16 independent prison visiting committees; there is not one umbrella organisation, as some members have suggested. In the Hugo Young lecture last week, the First Minister emphasised his commitment to Scotland being a “beacon for progressive opinion” and a more socially just and tolerant society. In August last year, a Russian delegation came to Scotland to find out more about prison visiting committees and what they do. They found an independent service that protects prisoners’ human rights. As I stated earlier, the service is envied throughout the world, and it must be protected. If the decision is what the First Minister and his party claim to be a “beacon for progressive opinion”, they are clearly misguided.

11. To ask the Scottish Executive what support has been provided to help employees of Remploy find alternative employment. (S4O-00649)

Given the fact that 85 per cent of those who lost their jobs when Remploy factories were closed in 2008 still do not have a job, and with unemployment high already, what practical measures will the cabinet secretary put in place to support disabled adults who are looking for a new job?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does the member agree that, in the wonderful area of Renfrewshire, where we both come from, the public have huge concerns about the proposed takeover of the Arriva services by McGill’s, and that there is a great fear that service levels will suffer and services will be cut?

I am glad to take part in the debate as a proud and patriotic Scot. I find it hypocritical and suspicious that the First Minister and his party have brought the claim of right to the very chamber that he refused to work towards through the Scottish Constitutional Convention. When Alex Salmond was a member of the Westminster Parliament in 1989, he refused to sign the claim of right, which delivered devolution to the Scottish people, resulting in the very building that we are in today. Why wait for five years since he became First Minister to raise the issue again? That is why I doubt the SNP’s intentions in reigniting the issue today. At a time when the biggest issue in Scotland is our future in the union, the SNP is looking backwards and talking about how to govern instead of putting words into action. At a time when unemployment is soaring, child poverty is at a dangerously unacceptable level and the economy is faltering, we have a Government that cares about its own goal of separation.

No. I have many points to make, and I do not have enough time to give way. We have a nationalist Government that is masquerading as progressive. Nationalism is a regressive ideology, and it must be exposed as that. The purpose of the motion is to stir up the debate on how the people of Scotland use their sovereign right to determine what Government should be formed to meet their needs. That is what happened last May. The SNP won that debate and must meet the needs of the Scottish people, as the claim of right requests of it. It already has the powers to create jobs, improve our economy and rid Scotland of child poverty.

No. I do not have time to do so. Why is the SNP’s attention elsewhere? Where is the leadership on the issues that matter to everyone in Scotland? Since the election in May, all parties have talked about how we need to include civic Scotland in the consultation for the referendum but, in 1988, the SNP walked away from the opportunity to listen to civic Scotland. How can we trust that party not to repeat the errors that it made then? The Constitutional Convention consisted of more than political figures. It included people from throughout Scotland, elected representatives and representatives of trade unions, faith groups, ethnic minorities and the business community. Why did the SNP blunder then? There was a great chance for everyone in Scotland to work together to achieve devolution. [Interruption.]

That was what the Scottish people wanted, and they still do. Why did the SNP not listen to their wishes and needs? What has changed since then? The claim of right is a pledge that we will give the people of Scotland a right to say how they are governed. It has taken the SNP 20 years to realise that. If it honestly believes that now, why does it not give Scotland the chance to vote on its future sooner rather than later? This debate is part of a distraction from the substance of the separation debate. The claim of right has no legal status, although it is an important promise to people throughout Scotland that the SNP refused to sign. Now that the self-appointed future king of Scotland has published his consultation and referendum document and followed that yesterday with a wee trip up the Royal Mile to measure the drapes, can we please move on to the substance? I hope that the First Minister and his party can answer the questions that must be addressed and then give the Scottish people the right to a say on Scotland’s future. If the SNP believes in the claim of right, why will it wait three years from when it won its majority to have the referendum? Is that because it fears that the Scottish people will reject its sole purpose as a political party? It is a political party with one reason for its existence: separation. Like Lord Wallace and many people throughout Scotland, I would take it more seriously if it had signed the claim of right in the late 1980s, which helped to bring it to the position that it is now in. The Scottish Government has a right to have a referendum on separation, but it should at all times take into account the right of the people to have their say on how they are governed. Bring forward the vote and stop hiding behind the myth that the timing of the referendum was in the SNP manifesto. Give the Scottish people the right to say how they are governed, and tackle the real, important issues that affect Scotland.

This week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy announced a radical rebranding of community health partnerships, which will now be health and social care partnerships, on a visit to open Barrhead’s new health and care centre. In the minister’s words, the reforms “will deliver a system that is effectively integrated, leading to better outcomes for older people and better use of resources.” How will that suddenly be achieved through health and social care partnerships, and why could it not be achieved through community health partnerships? Ms Sturgeon’s announcement on Monday indicates that the key elements of the new system will make health and social care partnerships accountable to local authorities and ministers, will create new or different job opportunities in the community—at a time when the SNP Government is cutting nurses from the NHS—and will ensure that NHS boards and local authorities will be required to produce integrated budgets, which will bring an end to the cost shunting that currently takes place. Accountability has always been an issue in the integration of health and social care. Who will be responsible when staff, service users or the public make a complaint about the service? Another aspect of accountability is the regulation of health and social care professionals. Will that be in the remit of the care inspectorate or that of health boards? There also needs to be accountability for the finances of health and social care partnerships. If integrated budgets are to end cost shunting, will the resources come from the change fund, local authorities or health boards? What will be the contribution from each body involved? As local authorities and health boards have had their budgets cut, can the minister assure the Parliament that the change fund will not be used to plug the gaps that have been created by underfunding by the Government? I have raised that issue previously. In recent months, care homes have closed after the parent company has entered administration, leaving many of our elderly people unsure about how they will be looked after. Therefore, not only must we regulate the financial accountability of health and social care partnerships, but there must be greater financial regulation of all social care organisations. The integration of health and social care cannot be fully achieved without input from the third sector and carers. What measures will be in place to engage fully with the third sector on how to maximise the integration most effectively? When legislation is brought before the Parliament on integration, I hope and have no doubt that Ms Sturgeon and the Government will fully consult the third sector. A recent survey shows that senior executives in local authorities believe that the third sector should be more involved in delivering services, with 86 per cent believing that the third sector could provide services as effectively as councils. That shows how important a role the third sector can play in shaping our services and our legislation. It is also vital that carers be given a greater say in how services are run locally and nationally. We all agree that Scotland could not survive without those selfless people and that our NHS would be bankrupt without the fantastic care and support that they provide, so we must utilise their experience and ideas to help to deliver more integrated services that join up the dots between health and social care. A key element of the health and social care bill that is to be introduced will be to strengthen the role of clinicians and social care professionals in the planning of services for our elderly. That can be achieved only through competent leadership from the Government, local authorities and health boards that creates a shared purpose between the professionals, as well as mutual trust and respect. One of the biggest criticisms of CHPs came from health and social care professionals who found that they could not work together or that their skills were seen as less important than those of others. In other words, there was a lack of respect between the professions, even though their purposes are very connected. In fact, that criticism has been highlighted by GPs since the inception of CHPs. Brian Keighley, the chairman of BMA Scotland, recently said: “The failure of CHPs has been highlighted by GPs since their introduction in Scotland in 2004 and more recently by Audit Scotland. They have become bureaucratic structures, caught up in their own internal processes rather than influencing planning, funding and development of local services to meet patient needs. It has been widely accepted that they have failed to bridge the gap between health and social care.” Dr Keighley added that, for the reforms to succeed, it was essential to involve clinicians from secondary and primary care. I would like to highlight two final issues. The first is the variation in charges for services implemented by local authorities, and the fact that that adds to the many existing barriers to integration that the health secretary wishes to remove. The other relates to the comments made by the Royal College of Nursing on self-directed support. It has expressed concern that self-directed support will be introduced in advance of a national debate on whether that is the best way of allocating health services.

When the First Minister addressed members in the chamber in June, he announced that the bill consultation would be extended to allow the First Minister and his Government to achieve “consensus across the chamber and across our partner organisations.”—[Official Report, 23 June 2011; c 1020.] Six months later, it is clear to all, except to Alex Salmond and the SNP, that they have failed to achieve a consensus with Opposition parties and organisations that are involved in tackling sectarianism. Nobody doubts the importance of tackling the disgrace that is sectarianism and bigotry and eradicating it from our communities, workplaces, schools and football stadiums, but the bill fails to address the problems and the attitudes of bigots at football matches, in pubs and at home. The First Minister has accused Scottish Labour of being negative and oppositionist regarding the bill. I wonder whether his views are the same towards groups and organisations such as the Law Society of Scotland, which questioned “whether these proposed measures do in fact bring clarity and strengthen the law.” The Scottish Human Rights Commission said: “the Bill is drafted too broadly, lacking legal precision as to the scope of the new offences”. Nil by Mouth commented that it would like to see “less grandstanding” and more understanding. The Church of Scotland and Faith in Community Scotland said: “The Bill will do nothing to reduce sectarianism unless it is part of wider work.” I ask the First Minister and the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs whether those groups are being negative and oppositionist, too, when they say that they would like to see wider work to tackle sectarianism.

I am not in any way downgrading any outside work or wider work that is going on. This is a huge problem, and we need a wide variety of solutions to tackle it. Scottish Labour has published our action plan to tackle the ills of bigotry through education, working with young people, teachers, employers, faith groups, football clubs and supporters groups. We agree that we need to tackle sectarianism, and our action plan shows how we can make the changes that are needed. However, sectarianism is not restricted to football matches or the pub. It is in schools, workplaces and homes. The Scottish Government has been forward in its promotion of early intervention, and here we have a clear area that needs attention, not the reactionary bill that we have as a result of the bigotry and lack of understanding of the minority in football grounds. I am glad to see that football banning orders, which were introduced by the previous Scottish Labour Administration, have been used more and more each year. Before that, we enabled the courts and police to add a religious prejudice aggravation to offences. Those measures are already in place and should be used further. However, by adding the bill, we risk doing more harm than good by confusing the public. The Government cannot even define sectarianism in the bill and gives no indication of what songs are offensive.

I do not have time. The minister who is responsible for the bill, Roseanna Cunningham, told the Justice Committee that fans who cross themselves or who sing the Scottish national anthem, “Flower of Scotland”, or the British national anthem, “God Save the Queen”, could be arrested if they were behaving in a threatening or offensive manner. There is no clarity about what is offensive. It is simply down to people’s judgment at the time. The bill has been steamrollered through by the SNP. Given the Government’s majority, the bill will likely be enacted. However, the SNP has failed to convince the general public, supporters groups, Opposition parties and external bodies that would like to work further with the Government to tackle the problem at its root, and I cannot support such a flawed and discredited bill. I hope that SNP members will ignore their whip sheet, see sense and vote with their conscience.

16. To ask the Scottish Executive how many people have used the individual learning account in the last financial year. (S4O-00474)

Does the minister agree that ILAs are a key element in ensuring that people can access training and qualifications? The difference between the £200 funding that is given and the cost of the courses—most cost between £600 and £1,000—could discourage people either from applying or from finishing their course. Does he agree that cuts to college funding may force colleges to increase the cost of courses or, in some cases, scrap them?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to tackle overcrowding in prisons. (S4O-00393)

In a recent visit to HMP Barlinnie, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said: “We’ve got to make sure that prison isn’t used routinely for short-term prisoners where it doesn’t benefit them and it doesn’t benefit us.” Can the cabinet secretary update us on progress in setting up the Scottish sentencing council, so that sentencing can be more consistent and transparent?

Earlier this year, the Scottish Government announced plans to train 200 dementia champions, with the contract awarded to the University of the West of Scotland and Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, both of which are based in Paisley. Will the cabinet secretary give an update on the progress made with the first 100 to be trained this year? What is the completion date for the training?

Today’s debate on the carers strategy is perfectly timed, as it was only two weeks ago that members, including myself, debated a motion on rehabilitation and enablement. During that debate, I discussed the importance of the carer’s role and I welcome today’s opportunity to expand on that. A few years ago, my aunt was diagnosed with dementia. As her carer, I truly understand the pressures of balancing the carer’s role with a job and a family. Carers are selfless and altruistic people who thoroughly deserve all the support and guidance that can be offered to them. In these tough financial times, I recognise that a carer is a genuine asset in our society. They are assets that save our health and social care services millions each year. However, no matter what the cost is, we must repay those people who spend their lives caring for others with more than just gratitude. It is estimated that there are approximately 650,000 carers in Scotland. A year ago, the BBC published an article that estimated that there are around 700,000 younger carers in the UK, with around 100,000 in Scotland. The hidden army of carers can never be counted accurately for many reasons, and I hope that the carers and young carers strategy and the debates that will follow will start to correct that. One of the reasons for an inaccurate count is the fear, embarrassment or stigma that some carers, particularly young carers, must feel when they tell someone that they have to care for a loved one who has certain issues upon which society would frown, such as substance abuse or imprisonment. A few years ago, I read about the case of a boy in his early teens who had to take care of his mother and young sisters when his father was imprisoned. As a result, the boy’s childhood was absent and his education and development suffered significantly. In that case, it was not known for almost a year that that young boy cared for his family. We use the phrase “early intervention” in a number of circumstances. In such cases, it is essential to identify the carer as soon as possible. One of my biggest concerns regarding the rights of carers is about respite or short breaks. Is there a difference between paid and unpaid carers and the level of breaks that they receive? Breaks from care are essential for the carer’s health and wellbeing, and for helping them to sustain the level of care that they provide. The Scottish Government has provided the third sector with an extra £1 million to provide more breaks for carers. That is crucial, given the funding crisis that faces many third sector organisations. I have been very vocal on that issue since May. Barnardo’s Scotland is a great example of an organisation that provides valuable services to carers and the cared for. Like me and other members, it is concerned about short breaks, particularly about what is meant by the term “a short break”; a clearer definition of terms is needed. Greater emphasis is needed on local authorities providing short breaks that have value and importance. Recent research has shown that the level of respite care and short breaks has been decreasing in approximately one third of councils. That is mentioned in the Labour amendment. One measure that could help the resourcing of respite and short breaks is the uniform collection of data. Some local authorities count a day break and a night break as two periods of respite. If we can measure accurately, we can improve upon the amount of respite with which carers are supported. I was pleased to hear the minister’s remarks about emergency planning and I look forward to the publication of the Enable Scotland report and real improvements in the provision of emergency care. I will finish by talking about carers’ rights, particularly in the proposed self-directed support bill. The carers’ rights that are already enshrined in law will be enhanced by the carers rights’ charter, and when it is created, it will consolidate all existing laws and set out key principles for support to carers and outcomes. I hope that that will correct the current focus on outputs from local authorities so that there is more effort on outcomes. Many in the third sector have raised that issue. I would like to finish with a comment by a carer who knew that we were having this debate. They said: “As a carer myself currently working through a difficult and bureaucratic system this is a personal plea ... life as a carer is tough, emotionally draining, and sometimes just plain awful. And I have honestly struggled these last few weeks—but I remain hopeful. We are a caring nation; today’s debate is critical and an important stepping stone in ensuring that policy and intention become reality on the ground, and help make the lives of unpaid carers and young carers, the lives of those they look after, the best that they can be. They deserve nothing less.”

I welcome the Scottish Government’s continuation of the change fund. That measure is extremely important in facing the challenge of a changing demographic. However, I have some concerns, which are shared by many in the care sector. My main worry is that some councils and health boards may use moneys from the fund to offset any budget cuts that the Administration imposes. Also, how will they evaluate any changes that are made? Over the past few years, the SNP has continually underfunded local authorities and our health service. Those who suffer most are the elderly, the vulnerable, the disabled and the poorest people in society.

It is up to the member’s party to make budget choices, as it is in government, not me. If the Government really wishes to improve the rehabilitation of the elderly and ensure that they have dignity in their twilight years, it must fund local authorities and the NHS appropriately. As a result of its funding, many councils have been forced to increase or introduce charges for services on which elderly people rely to enable them and to help their rehabilitation after an illness or a time in hospital.

I have already taken one intervention and I do not have time. I need to move on. Does the minister agree that charges for elderly day care services, such as the £34.70 per day that Dundee City Council charges, contradict the statement that the Government makes in paragraph 3.4 of “Reshaping Care for Older People: A Programme for Change 2011-2021”? It states: “Achieving this vision involves helping older people to have the best possible quality of life by: ... having opportunities to meet and support each other; ensuring no-one is socially isolated or lonely”. I hope that the minister can provide the Parliament with a response to that contradiction. In the same programme, the Government points out that we all have a role to play, and I agree fully. Families, neighbours, friends, housing agencies and transport providers can all support and care for the elderly. However, I am a bit unsure of how shops and banks can play a similar role. As I have said, the change fund is a very welcome initiative and I hope that we can build a bridge between health and social care and utilise the experience of the third and voluntary sectors. However, I hope that the Government will listen to the third sector and, in particular, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. In the SCVO briefing for this afternoon’s debate, there is a focus on the difficulty that third sector organisations have in engaging with the decision-making process. The structural issues within the change fund, which result in a lack of drive for change, are also highlighted. The SCVO has suggested changes that I feel the Government should consider, such as reforming the partnership model overseeing the implementation of the change fund to ensure that the third sector is genuinely an equal partner from the earliest stage of the decision-making process. The Government will look to bring the self-directed support bill to the Parliament in the new year. I hope that there will be considerable discussion with the third sector before the bill is brought to the chamber. The Government’s plans in the programme for change indicate that SDS should be provided to as many people as possible, including the elderly, to provide them with the chance to input into their care packages. I have reservations about self-directed support. What level of involvement will the user have in choosing their care? What monitoring will take place? Who will regulate the care? How often will visits take place? What training will the carer be provided with? What safeguards will be put in place to protect the user from fraud and abuse of the system? Carers have a vital role to play in the rehabilitation and enablement of the elderly. I hope that every measure of support can be offered to them, particularly if they are unpaid or elderly. Many of the elderly carers who provide 20 hours or more of care are unpaid. As I have said, everyone has a role to play in the care and support of our elderly, but none is more important than the carers themselves. Carers must be given more say in the creation of care packages, especially when the older person is being discharged from hospital. I would like to hear from the Government—particularly when the self-directed support bill is introduced—whether carers will be guaranteed the national minimum wage or the living wage when the user is creating the package of care that is best suited to them. We all know that one of the biggest problems that elderly people face when they are admitted to hospital is the unnecessary length of hospital stays, which leaves them with a serious lack of confidence, as well as confusion. Many emergency admissions will be the right course of action; however, we must focus more on how to reduce lengths of stay to less than two weeks, which is the Government’s target. To reduce the length of stay, greater focus is needed on integrating health and social care, so that the right plans are in place for the older person to leave, go back to their home and be as comfortable and safe as possible. There need to be better means of detecting problems with the older person’s health, before hospital admissions are needed. One perfect example of doing that could be training all those who make visits, including those who deliver meals, to look out for symptoms and assess the patient in their home before it is too late. We all know that social work departments and health boards require more integration. However, I have considerable apprehension that social work departments will struggle, due to budget cuts that they have forced upon them. Social work departments have a role to play in identifying the welfare needs of the elderly and detecting any health problems. However, that role is becoming highly restricted, due to the budget cuts. I believe strongly that that will cause further damage to our elderly and our health service. Telehealth is another vital tool that can reduce emergency admissions to hospital. I have come to discover that there is no set budget for telehealth; that is a massive failure to improve the health of older persons and encourage the rehabilitation and enablement of the elderly, especially in rural areas, such as the Highlands and Islands and the Borders.

I hope that the minister will give a commitment to fund properly a telehealth service.

Does the member agree that a local authority that imposes charges for buses to day care centres, increases elderly and adult day care charges and implements charges for blue badges does little to rehabilitate or enable elderly and disabled people?

I, too, declare an interest. I am a councillor and for four years—until May this year—I was on Renfrewshire Council’s adoption panel. During my time on the panel I came across many cases that could have been processed more quickly. The social work department in Renfrewshire has worked hard to improve that. There has been considerable investment in ensuring that all paperwork is ready on time and that it contains all the relevant and necessary reports. The panel has, therefore, been far better prepared and has had a better understanding of the cases that come before it. One thing that has contributed to the improvement in efficiency is that adoption panel members in Renfrewshire are invited to training days at which they are given the chance to talk to social workers and carers. That allows panel members to express their worries about the processes. I would like more development of that in other local authorities in Scotland. One of the most frustrating aspects of being on the adoption panel was the length of the process, which was due to legal challenges and promises that are made by birth parents. The struggle that is faced by local authorities is in the need to get the balance right. Under article 8 of the European convention on human rights, parents and children have a right to family life, but it is up to the state to ensure that children are not subjected to abuse or neglect; that is where the balance is needed. We have seen cases in which the state has failed children, including Baby P and similar cases. I would love it if every child was returned to their parent because doing so was in the child’s best interests and it was safe to do so, but we know that that is not the case for many children. I highlight an excellent campaign that was run by Renfrewshire Council in 2010 that found many new carers and continues to do so this year. I highlight, too, the council’s work to collaborate with neighbouring local authorities to take forward joint recruitment of adoptive carers. In Renfrewshire, 13 children were placed for adoption in the first six months of this year, which is a significantly higher number than in previous years. That may be due to the number of children there requiring adoption and fostering being higher than national average. The cause of that higher level can clearly be seen by looking at the higher rates of social deprivation, substance abuse and domestic violence that stain some communities in Renfrewshire. Recent reports in the media show that some children have to wait two years to be given a permanent home with adoptive parents. As important as it is for children to find that stability in their lives, there are other means for children to be given stability, such as kinship care and long-term fostering. If it is in the best interests of the child, there must be greater emphasis on placing the young child with his or her birth family. There must also be greater emphasis on improving the process to complete the assessments and checks for birth families, including grandparents, aunts and uncles. Research by Citizens Advice Scotland shows that many local authorities are not paying kinship carers the same as they pay foster carers. If we are to improve the stability of a child’s life, there must be equity in the payment to kinship carers to encourage them to become full-time carers. Many members know that I have recently started, along with Richard Lyle and Mary Scanlon, a cross-party group on families that are affected by imprisonment, which led me to attend the Families Outside conference yesterday. At the conference, I was approached by many delegates who are concerned about the number of children who end up in the care system when their mother or father enters prison. One of the main issues that comes across when speaking to people is that little concern is shown for the child’s welfare when the parent is arrested. While we talk about how to improve the process of finding permanent care for children, it is important that we remember that many looked-after children enter the system after a parent’s imprisonment. I invite the minister to come along to the cross-party group to speak to the organisations involved and to family members of prisoners, and to listen to their thoughts on how early intervention will benefit vulnerable children who are affected by parents’ imprisonment, and by drugs, alcohol and poverty. I believe that prospective adoptive parents face many barriers, for example, legal barriers, the rights of the birth parents and the background of birth parents and of adoptive parents, which includes factors such as religion, race, sexuality and relationship status. There must be greater focus on how to reduce those barriers, because in doing so we can reduce the time that it takes for adoption and long-term fostering to commence. In the forthcoming year, the Scottish Government will introduce a bill on the rights of children and young people and will also bring a greater focus on early intervention. I feel strongly that this debate should play a vital role in the bill before it comes to Parliament and when it does so. Over the last week, Barnardo’s Scotland has been very vocal on the issues that we are discussing. I fully support the restart of its national adoption service and I also back its calls for the Scottish Government to “give assurances that it will not just focus efforts on those children best placed to move into permanency, but will look to support those that are most vulnerable and at risk to ensure that every looked after child has a stable, loving home”. I also back four other recommendations that I hope the Government takes on board. I welcome the SCRA report and hope that members can work together to improve the life chances and stability of our looked-after children.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will request that the Scottish Prison Service record all visits made by children to family members in prison and whether it considers that setting targets for such visits would help the rehabilitation of prisoners. (S4O-00276)

I have a letter from John Ewing, the chief executive of SPS, which was sent to one of my colleagues. It states clearly that it should be up to the social work department to carry out the collection of data. Does the cabinet secretary agree with that statement, and does he agree that the social work department has sufficient resource in that regard?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in such a sensitive but crucial debate. The Scottish Conservatives are right to bring the issue to the chamber today. I support any initiative to improve the treatment of cancer patients, but I do not believe that a cancer drugs fund is the answer. A drugs fund would not solve the problem of the drug approval system but would simply bypass it. The Conservatives’ proposals do not address the root causes of why patients might be denied access to some treatments—a view shared by Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Myeloma UK and Macmillan Cancer Support. Murdo Fraser’s motion is right to point out the findings of the Rarer Cancers Foundation, but it does not address why there are treatments in England that are not given north of the border. The drug approval systems in both countries are very complex, and we must improve transparency around the Scottish Medicines Consortium, its decisions and their implementation. I back calls by Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Myeloma UK and Macmillan Cancer Support for an investigation into the factors that contribute to the SMC rejecting drugs on the basis of cost and clinical effectiveness, and how we can address such situations. I find it worrying that the Conservatives would pay for a cancer drugs fund by bringing back prescription fees. To me, that is a tax on certain illnesses to pay for others. The money that would be used in a drugs fund should instead be used to improve the early detection of cancers and reduce the waiting times that patients experience, as the Labour manifesto pledged to do. It is wrong that someone with suspected cancer should wait four weeks to see a specialist. As much as we need to improve and extend the life of a cancer patient, a drugs fund does not go far enough. More early detection and prevention of cancers are needed. Even the Society and College of Radiographers has criticised the cancer drugs fund in England—the system that the Scottish Conservatives have based their plans on. Audrey Paterson, director of professional policy at the Society and College of Radiographers, said: “it would only take a fraction of the £200 million budget to deliver cutting edge radiotherapy services across the country and the impact would be immense.” That is an example of how the professionals feel about the fund in England. Miss Paterson is correct to say that more money should be invested in more effective treatment services. I understand that some patients might be beyond the stage at which radiotherapy would help with their cancer, and that is where I feel that the heart of this debate must lead. Should we be providing drugs that improve the life chances of the cancer sufferer or drugs that simply extend their life? I would hope that any drug approved by the NHS, the SMC or any Government would do both. As I said, this is a very sensitive debate, and party politics should play no part in it. We need more investment in early diagnosis and successful treatment and we need to rid each health board of the postcode lottery.

I am glad to take part in the debate and I hope that the Scottish Government will listen to all voices and to issues that have been raised by members from all sides. Last week the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth presented his budget for the forthcoming year, in which there is the statement: “Good mental and physical health and well-being is vital for individuals to participate fully in economic and social life.” I agree fully with that and support it 100 per cent. However, on further reading of the health budget in the section entitled “What the budget does”, I found no specific mention of how the Scottish National Party plans to create good mental health. There are plenty of promises aimed at tobacco and alcohol use, dental treatment for children and sexual health in Scotland, but no statement on how to improve mental health and wellbeing among our population. It is critical for the benefit of future generations that we address the mental health problems that face our society. To a certain extent, last week’s budget will start to address those issues through Mr Swinney’s increased investment in the early years framework, which is action that I fully support. It is estimated that around 130,000 children In Scotland have mental health problems. If we can address such problems early, a child will be less likely to develop chronic mental disorders in adulthood. It is also believed that half of all looked-after children in Scotland suffer from poor mental health, and they are some of the most vulnerable children in our communities. It is for that reason that I back calls by Barnardo’s Scotland to provide “more mental health training for front-line staff in universal services dealing with children and young people on a day-to-day basis” I hope that the Government will take on board that call when it implements the increased budget for early years. Such front-line staff, such as teachers and carers, will be able to find problems in a child quicker and should be able address the problems earlier. It is clear that one of the biggest reasons for poor mental health in children and young people can be their background—many of the poorest children in society suffer from significant mental health problems that stem from the behaviour of their parents or from substance abuse. Under this Scottish Government, child poverty has worsened. If it wishes to improve the life chances of every generation, it is failing miserably as more and more children end up in poverty. It must be said that the Con-Dem cuts in Westminster have contributed to child poverty rates, but the figures still show that child poverty has been on the increase since the SNP came to power in 2007, three years before we were landed with a Tory Government. Important as it is to focus on the mental health of our children and young adults, it is equally important that we treat problems in the many adults who suffer from poor mental health. They might be forced out of work and end up on benefits, and they might suffer long-term illness. Parents with mental health issues should be given the best possible treatment so that they can overcome problems that could have a negative impact on the care and wellbeing of children. Two stories caught my attention during the past week and gave me cause for great alarm about how well the Government is tackling mental health in Scotland. First, the Government released figures that show that the number of Scots on antidepressants has increased and that one in 10 Scots over the age of 15 takes antidepressants. Secondly, a Royal College of Nursing survey found that 75 per cent of nurses in Scotland think that stress has increased in their workplace. Like many members, I do not think that nurses are alone in thinking that there is more stress in the workplace. The stresses of modern life, particularly in times of economic uncertainty, have contributed greatly to the rise in antidepressant use. The Scottish Government must take some blame for nurses’ stress and low morale, because 4,000 nurses have been lost since it came to power in 2007. It continues to add to that number. Increased pressure on workforces throughout Scotland creates a worrying picture. Pay freezes, job cuts and general uncertainty about job security all contribute to the rise in medicinal treatment of mental health problems, as do the cuts to CAMHS and third-sector organisations such as RAMH, which I congratulate on its delivery of services in Renfrewshire and the west of Scotland for the past 21 years. I stress the importance of the services that RAMH and other organisations in the west of Scotland provide to people who have mental health problems. RAMH’s chief executive, Stephen McLellan, told me that the biggest challenge that RAMH faces is to do with not being heard at national level by the Government and health service, even though every week the organisation works with 670 people in the west of Scotland who have mental health problems. If we did not have third sector organisations such as RAMH, the cost to our health service would be much greater. As I have said before, there must be a better working relationship between national Government, health boards and social care providers, to help to meet the challenges that we face in society. I will talk about mental health for the elderly—members might have noticed a running theme in my speeches. A few months back, I received a letter from a constituent, whose mother has been living with dementia for some time. The mother had been receiving weekly support and had been attending mental stimulation classes until Renfrewshire Council reassessed her case without explaining its decision. The gentleman who contacted me explained that his mother, who is in her early 80s, has had to resort to private care. He said that he is lucky enough to be in such a financial position as to be able to provide the extra care that his mother requires, but for many dementia sufferers no such resource is available. It saddens me to hear of cases in which cost-cutting measures of local authorities such as Renfrewshire Council have a detrimental effect on the mental health and wellbeing of not only the dementia sufferer but the family, who are left to pick up the pieces.

Yes. I will finish by quoting from Mr Swinney’s spending review document: “Providing high quality care and support for older people is a fundamental principle of social justice and is an important hallmark of a caring and compassionate society.” If only the SNP would show that care and compassion, I would believe that it was sincere in making that statement.

I welcome the staff of Quarriers who are sitting in the gallery. I ask the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy to speak to them today after First Minister’s questions about the impact that social care procurement has on the lives of the staff and the service users to whom they provide excellent care, and to step in to help everyone who is involved in the current pay and conditions dispute between the management and Unison. Those people represent the damage that is being done to our social care services throughout Scotland. As many members know, I have been very vocal on the situation that the Quarriers staff and service users face. I understand the financial pressures that are forced on the organisation by local authorities, but I cannot stand back and allow the staff to bear the brunt of cost cutting that procurement has led to. Like many others in the chamber, I strongly believe that local authorities have been using the procurement process to lower costs, and that there has been little focus on quality of care when services are retendered. Social care services provide essential care to the most vulnerable people in Scotland, and they require well-trained and qualified staff. Such services are a lifeline to many in society, and must not be provided on the cheap. I will give members an example of how cuts to the third sector are harming the care of the elderly, the disabled and the vulnerable. This case, which was brought to my attention by Epilepsy Scotland, involves a young girl who is legally blind with no verbal capacity and has two or three full-blown seizures every night. She was formerly receiving weekly support, and is cared for by her mother while her father serves in Afghanistan. Her funding and care were not renewed, and the choices support was withdrawn. That has had a huge detrimental impact not only on the girl’s wellbeing and care, but on her mother, who is a full-time carer with no respite. SNP members will howl and moan when I say that the problems of the economy and budgets were not caused by that young girl or other service users like her, but local authorities should be ashamed of the treatment of service users and the third sector as they cut budgets throughout Scotland. The procurement process has its merits, but its advantages are being exploited to bring cuts to social care. When a local authority believes that care is insufficient, it is right to retender that service, but retendering is being done to cut costs. If we continue to retender services—particularly those that provide the greatest level of care—we will have a system that forces the third sector to its knees and in which competition is less about care and more about how low we can go. That will be a race to the bottom. I call on the Scottish Government to introduce a minimum five-year term for social care contracts that are well funded, allow the organisations involved to plan for the longer term and give employees job security. Increasing the terms of contracts is essential for the stability of organisations such as Quarriers and for the quality of services that our vulnerable service users deserve. Local authorities must consult the third sector and trade unions more to deliver a clear procurement system that has care—not cost—at its heart. A distinct approach must be taken—that can be done by consulting other bodies. In previous years, many organisations in the third sector have taken massive steps to survive.

I am sorry—I do not have time. Operating costs have been reduced hugely through cuts to staff pay and changes to terms and conditions, for example. If we continue to make cuts, carers will become demoralised and the level of care will suffer. In February, the director of the Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland wrote to The Herald to highlight that “more than 80%” of its members “have been unable to” provide pay increases that “match the cost of living increases awarded by councils to their staff during the same period”. Why has the Scottish Government allowed local authorities to cut the budgets to organisations that care for our elderly, disabled and vulnerable, while the wages of top managers and chief executives have increased? The cuts that have been enforced on the third sector are short-sighted and based on cost cutting, not improvements to the care that councils tender.

The organisations that deliver our social care must not be attacked further. I call on the Government to protect organisations, staff and service users alike.

What guarantees will be in place to assure members that all care that is paid for by self-directed support will be undertaken by fully trained and qualified carers? How will self-directed support maintain standards of care throughout Scotland?

What assurances can the minister give members and families throughout Scotland who are concerned about recent evidence that care homes are struggling to cope and have been found to be drugging patients—as happened in the case of Mrs V, for example—and that one in 10 care homes are providing weak or unsatisfactory care? What steps are in place to integrate health and social care for the elderly, particularly those with dementia, to prevent events such as those at Elsie Inglis nursing home and Ninewells hospital?

I thank members for their input to what has been a very interesting debate. I pick up on a point made by Johann Lamont. She said that our justice system should be underpinned by fairness, honesty and transparency. That statement should resonate around the chamber. It should be our overriding goal. I am sure that the justice minister has been listening closely to all the issues that have been raised, and that he is not ready to blame the English justice system for the problems in our courts and prisons for which he has had responsibility for more than four years now. After all, it is his department that is cutting funding to the Scottish Prison Service by 22 per cent and to the Scottish Court Service by 14.5 per cent, even though his Government expects the prison population to continue to increase over the next decade. The figures are extremely worrying. Scotland ranks higher than most EU countries for number of prisoners per 100,000 of general population. We sit above England and Wales. Mr MacAskill and his party cannot blame the English for such levels. The region that I represent—West Scotland—has higher rates of imprisonment than any other region of Scotland. Of the six areas with the highest rates, three are in my region—West Dunbartonshire, North Ayrshire and Inverclyde. Those areas all suffer from worryingly high levels of unemployment and social deprivation. The Scottish Government continues to fail the poorest in those areas, and there are no plans to improve their lives and no jobs to help them. I welcome the creation of the new commission to consider female offenders and ways of reducing reoffending among women. The commission is to be chaired by former Lord Advocate Dame Elish Angiolini. Female prisoners face challenges in prison that are different from and more complex than those that male prisoners face, and I urge the Scottish Government to show leadership in addressing the problems that women prisoners face. It is of little surprise that the Scottish prison population has increased over the past decade, but figures showing that female incarceration has doubled in that time are worrying and unacceptable. Many women are imprisoned for non-violent offences, and the question that has to be asked is whether many of them need to be locked up. Many are crying out for help. The vast majority of female prisoners are also mothers, and I have issues with the jailing of mothers for crimes such as the non-payment of fines. That is not to say that, if someone has a family, they can break the law and get away with it. However, more services are needed to help women, many of whom are the victims of crime themselves. Despite my criticism of cuts to justice services, I am glad that Mr MacAskill has continued to fund Families Outside, which is the only organisation in Scotland that is focused solely on the welfare and rehabilitation of both prisoners and their families. Families Outside plays a vital role in keeping families together during the prison terms of the mother or father, and it provides great support after release. The helpline for Families Outside receives thousands of calls a year, at least half of which come from three of the largest prisons in Scotland—Barlinnie, Edinburgh and Cornton Vale. I am sure that every member fully supports the work of Families Outside, and that they will back calls by the charity, by Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons, Brigadier Hugh Monro, and by the Church of Scotland to create family visit centres in every prison in Scotland. We must work to ensure that each prisoner has a family to return to after their release. In order to do that, we need to place more emphasis on stabilising family relationships during prison terms—the benefits are far greater than the costs. Research has shown that if parents—especially women—feel that their parental needs are being met, it benefits them mentally and physically and reduces the risk of reoffending. Maternal distress can exacerbate the difficult issues that women face in prison, resulting in greater mental health issues. The impact of imprisonment on children must also be addressed. Children whose parents are in prison are at a higher risk of future imprisonment themselves. They also suffer from physical and mental health problems and show signs of regressive behaviour. According to Families Outside, more children in Scotland each year experience a parent’s imprisonment than a parent’s divorce. A parent’s imprisonment has a serious effect on children, especially in their understanding of the situation that they face. Concerns have also been raised about care arrangements for children. How many of those children end up in care through no fault of their own? When a parent is sent to prison, the family ends up with the characteristics of a single-parent family—with fears over their financial security and over how they can afford to keep a roof over their heads. I would also like to add that, as much as children need their mothers, families need fathers, too. Earlier in the week, Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons released his report on Cornton Vale prison and young offenders institute. The verdict of the report was that the prison was unacceptably poor. It has been little more than a year since the previous report, which also slammed the prison. Brigadier Monro expressed concern about the treatment of women with mental health issues, as well as stating that the prison was overcrowded. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice must do more to protect those vulnerable women and not cut services, to help the rehabilitation of offenders and ease them back into society and back to loving families. As well as the failure of the Scottish Government on the issue of justice with regard to Cornton Vale and its inmates, there are massive failings in dealing with trafficking in Scotland.

Phil Taylor, the regional director of the UK Border Agency for Scotland and Northern Ireland has slammed the ability of the criminal justice system to deal with sex and labour trafficking, branding it as too slow. To receive such criticism from inside the system is a major blow to the Government and shows that it is not doing enough to create a safer society.

I am happy to take part in the debate, because caring for the elderly is a personal issue for me, as I am sure it is for most members in the chamber. I was a carer for my aunt, who had dementia. Over several years, I dealt with her deterioration and decline daily. I therefore know how families across Scotland feel, and how services can, and should, be improved. Dementia is a serious issue, which the Government has been working on through the dementia strategy and charter of rights. I welcome the moves that the Government has taken until now, but it must do more. It must do more on the integration of health and social care services, and it must act on the failings of CHPs that Audit Scotland pointed out. In Scotland, 82,000 people currently have dementia, and that number is expected to rise to more than 150,000 in 20 years’ time. The increase is due to the fact that the number of people aged over 65 will sit at 50 per cent in 20 years’ time. As we see life expectancy rise, we are not seeing healthy life expectancy follow. Many social and economic factors contribute to that. The elderly will spend longer in poor health, and they will not lead the independent and fulfilling lives that they deserve to. As I have stated, the Government has taken action on care of the elderly, but more must be done. Over the past decade, we have seen a rise in the number of people diagnosed with dementia. That is because early signs of dementia have been recognised and acted on more quickly. The stigma attached to many mental illnesses has also been removed. However, the services available to patients after diagnosis are suffering as a result of cuts to local authorities and cuts to NHS budgets—the greatest cuts since devolution. Continuity of care must be addressed. People suffering from dementia do not react well to seeing a new face on each visit by a healthcare professional, and there is no dignity in a 15-minute visit to a patient’s home. In the previous session of Parliament, former MSP Irene Oldfather was a well-known champion of dementia issues. In a letter to The Herald, she said: “People with Alzheimer’s and dementia are at particular risk because of their communication difficulties. We rightly accept the importance of protecting children in our society. We have yet to place the same value on old people with dementia.” Irene’s letter was in response to the recent exposures relating to the care of the elderly in homes, and also in response to a report by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. The recent scandals over care homes in Scotland are no doubt shocking, but they are known only thanks to one doctor who had the courage to alert the authorities. What happened in the Elsie Inglis care home was not a one-off; a report by SCSWIS on the Eastleigh care centre in Aberdeen criticised the care provided as weak and less than desired. Much more must be done to protect our older population. The care authority regulator also pointed out that, because of cuts to the inspectorate budget of around 25 per cent, the frequency of unannounced inspections has fallen to as low as one every two years. We cannot allow inspections of care homes to fall to such low levels, at the same time as we are cutting budgets to care homes. That will only leave the residents in poorer care and in a situation where untold damage can be done. I call on the Scottish Government to work more closely with the third sector, where the vast majority of services are provided and where budgets are also being cut. We cannot expect lower-paid workers to continue to care for the elderly when they are facing wage cuts themselves, such as those affecting charities such as Quarriers. In the Scottish Labour manifesto we promised that we would create a national care service to integrate healthcare from NHS Scotland and social care from social work departments. Unfortunately, we did not win the election, but I call on the Scottish Government to consider creating a national care service, because the SNP must do more to improve the care of the elderly in Scotland. That would provide a high quality of care to the elderly and rid us of the postcode lottery. We face massive inequalities in how care is provided to the Scottish people, which need to be addressed urgently. The inequalities in care have only worsened since 2007, due to the failure of CHPs to have a positive impact on life quality. GPs, nurses and social workers believe CHPs to be unnecessarily bureaucratic. That is why Scotland needs a national care service to improve the integration of health and social care authorities and to provide a better level of care for our elderly. On average, 92 per cent of our over-65s stay in their own homes. In some parts of Scotland, that figure sits at 96 per cent. If the national average sat at 96 per cent, we would see massive savings to NHS budgets. Increasing that figure would allow the elderly to improve their quality of life and their wellbeing simply by staying in the comfort of their own homes. I congratulate the Scottish Government on its efforts in improving the care of our elderly to date, but I encourage it to do more. I am happy to work with members throughout the chamber on that.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve bus services in rural and out-of-town areas. (S4O-00019)

Lack of services, particularly buses, concerns people not only in my constituency but across the country. Large operators still cherry pick profitable routes, isolating communities and forcing out small operators. If the Government wants to do more to move towards a greener economy, we need an integrated transport system, which would have the knock-on effect of benefiting the tourist industry. The present system isolates—

The present system isolates elderly people. Given the debate that we have had this morning, I would like assurances that something will be done to protect the elderly.

I thank the people of West Scotland for giving me the great privilege of representing the area for the next five years. I pay tribute to the devoted MSPs whom the Parliament lost at the previous election; I was looking forward to working with many of them. However, that lost talent has been replaced by many new faces, of which I am one. I also pay tribute to Stuart Clark, the Labour candidate for Renfrewshire North and West, who was a terrific candidate and would have been a great representative of the people of the constituency. Stuart worked extremely hard in the nine months leading up to the election. Unfortunately, he does not sit beside me on these benches, but the Labour Party owes a great deal to him and to his wife, Jennifer, for the manner in which they ran their campaign. Iain Gray can testify to that. Like many members of the Parliament, I have worked hard for my community as a councillor—in my case, for Renfrew South and Gallowhill. In the past four years in Renfrewshire Council, I have witnessed attack after attack by the SNP-Lib Dem administration: attacks on education, which were shamefully defended by the First Minister only a few months ago; attacks on services such as community centres and libraries, which are vital to small communities such as Bridge of Weir; and attacks on sports clubs and sports grounds, such as those affecting Erskine youth football club and Parkmoor boys club. The SNP-led council has increased the hire for game and training facilities by 275 per cent. It plans to downgrade the pitch at Park Mains high school and to replace it with a red-ash surface, meaning that football in the community will suffer. One single mother to whom I spoke informed me that she now had to decide which one of her three children would be able to continue attending the football club. How are we to encourage children to adopt healthy lifestyles and to be proactive about physical activity when they do not have the opportunity to do so? In 2007, the SNP promised in its manifesto to guarantee that every child received two hours of physical education in our schools. In 2011, the facts show that that is not the case. Almost half of all primary schools do not meet the target. Only 23 per cent of S1 to S4 pupils are provided with two hours of physical education. Those figures speak for themselves and continue to show a depressing picture of the future of Scotland’s health and wellbeing, as only 8 per cent of S5 and 5 per cent of S6 pupils undertake two hours of PE. It is simply not acceptable to say that the blame lies with teachers or schools. The Health and Sport Committee found that the facilities in primary schools are not adequate and that primary teachers do not feel competent enough to deliver PE classes. Although some effort has been made through postgraduate courses at universities in Glasgow and Edinburgh, the number of active schools co-ordinators has been slimmed down by almost a third. Provision of specially trained PE teachers has not been implemented in the more appropriate areas, where health issues such as heart disease, addiction and mental health problems are greater. I am proud to say that we on the education board of Renfrewshire Council achieved success, in that all secondary schools provide two hours of physical education a week. The neighbouring council, East Renfrewshire, has achieved great success in providing all primary and secondary pupils with the promised two hours. That council is a shining light and a great example for all other local authorities to follow. East Renfrewshire placed a great deal of emphasis on working closely with sportscotland and on integrating the active schools programme into its wider sports strategy by hiring full-time co-ordinators. The council also created a high level of co-operation between schools and local clubs. However, it should be noted that East Renfrewshire benefits from more favourable socioeconomic factors, unlike the council ward that I represent, Renfrew South and Gallowhill, where the heart disease rate is higher than the national average and where alcohol and drug addiction plague families and communities. There are worrying levels of obesity there compared with in East Renfrewshire. The Scottish Government expects that, by 2050, almost 60 per cent of men and 50 per cent of women will be obese. The Scottish Government must act more quickly and more efficiently to deal with the obesity epidemic that Scotland faces, particularly in childhood. It has the answers but it cannot implement them due to budget cuts to local councils and the subsequent increase in costs that local clubs face. It is well known that promoting healthier lifestyles and physical activity at a younger age will benefit the child through his or her life, but only if the funding and resources are made available—and that is especially relevant when the child enters year 5 or year 6 of secondary school. If physical literacy is introduced at an early age, a child can have the focus and drive to continue with physical activity and sport, and the recommendation by the Health and Sport Committee that all children in P6 should take part in a physical literacy test, to help determine what help they need heading into secondary school, should be implemented by the Scottish Government. The skills that children learn through physical education benefit them mentally, physically and socially, and they also benefit society in general for generations to follow. In the coming years, Scotland will be in the global spotlight as hosts of the Commonwealth games in Glasgow, the Ryder cup at Gleneagles and the Davis cup in Braehead. There is much talk about the legacy that will be left after the Commonwealth games, and I look forward to working with every member in the chamber to ensure that the legacy lasts longer than the fortnight of the games. Over the next five years, I hope to work closely with every member in the Parliament to improve the roles of sport and education in Scotland, to encourage children to become more active in sport, to address the issue of female participation in physical education and to work towards a healthier Scotland. Being from the west of Scotland, I must mention a football team close to my heart: Cherrie youth football club. The Cherrie boys are based in my home town of Renfrew and are made up of 140 children aged between five and 16. The club has been successful in starting a summer school for children aged five and six, and has been encouraging healthy lifestyles by offering nutritional advice and banning all players from using caffeine-filled energy drinks. I wish the Cherrie boys under-13 team good luck in the league cup final on 11 June. I will be there cheering them on.