One thing that can be said about the rise of new psychoactive substances is that there is unanimity inside and outwith the Parliament both in the recognition that there is an issue to be tackled and in the desire to come up with an effective solution. Whether it is our colleagues in Westminster or local government, Police Scotland or drug workers in our communities, all of us know that this is a situation that requires an appropriate response. As we have heard and, I am sure, will continue to hear this afternoon, the problem is just what form that response should take. In the context of the debate, it is important that we acknowledge a fundamental misconception at the heart of the issue, in that new psychoactive substances users believe that legal—as in so-called legal highs—equals safe, when it most definitely does not. It is also important to put the scale and nature of the problem into context. That is not easy. Neither Police Scotland nor the NHS records new psychoactive substances-related incidents in a manner that readily allows for the formation of an accurate picture. We need a solid information base so that we can begin to understand who is using new psychoactive substances, their age profiles—because it is possibly too simplistic to say that we are dealing only with teenagers here—and the consequences of the substance use. In accident and emergency, we need better recording of what kids who present may have taken. As I understand it, at present the recording of such cases is done on the basis of reaction suffered and how that has been addressed. All too often, new psychoactive substances overdoses have, to some extent at least, been influenced by the taking of other substances such as alcohol. However, the involvement of new psychoactive substances in such cases surely requires to be mapped in a way that allows us to measure the growing impact of the abuse. It was good, therefore, to hear from the minister of the Scottish Government’s plans. In 2013, for the first time, the drug-related death statistics contained new psychoactive substances-specific data, but it appears that we are coming up short in pulling together data concerning those who—thankfully—do not suffer fatal consequences from dabbling in new psychoactive substances. When people present to the NHS with mental health issues, we need to get clarity about whether the use of new psychoactive substances may have been a factor. Again, the undertakings from the minister today are welcome. Even with improvement in data collection, it would remain difficult to determine the exact scale of the issue because, in reality, the information at our disposal would largely relate to the number of people who have had an immediate or consequent adverse reaction, or, in the case of Police Scotland, have been identified in other circumstances. When it comes to informing the debate, we have the results of an internet survey of more than 1,000 16 to 24-year-olds throughout the UK, which was carried out on behalf of the Angelus Foundation. The survey found that up to 44 per cent of respondents believe that so-called legal highs are safer than illegal drugs; 58 per cent have friends who have taken new psychoactive substances; 39 per cent know where they could access new psychoactive substances; and 45 per cent have been offered them. Specific to the area of the country that I represent, an Angus-based drugs worker with a leading young persons charity told me earlier today that well over half of his case load currently involves people using new psychoactive substances and that almost 100 per cent of referrals since Christmas relate to new psychoactive substances and/or cannabis use, indicating a changing trend in drug use. Interestingly, throughout the county we have three so-called head shops—two in Arbroath and one in Montrose—that sell new psychoactive substances over the counter. I say interestingly because there are only two more in the whole of the rest of Tayside—one in Dundee and one in Perth. My understanding from Police Scotland is that the total number of such premises throughout the country is not into treble figures. Why, then, are there two shops in a rural town the size of Arbroath? Of course, premises selling so-called legal highs are, strictly speaking, doing nothing illegal. As a parent, though—let alone the local parliamentarian—I find it unsettling that such shops in my constituency have opened close to youth and drug rehab projects. Alex Johnstone mentioned that earlier. I also find it disconcerting to hear of head shops in Scotland issuing loyalty cards and doing buy-one-get-one-free offers over the festive season. I commend Police Scotland for the way in which it has responded to the rise of new psychoactive substances, and I acknowledge that, as legislators, we need to find a way to equip it with the legitimate powers to really tackle it. Among other things, last year Police Scotland issued instructions to officers that any new psychoactive substances material seized should be sent for analysis. That was prompted by the discovery that around 27 per cent of the substances that had been checked contained traces of controlled drugs. I wonder whether such evidence, supported by testimony from the purchaser confirming where they bought the new psychoactive substances and what advice they were given regarding usage, could open the door to prosecutions. I am no lawyer, but I understand that there are other potential legal avenues that could be and are being explored. I believe that section 9A of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 suggests that it can be deemed an offence to trade in apparatus that could be used for consuming drugs. Presumably that would cover bongs, grinders and so on—the kind of equipment that is openly available in head shops, although I recognise that bongs can also be used for the consumption of tobacco. I am told that, back in the 1980s, successful prosecutions were mounted in the midst of the glue-sniffing epidemic, under the heading “reckless conduct”, which the minister referred to in her opening remarks. I understand that that covered the over-the-counter sale of, say, 30 tubes of glue or of a collection of items that, added together, might be deemed to be a glue-sniffing kit. How might that approach be deployed now? Let us say someone is sold a bong, a grinder and a couple of bath salts, the bath salts—rather surprisingly—coming with a price tag of £20 to £30. Could it reasonably be assumed that those items are for the purposes of getting high, especially when the product carries a charge that indicates that it is not being used for its legitimate purpose? Given the potential consequences of that, might that be deemed reckless conduct on the part of the seller? That said, we have to be careful that we do not end up applying a sticking plaster to a wound that requires more considered treatment. My understanding is that, often, what is sold in the shops is more expensive and has less “bang for your buck” than what is available online. Once the knowledge levels of users increase, they will turn to internet sourcing. That may lead to those head shops closing, but it will not remove the issue that those shops have contributed to the creation of. Head shops stimulate the market, but new psychoactive substances abuse will continue—and in some respects may become even more problematic—even when such shops have vacated our high streets. Indeed, according to the Scottish Drugs Forum, the vast majority of supply is coming through the internet already and discounted bulk buying is feeding localised small-scale networks. We therefore have to look beyond simply removing head shops from our midst—desirable as that would be.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it encourages local and national organisations to work in partnership to promote historic locations and events. (S4O-02880)

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of interests. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the formation of the 2020 group in Arbroath, which involves Historic Scotland, VisitScotland, Angus Council and the Arbroath abbey action group and which is working to create a suitable build-up to and celebration of the 700th anniversary of the declaration of Arbroath? Will she encourage that sort of engagement and co-operation between public bodies and ordinary members of the public with an interest in a subject, which can best realise the potential of some of our historic locations and events of global significance?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on introducing its proposed legislation on carers. (S4O-02839)

I welcome the prominence that is given to young carers and their role throughout the consultation document. How will the Government seek to ensure that the voice of young carers is heard as we look to shape future legislation? As the minister knows, young carers encounter specific issues and challenges in their role, and I am certain that, like me, he will want to seize the opportunity presented by the consultation to set about tackling some of those issues.

On afternoons such as these, there is little that is worse for the members who come after than when the person who kicks off the open debate tries to cover every aspect of the subject under consideration. In the case of the common agricultural policy, that would be impossible, so colleagues will be relieved to learn that I will not attempt to do so. Instead, I will focus on just a couple of aspects of the CAP. NFUS, as any such representative body should, is lobbying hard on behalf of its members. There is nothing wrong with that; indeed, there would be something wrong if it did not do it. To be fair to NFUS, it is advancing some seemingly reasonable arguments and, to some degree, it is indicating that it recognises the realities of the situation in which Scotland finds itself. As Nigel Miller acknowledged in The Courier last week: “The move to area payments was never going to be easy for Scotland with a limited budget and a variable jigsaw of land types and farm systems. Area payments systems will always move support away from units where historic production has been intense.” Even in extolling the virtues of the northern and, in particular, southern Irish farming approaches as alternatives to what is being proposed, Mr Miller accepted that their “budgets that are more than double that of Scotland.” The concerns that have been articulated by NFUS about the possible implications of funding the vulnerable beef and sheep sectors are not to be dismissed lightly, although it was intriguing to note the apparent disconnect in the newly released annual Bank of Scotland survey, which showed that 51 per cent of respondents expressed the view that they anticipated being worse off under CAP reform, although a third of beef farmers and 29 per cent of sheep farmers plan to increase the size of their herds. As Ewan Pate, the farming editor of The Courier, observed today, that appears to show a “massive contradiction between what farmers think privately and what they are saying in public.” The shaping of the CAP arrangements in Scotland is still a work in progress, but we are not at the endgame yet, as the cabinet secretary has made clear. I have something of a difficulty with NFUS’s position when it talks of minimising modulation and utilising pillar 2 to “top up funding of the beef cow coupled support” and, as it has done on a couple of occasions in front of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, come up with other agriculture-inclined spends that would further test the elasticity of pillar 2. Jonathan Hall, the director of policy and regions, has called for the establishment of an advisory service for Scottish agriculture, farmers and crofters. In addition, Andrew Bauer of NFUS has suggested that we need knowledge transfer and financial incentives to bring about widespread use of better farming practices in response to the impacts of climate change. Both might well be worthy proposals, but underlying them is NFUS’s belief that CAP funding belongs—if not entirely then, certainly, largely—to the farming sector. Indeed, in the article to which I referred earlier, Mr Miller admitted that he is looking for investment in infrastructure and innovation, among other things, “even if that means scaling down forestry targets.” The cabinet secretary must strike a responsible balance; he cannot simply grant every item on agriculture’s CAP wish list when he is under the current financial constraints. He needs to balance the competing demands of land use for food production and protection of valuable habitats and, within the industry, he must address the interests of key sectors, including less favoured areas, at the same time as mitigating the impact on other parts of the industry. He must also balance allowing farmers to adjust to the changes with providing a fair deal for new entrants as quickly as he can. The NFUS must surely understand the challenge of striking those balances, because it has members who will be winners and losers under the new CAP, however it pans out. Pillar 2 has to cater for a wide range of interests and needs across our rural areas. The Scottish Government has to find a way to build on the success story of Scottish food and drink while protecting the natural environment, not least from the impacts of climate change, and all the time it is being held back by what is, by any judgment, a poor financial settlement. Let us look at the balance that is intended to be struck under the Government’s provisional draft proposals for the new SRDP, with a likely budget of approximately £1.35 billion between 2014 and 2020. There will be £459 million for less favoured area support and areas of natural constraint, with further funding for food and drink, crofting grants, grants for small farmers, and new entrant support. I calculate that the total will be around £570 million, or 43 per cent of the entire pillar 2 budget allocation. That is without even considering the degree of access to the £365 million that has been earmarked for agri-environment and climate change, which the sector also covers. What would NFUS have us cut to ensure a bigger funding pot for agriculture? We know that planting trees is considered to be expendable—Nigel Miller told us that—regardless of how it might impact on the environment. What else? Do we eat into the £66 million for LEADER, which has served rural communities so well, or the £20 million to support small rural businesses that helps our young people to stay in their rural communities, or the £9 million for broadband infrastructure in our rural parts? I am anything but anti-agriculture—I represent an area that is rich in farming—but Angus and wider rural Scotland also need and have enjoyed the support of pillar 2 in other ways in recent years. We need to continue managing those often competing pressures. Of course, we really ought to be better placed financially, even if Alex Fergusson and Claire Baker would prefer that we drew a line under the issue. We could and should have had another €230 million from the convergence uplift but, of course, Owen Paterson said no. Is that an example of what “better together” means? Well, yes it is. Mr Paterson could have looked at the Estonians, the Latvians and the Romanians and thought, “We can’t have part of the UK lagging behind those countries when it comes to pillar 1 hectare averages” and he could have done something about it, but he did not. He does not believe in direct payments and, in any case, it would have been a bit awkward arguing for a fair deal for Scotland when we are the poor relation within the UK as well as broader Europe. Owen Paterson also says that he is an enthusiast for the benefits that the pillar 2 scheme brings, but he stands by while 16 other countries secure an uplift in their payments, leaving Scotland to prop up the league table. Even when a pot of money comes the UK’s way, purely because Scotland is so poorly treated, he tells us that it belongs to every part of the UK. That is a disgrace. Unlike the unionists in this Parliament and their better together buddy Mr Paterson, we will stand up for Scotland and its interests and argue the undeniable case for independence and the benefits of full member status within the EU. Things can be better than what better together is offering. All it takes is for Scotland on 18 September to replace Owen Paterson’s “no” with a simple “yes”.

My preparing for the debate prompted me to re-read in detail the evidence on the draft programme that was given during two stakeholder meetings that were held on 30 October last year. I remember at the time sitting in committee and feeling quite invigorated by what I had heard. Going over the Official Report ahead of this afternoon’s debate had a similar effect. The evidence that we received was as constructive and detailed as it was wide ranging, so on behalf of the committee members I record our appreciation of the contribution that witnesses and stakeholders made to our deliberations. I also concur with the minister who, in his letter responding to the committee’s report, said that the process had “provided valuable insights and raised useful questions”. Across the panels, there was absolute unanimity on the fact that the impacts of climate change are being felt right across society. Professor Des Thompson of Scottish Natural Heritage told us: “We are now seeing in our seas and mountains and on the coast rapid changes such as have never been witnessed before in a similar timeframe.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2822-23.] Andrew Bauer of NFU Scotland told us: “From a farming point of view, the impacts are already here ... The growing seasons have changed, and farmers are already adapting what they are growing because extreme weather events are making potentially higher-profit crops more risky to plant.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2823.] Jim Densham of RSPB Scotland revealed that, across various RSPB sites including some of Scotland’s “most special places”, “every day issues and impacts”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2824.] are being seen that cannot be disentangled from climate change. David Goodhew of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service admitted that the past decade had seen recognition that the impacts of climate change are more variable and wide reaching than was previously anticipated. He explained that the Fire and Rescue Service is now having to purchase more four-by-four vehicles with differential locks on rear axles and exhaust pipes set higher than 18 inches in order to meet the challenging range of circumstances in which the service must operate. It is widely recognised that we have significant challenges to which to respond. Although the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs secretary of state, Owen Paterson, has sought to portray the consequences of climate change as offering an opportunity for agriculture, Andrew Bauer revealed that the sector in Scotland does not entirely share that viewpoint. He told us: “we can foresee the benefits. However, the uncertainty could wipe them all out; you might be okay one year in five, but for the other four years you ... could suffer significant problems. ... I am not betting my house ... on the benefits outweighing the negatives that we have to deal with.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2837.] One specific downside that he predicted was that, in the future, we will see a decline in areas that are fit for production in some of our farming heartlands. What is going on out there as we react to the impacts of climate change? What are we as a society doing well, and what do we need to do better? Let me deal first specifically with the adaptation policy. We were told that the Government had made good strides in implementing and developing the existing framework. The move away from a sectoral approach towards an integrated package was welcomed—albeit that there was a call for that to be built on. Jim Densham rightly made the point—as Alex Fergusson and Patrick Harvie have—that we need to think beyond five-year programmes of objectives, proposals and policies, which give us a short-term look at, and control over, what needs to happen, but do not consider the longer term. As Mr Densham said, we need to be clear about where we are going and how we will deliver a resilient and adaptable Scotland. That is something that he feels does not quite come across in the draft programme.

I thank the minister for that input. We are aware that they are five-year programmes, but there is a general point that we must look as far beyond that timeframe as we can. I turn to areas in which the Government and other public sector bodies, the utilities and the private sector are already responding. We heard from the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service how experience has taught it to work closely with partner agencies in response to flooding predictions and to forward deploy equipment and personnel. We were told that amalgamation of the police forces and fire brigades into national forces has “invigorated” the process of ensuring that assets are aligned to risks, and that the right resources are in the right place at the right time. We were advised that, building on publication of the national flood risk assessment, SEPA has moved on to the new flood risk and hazard maps, which are to be launched tomorrow, as the minister revealed. Next year will see the development of risk management strategies, which will look at the biggest risks in each local authority area. Gordon McGregor of Scottish Power revealed that the power companies are working daily to monitor weather and its impact on power assets, which is making those assets more resilient, especially in areas that are subject to frequent storms. They are also building stress testing into the process of designing future infrastructure. Some areas were highlighted as needing to be improved or addressed. We were told that there could be better joined-up working between agriculture and local authorities, with farmers planting low-value crops in fields that could be utilised for flood-plain storage rather than planting high-value crops that would have to be written off, out of necessity for the greater good. It was also suggested that, in pursuing woodland expansion, we should not see large-scale reversion from farming to forestry but should actively pursue the establishment of pockets of forestry and agroforestry systems. We were told of upcoming problems with drought in the likes of Angus and Fife, with their short coastal rivers and areas of intensive agriculture. Indeed, the committee was advised that, in some parts of the country last year, we came within a week of restrictions being placed on irrigation. It was suggested that offline and winter storage in reservoirs should be encouraged. The committee also heard of the need to support the research community. Professor Thompson summed up the situation when he said that “rapid, risky things are now being thrown at our environment, and unless we have the science and innovative techniques in place to try to combat them, we will simply be folding our arms as those changes happen.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2842.] Anna Beswick of Climate Ready Clyde suggested that we need a national heatwave plan, which I think is mentioned in the draft—England already has one—hard though it might be to imagine Scotland requiring to implement such a plan. Transport Scotland is currently recruiting chartered engineers who must have an MSc, and it was suggested by Stephen Thomson of that organisation that introducing the concept of adaptation in MSc courses—whether for engineers or anyone else—would have benefits. What came over loud and clear in evidence was that the various sectors generally realise—as they must—that they must play their part in adapting and becoming more resilient to the impacts of climate change. I thought that David Goodhew of Scottish Fire and Rescue best summed up the way forward when he told the committee that “Extreme weather is not anybody’s problem; it is everybody’s problem. If we do not take a unified approach with real joined-up working ... we will fail ... it is a question of partnership, partnership and partnership.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 October 2013; c 2858-9.] We need widespread engagement on responding to the challenges that we face, and we need leadership—not just from Government. Therefore, the formation of the public sector climate leaders forum is welcome, as is Claudia Beamish’s involvement in it, given that Scotland’s 2020 climate group focuses mainly on business. There can be no doubt that, as the minister highlighted in his letter to the RACCE Committee, we need exemplar bodies from the private and public sectors. There are good examples. I visited the Kingsway campus of the new Dundee and Angus College last Friday and was delighted to learn how that building has been made to rise to the challenge of tackling climate change. Worcester Bosch has sponsored the installation of a ground-source heat pump, which is used for training that company’s technicians. A solar power room provides a training facility for students, as well as meeting the building’s energy needs, and rainwater is being harvested for toilet flushing in the catering block. Through strategically positioned monitors in the building, the college is advising students and staff of the performance of measures such as the solar power unit, with the aim of creating a culture of awareness of the need to save energy and to promote renewable energy use.

Sarah Boyack has made a very good point. I do not think that there is anything that I can add to that. There is so much more that can be done, as Sarah Boyack indicated, especially by local authorities. I am not convinced—from experience or from the evidence that the committee received—that councils are, in the first instance, making full use of existing drainage infrastructure to cope with increased instances of excessive rainfall, because they are failing to clean gullies as often as they should. The debate has been an excellent one that has reflected the justified importance that Parliament, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, the Government and stakeholders attach to the subject. The adaptation programme is a work in progress. On behalf of the members of the committee, I say that we look forward to participating further in its development. I am sure that colleagues would welcome, in particular, an opportunity to consider further at some future date how Scotland is adapting to climate change, once the strategy has been progressed and if parliamentary time allows. In the meantime, I ask members to support the motion at decision time.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the report, “The Effectiveness of the Rail Network Across Great Britain: A Comparative Analysis”. (S4O-02728)

The report notes that rail in Scotland receives a high level of financial support from the Scottish Government and that, as a result, services that are high quality and growing are being delivered. It acknowledges the challenge of maintaining those performance levels in the face of budgetary pressures. Will the minister outline the scale of the threat to rail services that would be posed in the event of a no vote next September, which would mean that a £4 billion budget cut was coming down the track from Westminster?

Some months ago, I visited Inverbrothock primary school in Arbroath to give a talk to primary 6 pupils on the life of an MSP and the work of the Parliament. Having—I thought—fired their imaginations and enthusiasm, I invited questions. Up shot the first hand, but the young lady in question did not want to explore the workings of the Parliament or ask anything remotely connected with the role of a constituency MSP. She simply asked, “How can we save the CAFE project?” That put me in my place, although I was able to explain that I had been helping Sheriff Stein to identify a number of funding sources that might be explored. It emerged that several of the kids were deeply concerned about the threat to the project, and they outlined some fundraising ideas of their own that they thought could assist in securing its future. I tell that story simply to illustrate how much the CAFE project means to those who use it. I think that, after 17 years, those of us who live and work in Arbroath have become so used to it being there that we have perhaps come to take it for granted. The revelation that Children in Need had called a halt to providing funding, with all the potential consequences that that threatened, was a wake-up call. My most recent visit was on a night that was given over to providing activities for youngsters and adults with learning difficulties. Some were there with carers, but the project is proud of the fact that a significant number of the participants eventually develop the confidence to attend on their own, which of course has the benefit of giving the carers a wee respite as well. As Alex Johnstone highlighted, however, the project does much more than that. On four evenings a week, it offers drop-in sessions for P4s to P6s and then S1s to S4s, with a range of activities that help to develop skills and an emphasis on healthy living and good citizenship. There are teatime clubs two afternoons a week and a holiday club that runs three afternoons a week. The P7 active boys and girls groups welcome many youngsters who are in care or under supervision. There is a parents and toddlers group, an Alan Soutar darts academy and a chess club. Additionally, jobcentre staff are there once a month to advise and assist young people into work. All told, it is estimated that 650 young people a year benefit from the CAFE project’s work. That is why it is so important that a means is found to ensure its survival beyond July. Missing out on a 13th year of funding from Children in Need was undoubtedly a blow, but the CAFE project was not unique in that, with nine out of 10 applications to Children in Need being unsuccessful. As Alex Johnstone said, these are difficult times for charities and competition for funding is fierce. However, I understand that the CAFE project is planning to knock on Children in Need’s door again quite soon, and I wish it well in that. I welcome Angus Council’s renewed engagement with the project, which I understand will lead to the council assisting with the preparation of grant applications and with energy efficiency measures to help to drive down the overheads that are created by the age of the building at Brothock Bridge. In concluding, I pay tribute to Sheriff Norrie Stein, the project’s founder, who is in the gallery tonight. Mike Weir MP and I will meet him on Sunday for an update on the progress that is being made to secure the project’s long-term future. We are going to grab a coffee in the cafe at Morrisons in Arbroath, as Sheriff Stein will be there participating in a bag pack to raise funds for the project. I think that we will be chatting almost on the run, as it were. Sheriff Stein is a remarkable man whose contribution to the town and its surroundings was recognised relatively recently with the naming of a street in his honour, and the CAFE project is an equally remarkable Arbroath institution. I wish both a long and prosperous future, and I congratulate Alex Johnstone on giving us this opportunity to note all that the CAFE project has achieved.

I congratulate the MRC on its centenary, which marks a hundred years that the MRC can reflect on with considerable pride. It is a shared history: one of close collaboration between the nations of these islands, which has a future that will continue post-independence. The funding of research is an important issue; it is important enough to have three pages dedicated to it in “Scotland’s Future”, the document that was published today, so to that extent I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. That said, it was wrong for him to make the assertion that he made—predictable though it was. Do not just take my word for it: as Universities Scotland’s convener Professor Pete Downes stated, the research and innovation collaborative ecosystem “transcends all borders”, and it is in everyone’s interests that “vigorous cross border collaboration is supported to continue whatever the result of the referendum.” Tim O’Shea, principal of the University of Edinburgh, said that “there is no reason why any form of constitutional change should preclude participation in higher order research councils.” Professor Ian Diamond, principal of the University of Aberdeen, has stated that he “can’t see it’s in the interests of anyone in the rest of the UK to want to exclude Scotland, nor is it in the interest of Scotland to be excluded from collaboration.” As far as I am aware, none of those views has been expressed by people who are known to be partisan on the issue of independence. Rather, they come from academics who have taken a pragmatic and practical look at the situation. Listening to Murdo Fraser, I had a vision of Private Frazer of “Dad’s Army” proclaiming “We’re a’ doomed!” I will resist the temptation to deploy Captain Mainwaring’s withering put-down of Private Pike by way of response to Murdo Fraser’s contribution. The situation with medical research is rather like the situation with energy. We have a UK-wide grid network through which Scotland ensures that the lights remain on in the rest of these islands. Under devolution, Scotland exports electricity 365 days a year to England and Northern Ireland. That will continue post-independence—we will not see them plunged into darkness. As good neighbours, we will collaborate because it makes sense to do so. In the same way, integrated and collaborative medical research will continue to be done, just as it is at present, between the UK and other countries, because that is the best thing—the right thing—to do. Is Murdo Fraser really predicting that those who have devoted their lives to finding cures for debilitating or life-threatening conditions would be party to undermining the quest for those cures just because Scotland votes for independence? That is—to be frank—daft. There will be a refreshed relationship but, generally speaking, in practical terms little would change. At the moment, public funding for university research across the UK is delivered through block grants from the funding councils of each country, which are paid for through devolved budgets, along with competitively awarded grants from the UK’s shared research councils, which are funded through taxation. Post-independence, the Government will seek to continue the common research area approach, albeit that we would, instead of paying our share through UK tax take, negotiate a share based on population percentage that takes account of the level of research funding coming to Scotland. I certainly had no problem understanding that section of “Scotland’s Future”. To be fair, there is a degree of uncertainty for research. The Government is supportive of the European Commission’s ambition for “A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth”, which would see researchers, research institutions and businesses engage better across borders. Were we to remain in the UK, we might conceivably, by virtue of the Tories’ plans for an in/out referendum on EU membership, find ourselves on the outside looking in as that sensible approach is developed. That is perhaps something for people in the research community to think about as they ponder how to cast their vote in next year’s referendum. I conclude by pointing out that today’s debate takes place on the day that the cancer mortality in Scotland statistics for 2012 were released. They show that, over the past 10 years, cancer mortality has fallen by around 11 per cent. A number of things have contributed to that decrease, not least of which is the research into cancer that is being conducted around the world, throughout Europe and across the UK. Right at the heart of that has been the work that is done at Ninewells hospital by Professor Alastair Thompson of the University of Dundee’s clinical research centre. When I and my Dundee-based colleagues Joe FitzPatrick and Shona Robison visit that centre next month to see for ourselves the progress that is being made in tackling the scourge of cancer, we will do so with an eye to the future, rather than to the present or the past, and with the understanding that the work that is being done in Dundee will continue—and, indeed, flourish—following a yes vote next year.

Given the settlement, the UK Government’s plans for an in/out referendum on Europe and, of course, the Tories’ confirmed intent to all but wipe out direct support for Scotland’s farmers, does the cabinet secretary agree that the only way to provide certainty and a fair deal, and to secure a long-term future for Scottish agriculture, is through independence?

I do not think that any reasonable person would question the wisdom or desirability of what the bill seeks to achieve—surely everyone benefits from improved regulation and an improved ability to regulate. The challenge in relation to the areas of the bill that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee scrutinised as a secondary committee lies in ensuring that, in facilitating sustainable economic growth, we in no way compromise or give rise to the possibility of compromising protection of our environment or our natural heritage. The committee’s scrutiny of the bill centred on part 2, which covers environmental legislation, along with those areas of part 1 that relate to SEPA and SNH. In its submission, SNH revealed that it had no difficulty with the principles of the bill but admitted that it was not fully clear on its priorities and purpose. It should be acknowledged that SEPA revealed itself to have a clear understanding of its role. It stated that its new general purpose, as drafted in section 38 of the bill, accurately reflected the manner in which it currently operates. The Minister for Environment and Climate Change told the committee that he did not intend the duty on sustainable economic growth to subvert in any way the existing regulatory duties of SEPA and SNH, and that regulators would take economic impact into account only when there was no conflict. Despite that, the committee came to the view that, given SNH’s hugely important role in securing the conservation, enhancement, understanding, enjoyment, sustainable use and management of the natural heritage, a provision similar to the one that is provided for SEPA in section 38 might reasonably be included. The minister indicated that he did not feel that to be necessary. However, although we were largely reassured by the minister’s evidence, we remained of the opinion that the hierarchical model that is set out in section 38 might still be deployed to provide that clarity. The intention is understood, but we were simply of the view that it might be more clearly understood were the Government prepared to take the suggested approach. The minister indicated that regulators would be able to identify the outcomes of their new duties in future annual reports, but the committee was concerned that if regulators were unclear on what the duty would mean for them in practical terms, that would impinge on their ability to report. However, we welcomed the Government’s commitment to produce, in consultation with stakeholders, appropriate guidance. The undertaking given that the statutory code of practice will be comprehensive and define what is expected of regulators as regards their duties under section 4 is also to be welcomed, provided that the guidance includes clear instruction on how to resolve any conflict that arises between compliance with their primary functions and achieving sustainable economic growth. Of course, things have moved on with the creation of the Scottish regulators code of practice working group to develop the draft code, with a view to entering into full consultation later in the year, and the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism reiterating in evidence and again today that sustainable economic growth is not to be prioritised over other regulatory objectives but is simply something to which regulators must have regard. The direction of travel is therefore one that satisfies the concerns of this member of the committee. However, concern was expressed in the evidence that we took about how a high-level code of practice that is designed to be applicable to a wide range of regulators could be meaningful and effective. Subsequent ministerial reassurance that the new code was designed not to replace but to complement the detailed and specific subject codes that are already in existence—in other words, the already well-functioning codes specific to individual regulators would remain their driver—has helped to allay those fears. However, like the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee might well renew our interest in the subject prior to the draft code being finalised and laid before Parliament. I very much welcome the planned enhancing of SEPA’s powers of enforcement through the bill and planned Government amendments. The package of measures that we might end up with by stage 3, judging by what is in the bill as drafted and the Government’s proposed stage 2 amendments, will give those who police and protect our environment the means to do so effectively. I welcome the planned new section focusing on SEPA’s investigatory powers with a view, among other things, to determine any financial benefit that has accrued in relation to serious environmental crime. I similarly welcome the proposed amendments to schedule 2, which will mean that permits can be varied, suspended or revoked if the holder ceases to be deemed a fit and proper person and that a permit transfer can be refused if the would-be transferee is not a fit and proper person. I also welcome the intended amendments to sections 69 and 166 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. Concerns were raised that SEPA might use its new powers to impose fixed-penalty fines in relation to weaker cases rather than pursue the issue through the court process. However, SEPA stated in evidence that in practice it would still have to carry out a thorough investigation into the evidence and that guidelines to be provided by the Lord Advocate would further direct its approach. The committee was told that the nature of the offence and whether criminal intent was involved would be taken into account in determining the balance of probability. As a member of the committee, I was particularly pleased to learn that regulations made under the bill will enable SEPA to consider issues on a company-wide basis rather than an individual-site one. That will ensure that organisations that have a corporately bad attitude to the environment will be appropriately held to account, not just slapped across the wrist because at an individual location level their actions are not deemed to be significantly serious. Plans to issue publicity orders are also a step forward, because they might be used alongside or in place of alternative sentences, and someone who is convicted of an offence would be required to make public details of the misdemeanour and the sentence imposed. Discretion on whether to deploy that approach would lie with the courts. However, it strikes me that, used in a commonsense way, that would draw a distinction between a one-off accidental breach and a perpetrator deliberately playing fast and loose with the environment. It is another useful weapon in the environmental protection armoury. Allowing directors of a company and similar office-holders to be prosecuted for the offence of failure to comply with a publicity order in certain circumstances is a logical accompanying step. I welcome moves to better protect SEPA officials from threats of violence and intimidation. The committee heard of cases of serious organised environmental crime in which SEPA officials had been subjected to such threats. SEPA officers do hugely important work on our behalf and they must be afforded the fullest protection and backing.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what emphasis it places on the delivery of hospital services in rural areas. (S4O-02523)

Is the minister aware of plans by NHS Tayside to close Little Cairnie hospital, in Arbroath, in my constituency, and move the palliative care that it provides to Arbroath infirmary? Does he agree that if such a move were to go ahead, it should do so only if that leads to better facilities for patients and their families, which match the best facilities that are available elsewhere in Angus?

I, like others, congratulate Alison Johnstone on securing the debate. I do not agree with what Cycle Law Scotland is calling for but, like other members, I recognise the need to arrive at a safer co-existence between the various road users through a package of measures, which to be fair, is what the motion calls for. Encouraging more people to feel able to get on their bike is important from health and climate change perspectives. However, in seeking that, we must examine in a balanced way the relationship between pedestrians, cyclists and vehicle users. Sadly, the petition to which the motion refers can hardly be described as balanced in its consideration of that relationship. I am a car user whose very mixed experience of cyclists’ conduct on our roads leaves me believing that, although we must consider how we arrive at a better, safer interaction between cyclists and vehicle users, what the petition calls for is wrong-headed. Claudia Beamish mentioned rural links. The constituency that I represent has a number of paths and lanes placed at the disposal of cyclists that allow proficient and not-so-proficient cyclists to either pursue what is an interest for them, or to commute to and from work relatively safely. As Nigel Don, my North Angus colleague has highlighted previously in the Parliament, there remains scope to connect even better our counties, towns and villages to the benefit of cyclists. However, we still have many instances in which cyclists, vehicle users and pedestrians have common usage of routes and where problems arise. My most striking and direct personal experience of cyclists has been here in Edinburgh, generally in close proximity to the Parliament, and that experience reaffirms my belief that what is being called for by Cycle Law Scotland ought to be rejected. A bustling, major city such as Edinburgh must be incredibly intimidating for cyclists, as Kezia Dugdale highlighted. The conduct and attitude of some drivers towards cyclists leaves a great deal to be desired. However, let us be clear: those taking to the roads on bikes are also of very mixed ability and attitude, so to introduce a presumption of liability against motorists involved in incidents with cyclists is—against that backdrop, and unless other measures are taken—unjustifiable. Of course, we need to better protect vulnerable road users, be they on foot or on bike, but surely we must recognise that there are cases in which in those vulnerable road users cause the very incidents that lead to their sustaining injuries, yet Cycle Law Scotland wants us to start from the premise that the driver is automatically deemed to be at fault and it is up to them to prove that they were not.

I take the member’s point, but the starting position is a presumption that the driver is in the wrong. I raised that very point with Cycle Law Scotland, which told me that it recognises that a cyclist might be negligent, but it would be up to the motorist to argue that point. I was told that in the case of young or elderly cyclists or pedestrians, the driver would need to establish a degree of recklessness on the part of the injured party. I am not quite sure how that sits in terms of natural justice. If we are to accept that what the petition calls for is justified, we must believe that cyclists are rarely, if ever, at fault in traffic accidents, when the reality is that the behaviour of cyclists on our roads often leaves much to be desired, just as the behaviour of drivers does. In the course of the past few weeks, for example, on London Road, just a short distance from here, I have twice witnessed a cyclist jumping off the road and on to the pavement to get round a queue of traffic, before diving back on to the carriageway in front of moving vehicles. Unlike Cycle Law Scotland, however, I do not deem it appropriate to tar one group of road users with the same brush. If we are to get more people cycling safely on our roads, we need to create a culture of respect among the people who use the roads, in which everyone is required to behave responsibly and everyone is held equally to account when they cause injury or damage through carelessness. I agree with Alison Johnstone that a jigsaw of measures is required to get us to that point. We must take a balanced approach. Measures might include the introduction of a cycling proficiency examination that cyclists of all ages must pass before they take to the roads, and, as Christine Grahame said, a requirement for cyclists to carry third-party liability insurance to cover damage that they are found to be responsible for inflicting on vehicles and pedestrians. There is a considered debate to be had on the issue. This afternoon’s good debate has kicked that off and I look forward to its continuation.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on promoting climate justice. (S4O-02499)

Further to yesterday’s conference, will the minister outline the opportunity that the forthcoming United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change talks in Warsaw will provide to make further progress on this important issue?

4. To ask the First Minister whether he will provide an update on the national flu campaign. (S4F-01607)

Clearly, those vaccination programmes will go some way towards preventing people—particularly older people—from presenting at accident and emergency departments this winter. Can the First Minister set out what further actions are being taken to get the NHS ready for winter?

I begin my speech by focusing on pillar 2 and how, from a greatly reduced funding pot, it will be made to work to deliver for rural Scotland. By rural Scotland, I do not just mean the farming sector, because there is more—much more—to rural Scotland than farming or indeed forestry, hugely important though both are. We are told that only about 17 per cent of people who live in rural Scotland make their living from farming, and 16 per cent from forestry. That means that up to two thirds of the rural population—at least, those who are in employment—may be engaged in activities that are not necessarily traditionally rural.

I think that there is a balance to be struck in that regard. Within that figure will be people who commute to towns and cities to earn their living but, given the huge investment that is being made in delivering an acceptable standard of broadband to rural parts of our country, we must ensure that SRDP funding continues to encourage people to set up all sorts of businesses and helps to sustain existing businesses in a rural setting, thereby supporting local economies and reducing carbon dioxide emissions through lowering car miles. Pillar 2 is there to support things such as LFASS and new entrants and much of it will go to the farming sector but, contrary to what some in agriculture seem to think, it is not exclusively for supporting farming. Pillar 1 is there exclusively to provide support for farming, but pillar 2 is there for a wide range of activities. However, perusing the latest edition of the NFUS’s Scottish Farming Leader, I was struck by an article on the CAP that insisted that, if the Scottish Government was to transfer funds from pillar 1 to pillar 2, that should be matched and the combined sums channelled towards accessible and practical measures that underpin farming and crofting. I entirely appreciate that the NFUS is going to fight its members’ corner, but I cannot help but feel that those demands betray a belief that pillar 2 is—if not quite lock, stock and barrel, then not far off it—there for farmers to access. Actually, it is also there to support programmes such as LEADER and other lifeline funding for rural areas. The situation regarding transition arrangements for LEADER is concerning given that it gave out, I think, £12 million in the last financial year. The nature of what the SRDP is for was reinforced in the Parliament building on Tuesday evening, when the cross-party group on rural policy received a briefing from Mike Mackenzie of the European Commission’s directorate-general for agriculture and rural development, who works within the unit that deals with the fundamental principles and structures of the EU’s rural development policy. He made it clear that the rural development policy from 2014 to 2020 must “achieve a balanced territorial development of rural economies and communities including the creation and maintenance of employment” and that included among the six union priorities is “economic development in rural areas”. I speak as an MSP for just such a rural area—one where farming is hugely important, but one that has also seen vital support given to non-agricultural businesses. They include the prospering quarrying company whose £1.2 million new processing plant and offices I had the pleasure of opening. As the only source of quarried Angus sandstone, it employs about 20 full-timers and it is looking to develop a training programme. We also have a small architectural business that, with the help of grant aid from the SRDP, is building a brand new headquarters in a rural setting and aiming to double its workforce, keeping young, newly qualified architects in the rural communities that they come from. The Scottish Government has spent the past 18 months consulting stakeholders on the next SRDP, and a second, more detailed consultation will follow. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s confirmation in opening the debate that the SRDP has a wider role than simply supporting farming. However, it would be helpful if, in his closing remarks, he could shed some light on how he will seek to ensure that we continue to encourage and support non-farming and non-forestry businesses to locate or remain in rural settings. There are so many important aspects of the CAP that each member who participates in the debate could choose just one or two to cover in their speech and a number of aspects would be left untouched, but we cannot get away from the fundamental issue of funding. By any determination, the position in which Scotland finds itself is unacceptable. The facts are there. The funding situation and, in particular, the prospect of Scotland not receiving the full external convergence uplift that the UK received only because of Scotland—it would be worth about €11 million in 2014, rising to €60 million in 2019—are gross wrongs. It is not only SNP members of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee who have recognised the inherent unfairness that is at work here. Alex Fergusson reiterated his worries today. However, it seems that Mr Paterson is not listening. When he was in front of the committee, his message was essentially to tell Scotland that it would get what it was getting and it should concentrate on how it would spent that. In winding up, I want to look over the horizon to the next CAP, because it is possible to look beyond 2020 and see what the future holds if we remain within the union—the union with England, that is. In considering the forthcoming CAP, one should not lose sight of what is coming down the track beyond that if Scotland remains in the UK and the UK remains in Europe. I recognise that I am speculating, but let us assume that the Conservatives, maybe propped up by the Lib Dems and maybe not, are still in power at Westminster. The Scottish Parliament, just a few months ago, was given a telling insight into what the future would hold for our agriculture sector when Owen Paterson appeared before the committee. The secretary of state—let us give him credit for candour—was quite clear in his view on direct support for Scotland’s farmers. If the UK remains part of Europe, he at the very least wants to reduce that support greatly, which would be seriously bad news for Scotland. Claire Baker suggested that any hiatus in direct payments would be problematic for Scotland’s farmers. How damaging would removing them be when, as Alex Fergusson pointed out to Owen Paterson at the committee, pillar 1 spending is incredibly important to Scotland? To be accurate, Mr Paterson believes that there is a role for continuing to compensate farmers for environmental benefit, and he has indicated that he would direct some of the money saved to research and marketing. Specifically, he is on record expressing the belief that a proportion of the money saved by slashing support to Scotland’s farmers would be better deployed supporting England’s wine industry, of which he is a fan. The truth is that slashing direct support would be hugely harmful to Scottish farming, although his honesty is welcome in the context of the independence debate. In agriculture, as in so many other walks of life, the situation is evidence based and clear. Scotland’s best interests are not served by remaining a part of the UK.

Is the minister aware of the deeply irresponsible comments that were made by the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Owen Paterson, at a Conservative conference fringe event? He spoke of positive aspects to global warming and appeared to suggest that, rather than act now, we can adapt to its consequences as we go along. Does the minister agree that those remarks betray a complete lack of understanding of the damaging impact that climate change has had both at home—on our farming, our coastal communities and those towns and villages that are already experiencing severe flood events—and elsewhere in the world?

Mr Paterson was taken to task by Guy Newey, head of environment and energy at the Policy Exchange think tank, who said: “The point that the climate has been changing for centuries understates the size of the problem that we are facing and the size of the action we need to overcome it. We really have no idea of knowing what is going to happen in terms of temperature. The risk is really very scary”. Does the minister agree that Mr Newey has a far better handle on matters than Mr Paterson?

Does Patricia Ferguson share my view that the best way of boosting tourism numbers in Scotland is to secure a cut in VAT on tourism? In Ireland, for example, a cut to 9 per cent is reckoned to have generated 10,000 jobs, 7,000 of which were directly in the tourism sector.

I echo the comments of Patricia Ferguson, Liz Smith and Tavish Scott concerning our late colleague David McLetchie. I cannot help but think that this debate is poorer for the absence of David, given the contribution that he would surely have made to it. Sport retains a very warm place in the affections of our nation and in places beyond these shores. However, one cannot help but reflect on the tarnished nature of some areas of sport, certainly at a professional level, or on the obscenity of a footballer being traded for €100 million, while a teammate is rewarded for signing a new five-year contract with a salary reputed to be worth £15 million a year after tax but before bonuses, when we still have poverty and hunger in the world. Too often, sport or those who become idols to youngsters as a result of their success in it are found to be unworthy of such adulation. Just yesterday we had a former snooker world championship semi-finalist thrown out of the sport for 12 years for frame-score fixing amid claims by the reigning world champion that cheating of that nature is widespread. Earlier this year, a leading flat jockey was banned for 10 years for fixing races. The reputations of tennis and athletics have been besmirched recently by doping violations, albeit that in the former case it is accepted to have been accidental and in the case of several leading sprinters B test results are still awaited. Worst of all, the sport of cycling remains in the shadow of Lance Armstrong. For every bad apple in each of those sports, there are many decent leading participants—people worthy and deserving of the respect of us sports fans—but with every scandal, our faith in those who are, and should be, role models to aspiring youngsters is diminished. In among all that stands a shining example, in the form of the Ryder cup, of what sport should be about. I want to focus my contribution on the traditions of that event. By virtue of the off-course antics of the former world number 1, golf has attracted its share of adverse publicity. Surely no one would defend the existence of golf clubs that treat women as second-class citizens. However, I cannot—I say this as a former sports journalist—think of an event that better upholds traditional supporting values, while providing almost unrivalled competitiveness, than the Ryder cup does. And what theatre! Three days of ebbing and flowing drama as participants in a sport, the individual nature of which is normally perhaps matched only by that of boxing, are forged into a team whose spirit, certainly in the case of the Europeans, is something to behold. A year from now, we will have it unfolding right here in Scotland as the Ryder cup returns to the home of golf for the first time since 1967. The golf fans among us can all name the iconic moments of high drama that have made the Ryder cup what it is, such as 1985, when the cup was wrenched from USA’s grasp for the first time in almost 30 years as Seve Ballesteros and our own Sam Torrance inspired the Europeans to victory, Sam coming from three down at one stage against Andy North to seal the win with an 18-foot birdie putt on the last. Two years later, Tony Jacklin led Europe to its first ever victory across the pond, thanks in large part to Ballesteros and José María Olazábal. Ben Crenshaw snapped his putter after going two down to Eamonn Darcy with 12 holes to play and had to use his 1 iron to putt for the remainder of the round. In 1989, Christy O’Connor’s 2 iron approach to the final green finished 4 feet from the hole to clinch victory over Fred Couples, allowing Europe to retain the trophy by virtue of a draw, even though the Americans won the last four singles. Two years later, at Kiawah Island, Colin Montgomerie battled back from four down to take half a point against Mark Calcavecchia, all in vain as Bernhard Langer missed from 6 feet on the last against Hale Irwin. Yet in the midst of that incredibly competitive environment, traditional sportsmanship survives. The ethos of contesting the relatively modern day Ryder cup in the right way can be traced back to 1969 at Royal Birkdale, when America’s Jack Nicklaus conceded a missable putt to Tony Jacklin on the 18th to bring about the very first draw in the competition’s history. Of course, that was still enough for the USA to retain the trophy but, by doing what he did, Nicklaus laid down a marker for how the Ryder cup ought to be contested. As the competition has gone from being contested between the USA and GB to being contested between the USA and GB and Ireland and then, from 1979, USA and Europe, future generations of golfers have heeded that approach. At the 2006 tournament, who could forget the moment when Darren Clarke, still grieving for his wife Heather, walked on to the first tee at the K Club and his opponent Phil Mickelson held out his hands and embraced him? What about the final hole of the final match when American rookie J J Henry had to hole a 25 footer to halve with Paul McGinley and spare the USA its worst ever beating in the competition, and McGinley conceded the putt? Four years later, Colin Montgomerie chose not to exercise his prerogative as home captain to set the course up to suit the Europeans because he wanted an honest test that would reward the best team, and we got a competition that went to the very last match before Europe prevailed. What about in 2012, when Justin Rose sank a monster putt on the 17th and Phil Mickelson—who, remember, was part of a pumped-up US team—gave him the thumbs up? The Ryder cup has surely changed the way in which we view golf—that is, those of us who play and follow the sport beyond those biennial three days of intense battle. Before Europe started to win the cup, how many of us Scots golf fans were particularly bothered whether an Englishman or any other fellow European was winning majors? Yet now, are we not just as pleased to see a Lee Westwood, a Justin Rose, a Miguel Ángel Jiménez or an Ian Poulter contending as a Martin Laird? Did we not all welcome Henrik Stenson becoming the first European to win the tour championship and FedEx cup at the weekend, because he is, after all, one of us? That said, we are still first and foremost Scots—a nation with a proud tradition of Ryder cup involvement, supplying winning captains in Monty, Sam Torrance and Bernard Gallacher. We have not done badly either with participants—Monty, Torrance and Gallacher, not to mention Sandy Lyle, Paul Lawrie, Harry Bannerman, Andrew Coltart and John Panton, among others. Let us not forget Brian Barnes, who contested six Ryder cups and famously defeated Jack Nicklaus twice in one day back in 1975. Right now, we would not bet on there being a significant home representation in the European ranks at Gleneagles. Looking at the world rankings today, of the top 50 players eligible to turn out for Europe in the Ryder cup, just six are Scots, with only Martin Laird, Stephen Gallacher and Paul Lawrie sitting inside the top 30. However, any of those three and perhaps others such as Marc Warren, Richie Ramsay and Scott Jamieson could strike a rich vein of form and qualify for the team by right and, of course, Paul McGinley has captain’s picks, so I am hoping for a Scottish presence in the side. However, regardless of how many—if any—Scots make next year’s team, it promises to be some event. The Americans have won just four of the 14 Ryder cups since 1983 and their triumph of 2008 at Valhalla is a distant memory following the miracle at Medinah last year when Europe, led on the course by the remarkable individual that is Ian Poulter and off it by Olazábal, came from 10-6 down at the beginning of the final day to triumph—a victory that the tearful Olazábal of course dedicated to Seve Ballesteros, who had tragically died a short time earlier. Under the captaincy of Tom Watson, the Americans will be desperate for revenge. As Europeans, we will hope that Paul McGinley’s side resists that but, more than anything, surely all of us wish for a competition that once again upholds the very best in Ryder cup tradition and shows Gleneagles and Scotland in the most favourable of lights.

We are debating an extremely important topic and I, too, congratulate my colleague James Dornan on bringing it to the chamber. However, I cannot help but feel that, in reality, few of us who speak in the debate—with the exception of Dennis Robertson and Siobhan McMahon—can even begin to understand the reason why so few people who are identified as having a disability are actively involved in politics, let alone contribute on the subject with any degree of authority. That is why, in the main, I will focus my speech not on my thoughts but on the experiences and views of someone who undoubtedly knows what they are talking about. Councillor Sheila Hands, who represents the Monifieth and Sidlaw ward on Angus Council, is a truly remarkable person, although she would be annoyed to hear me say that, because she does not view her blindness as defining or restricting her—it is simply something that she finds a way around. It certainly does not prevent her from being an exceptional contributor to the council administration, and I have yet to witness an example of it hindering her in discharging her ward duties. To those who are unaware of the nature of the Monifieth and Sidlaw ward, I explain that, as the local member, I hold surgeries in seven different locations in it so that I can be appropriately accessible to constituents. Because of the area’s nature, it makes demands of its elected representatives. However, ask Sheila about the role of councillor and being active in politics and she will talk about how rewarding, rather than challenging, the experience is. Interestingly, she will say that she feels that she has achieved more in changing folks’ perceptions of disability in the past year and a half than she ever did in her previous life working in the area of equalities and disability rights. The reason is that, day in, day out, in helping her constituents, she demonstrates to them that disability need not be a barrier to providing successful political representation and that, in return for electing someone with a disability to represent them, they will not get a second-class service. Among other things, the pop-up think tank’s report highlights the need for role models. It asserts: “Seeing their peers in political positions ... would give disabled people the confidence to try it out. Without such positive role models, the barriers to disabled people’s participation in politics may appear to them to be insurmountable.” I agree, and I point to Sheila as an inspiration for disabled people who want to get involved. However, although she is happy to be seen as a role model, she does not want to be pigeonholed as a spokesperson or champion for disability. I asked Sheila to read the report and give me her candid opinion of its content—mind you, I need not have specified that, as she is not prone to holding back. Like me, she remains to be convinced of the merits of quotas. She pointed out that making it easier for disabled people to get involved will not in itself create the hoped-for surge. As she says, we cannot create a disabled person who wants to enter politics, as people have to want to get involved in the first place. We can give people confidence to go for it by showing that the opportunities are there, but they have to want to take the opportunity. Sheila has always had an interest in politics and the independence cause and has been a Scottish National Party member for some years, but it was not until I turned up at her door and asked what she thought she could actively contribute that she took that first step. Stuffing envelopes at her dining room table—with the rest of her family dragged in to assist—was quickly followed by attending first branch and then constituency meetings, after the guy who picked up those envelopes offered her a lift to both. In no time at all, she was branch secretary. When the branch first asked her to stand for the council in 2012, she says that she laughed but, three months later, she was filling in the pre-vetting paperwork. Basic practical and enabling help and encouragement were all that she needed to take those vital first few steps. Sheila still has difficulties to overcome daily, because those of us who do not have disabilities to contend with do not understand the issues that they can pose. Information technology training for councillors does not take account of the fact that the instruction, “Right click the mouse,” means nothing to her when she does not use a mouse. It took until four weeks ago for her to have access to emails on her phone, although every other councillor has had that as a matter of course since they were elected. As she says, we still have some way to go until we replace seeking to adapt things for disabled people—and not always succeeding—with genuine accessibility for all. Of course, as the report makes clear, in some ways, we have not even got the basics in place to ensure that people with disabilities can compete on a level playing field for roles in politics. However, I do not believe that establishing quotas for disabled candidates would necessarily address the issue, although there would absolutely be merit in doing something along those lines for paid internships and perhaps job shadowing. In theory, quotas would furnish us with more role models, but first and foremost do not political parties need to get our basic thinking right on how we interact with people with disabilities? Even more basically and at the same time, do not we need to create a society that treats those people better, so that they do not feel let down by and disengaged from it? In reality, might not that situation be creating as much of a barrier to disabled people becoming involved in politics as the practical difficulties that they could face if they did? That is a question rather than a statement because, as I said at the outset, I do not feel sufficiently qualified to claim to speak with authority on the subject. I pay tribute to those whose views contributed to the report. There are aspects of it on which I remain to be convinced, but it is undoubtedly a thought-provoking piece of work. As a consequence of reading it, I—and I am sure that other MSPs feel similarly—have been left at least contemplating how I can better engage with disabled constituents and assist those of them who are interested in getting involved in the political process to do so and, I hope, follow in the footsteps of Sheila Hands, whose political journey is, I suspect, far from over. In Angus, we are fortunate that we have the type of role model that the report calls for more of but, like many other places, we have a long way to go before we can say that the political environment that we shape and within which we operate is genuinely open to all.

There is no denying just how blessed visually we are here in Scotland. We are blessed with breathtaking scenery and with the historic environment. We owe so much to those who preceded us for the legacy that they bequeathed us. From the fantastic granite buildings of Aberdeen to the striking historic constructs here in the capital and everything in between—the castles, historic houses and gardens, and archaeological sites—Scotland has so much going for it. For me, it is one of life’s pleasures to marvel at historic buildings that leave one wondering, “How did they build that back then?”, as opposed to the reaction of, “Why did they build that?”, which I certainly have to a number of more modern contributions to the built environment. It is incumbent on us, as the latest custodians of that marvellous heritage, to cherish, appreciate and safeguard it as well as capitalise on its potential for economic benefit. As the historic environment strategy says, it is vital that “it is understood and valued, cared for and protected, enjoyed and enhanced ... at the heart of a flourishing and sustainable Scotland and will be passed on with pride to benefit future generations.” That indicates that a slightly different approach is being taken and a different emphasis is being placed here in comparison with the approach in other parts of the UK. Earlier this year, Westminster’s culture secretary, Maria Miller, stated: “when times are tough and money is tight, our focus must be on culture’s economic impact.” Of course we need to make the most of what we have in generating revenue. We are told that about 16 million tourists visited historic environment attractions in 2011 and that the sector contributes about £2.3 billion to Scotland’s economy, employing 60,000 full-time equivalent staff. As Liz Smith’s amendment says, it is important that we make the most of what we have in enticing visitors to our country. However, for me, it is just as important that we properly appreciate our inheritance and safeguard it for the future. Central to that must be ensuring that more Scots come to recognise what we have in our midst. Statistics show that one in three tourists will visit an historic attraction, yet only one in five adult Scots will do the same in the course of a year. That is a disappointing figure, given the range of opportunities that we have on our doorsteps. For example, within a 30-mile radius of Carnoustie, where I live, we have Barry mill, Arbroath abbey, the House of Dun, the Aberlemno stones, Glamis castle, the Angus folk museum, Barrie’s birthplace and the camera obscura, to name just a few of the fantastic places of interest. A few weeks ago, in the space of a single day, I visited three of those in the company of the cabinet secretary, having visited another one myself a fortnight earlier. I confess to never having been inside the House of Dun or Barry mill, although I look forward to putting that right. However, a far more pressing priority for me as an Angus MSP is to bring all the relevant parties together to properly package and promote what our area has to offer tourists and locals who are looking for ideas and to raise awareness of and pride in the historic environment of the area. As the motion makes clear, we need buy-in from other sectors, such as local government and special interest groups, because local initiatives and leadership on the ground will be essential in taking us where we require to go. We need to be trumpeting to our communities just what lies in our midst and making it as easy as possible for visitors to get to and access the historic attractions that we have. Some 18 months ago, at the suggestion of Ruth Parsons, the then chief executive of Historic Scotland, I formed the Arbroath abbey action group, to which the cabinet secretary referred, which is a group of like-minded, positive, passionate and locally based individuals who are working with Historic Scotland to promote the abbey more effectively. Progress has been slow at times, but we are getting there. Indeed, a fortnight tomorrow will see a summit at the abbey attended by the chief executives of Historic Scotland, VisitScotland and Angus Council to try to pull together a clear strategy aimed at enticing to the area North American visitors—a key target audience, given the links between the declaration of Arbroath and the American declaration of independence. In Angus, we need to look beyond focusing entirely on what is arguably our greatest asset—and we are. We have ScotRail ready and willing to promote the county as a rail-access tourism destination. Historic Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland and the owners of some of our private gardens and castles are keen to explore packaging the attractions under a “visit Angus” banner, with, we hope, the council assisting in moving visitors inland from the rail stops on the coast. Attracting visitors, whether they are relatively local or from further afield, to our historic places matters to our small communities and businesses, particularly in fragile economic circumstances. That has become all too evident in the village of Glamis in my constituency, where the temporary but extended closure of the Angus folk museum has had a predictably negative impact on the local shop and post office, upon which the village and the nearby settlement of Charleston are so dependent. Another thing on which I would argue that we need to place increased emphasis, certainly in Angus and almost certainly across the remainder of the country, is direct engagement between schools and the historic environment. At the moment, nationally, only around one in five school visits are to historic sites. That figure makes for even more concerning reading when one considers the assistance through free entry and support for travel that the likes of Historic Scotland provide to schools. It is to be welcomed that the NTS and Historic Scotland attract 200,000 learners per year to their properties, but we need to encourage schools to be much more active in fleshing out projects with visits to some of these locations, especially those that bring the history of the place to life with costume tours or re-enactments, as is the case at Arbroath abbey.

I absolutely agree with that. In passing, I recognise the tremendous work that Historic Scotland is doing to retain and safeguard the traditional skills that are vital to the preservation of our buildings, especially through the modern apprenticeship programme. I also acknowledge the fine work that was done at Historic Scotland by Ruth Parsons during her tenure as chief executive. I look forward to further progress being made by the new body. Indeed, I hope in the next few years to see it finally recognise that Angus—specifically Dunnichen—was the location of the battle of Nechtansmere, a hugely significant Pictish battle, the outcome of which ensured that there was a Scotland to fight for at Bannockburn. As the cabinet secretary knows, Historic Scotland, probably correctly, given the lack of available evidence, has sat on the fence regarding the site of that conflict and has refused to include it in its inventory of important battle sites. I can tell her that we now have evidence—at least I am claiming it as evidence. The great tapestry of Scotland, which was unveiled last week—it is still there to be viewed in the Parliament’s entrance area—has an entire panel given over to that event, which it refers to as the battle of Dunnichen. It even features a depiction of Dunnichen Hill and Rescobie Loch. If the great tapestry of Scotland says that the battle took place near Forfar, it must be so. At least, that is what we in Angus will claim. I welcome the strategy and the debate, both of which I feel will make an important contribution to moving Scotland forward in appreciating and safeguarding this aspect of heritage and better spreading its message both among Scots and to a wider audience.

A recent poll revealed that almost nine out of 10 Scots are aware of fair trade. That remarkable level of awareness is one that would, in most cases, trump awareness of who their constituency MSP is, let alone of those of us who are charged with representing them via the regional list. That high-level recognition of fair trade and what it stands for should not surprise us. Earlier this year, Scotland was one of the first countries in the world to become a Fairtrade nation—a fantastic achievement that would not have been possible without the dedication and commitment of people of all ages and backgrounds throughout Scotland. Whatever else achieving Fairtrade nation status does, it surely highlights the shared vision that we Scots have of Scotland as a good global citizen that is committed to playing its part in addressing poverty. Scottish support for fair trade products and the ethical business practices that fair trade promotes, is growing. That reflects an increased understanding of the concept of fair trade—awareness levels have arisen from 64 per cent of the population in 2006, to 88 per cent earlier this year. It is pleasing to note that a third of Scots are believed to purchase fair trade products regularly, compared to just 20 per cent as recently as two years ago. The fair trade movement has come a long way since its beginnings in the 1960s—it has certainly long since shed its one-time image as the preserve of middle-aged, middle-class do-gooders. It is to the credit of Scotland and this country’s inherent sense of fairness that we are at the forefront of that movement. Hundreds of community-based groups have sprung up in our towns, villages, cities, schools, colleges, universities and places of worship to promote fair trade. Whether that is because they have bought into the ethos of the movement or are simply responding to demand—or it is a bit of both—supermarkets are active in providing opportunities for ethical shopping, with the market doubling every two years. Sainsbury’s, which lays claim to being the United Kingdom’s largest fair trade retailer, with a 22 per cent share of the market, reports that its sales of fair trade goods rose 5 per cent last year to £288 million. That figure includes sales of 650 million bananas, which has generated £4 million of fair trade money that is going to help small farming communities in the Dominican Republic, Colombia, St Lucia, Panama, Peru and Ghana. In keeping with the rise in the fair trade movement in Scotland, Sainsbury’s aims to sell £1 billion of fairly traded products annually by 2020. In order that I cannot be accused of promoting one supermarket chain, I mention that Morrisons, Asda, Lidl, the Co-operative and the Spar in my constituency are all fair trade engaged. My motion was principally about noting the achievements of communities and organisations across Scotland, specifically in the area that I represent, in buying into fair trade and what it stands for. The Angus zone, which covers all of the county, achieved Fairtrade status in 2012, nine years after the local council first agreed to support the concept and four years after Montrose, in my colleague Nigel Don’s neighbouring constituency, became the first Angus Fairtrade town. Within the zone, two of the four towns in my constituency have secured Fairtrade status, with a third, Kirriemuir, currently working towards that goal. The achievements of Arbroath and Carnoustie in getting there were recognised by Angus Council, which awarded them civic receptions in November 2012 and February 2013 respectively. Fittingly, Carnoustie’s reception took place on 25 February—the same day as Scotland became a Fairtrade nation. It is remarkable to witness the speed at which participation in fair trade can grow. Take the example of Arbroath, where five of the 12 places of worship have now gained Fairtrade status. Only one school, Arbroath high, was involved at the outset, but now two primaries, Inverbrothock and Muirfield, are in the fold, with Warddykes primary and Arbroath academy seeking to follow suit. Angus College is also participating through its catering outlet, Cafe 56, and its charity shop. All the Co-ops in the town have Fairtrade status, along with Boots the chemist and a variety of cafes, a guesthouse, the Arbroath Choral Society, the local credit union and the furniture recycling project. In Carnoustie, three out of the four schools are now actively involved in the local fair trade movement. Carlogie primary operates a fair trade cafe once a month out of the Panbride church hall, and Woodlands primary holds a fair trade cafe once a term. Both of them have achieved Fairtrade school status. Carnoustie high school, although it is not a Fairtrade school, has also found creative ways to be supportive of the ethical buying scheme. Pupils have their own fair trade forum and can buy Fairtrade products from the tuck shop, and one pupil is being invited to sit on a local committee to provide a youthful perspective on fair trade. All Church of Scotland premises in the town are involved with the fair trade group. As well as promoting ethical purchasing, the Carnoustie fair trade movement is about buying local produce, thus reducing the carbon footprint and helping to boost Scotland’s industry. In a bid to get the message across, the Carnoustie committee has arranged fashion shows and tasting events. A number of the businesses in the town have pledged their support to the cause. Kirriemuir’s Fairtrade forum has been up and running since November last year, and it will shortly be submitting its application for Fairtrade town status. The Glens and Kirriemuir old parish church is already a Fairtrade church. The forum’s efforts are being further supported by Webster’s high school and the two primaries, Northmuir and Southmuir. The fair trade message continues to be spread in Kirriemuir, with activists attending the Cortachy highland games just outside the town and a local heat being staged for the upcoming Angus bake-off competition, which is being staged on 14 September at Forfar mart as part of the taste of Angus festival. I have no doubt that the efforts of those organisations and the various Angus events promoting fair trade have contributed to the positive association that Scots now make with the movement, and that they will, in time, result in more towns like Kirriemuir being added to the growing list of areas in Scotland that hold Fairtrade status. Fair trade is becoming accessible to everyone. With thousands of Fairtrade-certified products for sale through retail and catering outlets across the country, anyone can show their support for ethical business during their weekly shop. Fair trade is about being the better nation that we aspire to be. By consciously supporting better prices, decent working conditions and fairer terms of trade for farmers and workers around the world, with each purchase that we make we are expressing our support for the same social justice to be upheld in our own country and in our communities. Although the gesture might seem relatively small, the people of Scotland recognise the moral value of buying fairly traded products, and I am proud to represent a constituency that demonstrates a strong commitment to increasing participation in the movement within our Fairtrade nation. I note the degree of cross-party support that the motion has attracted. Clearly, support for fair trade and all that it stands for is as widespread in the Parliament as it is across Scotland. I thank all 40 members who signed the motion and allowed the debate to take place.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what impact it considers a reduction in VAT would have on the Scottish tourism industry. (S4O-02324)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, if the UK Government requires evidence of the positive impact that a VAT cut can have on the tourism sector, it need only look at Ireland, where a recently published report on the effect of the Irish Government’s reduction of VAT on tourism-related goods and services to 9 per cent in 2011 reveals that the move led to the creation of around 10,000 jobs, and a €40 million boost to the exchequer in 2012 alone from increased numbers of visitors from overseas. Ireland, of course, has achieved that because it has control of all the financial levers. Is what has happened there yet another example of the benefits that Scotland could enjoy from independence?

Given the importance of the coastguard to offshore safety, which was highlighted by its involvement in the immediate response to this tragic event, can the cabinet secretary provide an update on staffing shortages in the coastguard service around Scotland?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with BBC Scotland regarding the impact of reductions in its budget. (S4O-02275)

Is the Government satisfied that BBC Scotland is currently sufficiently staffed to gather news in rural areas around Dundee, the north-east, the Highlands and Islands, Dumfries and Selkirk? What, if any, assurance has the cabinet secretary or the First Minister received from BBC Scotland about the provision of regional radio news bulletins to such areas following the planned digital switchover?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in conjunction with local authorities to tackle scamming. (S4O-02255)

I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to an initiative that Angus Council is to launch tomorrow. I believe that, in launching scam-free Angus, Scottish National Party-led Angus Council is the first local authority to adopt a specific policy on financial harm that will involve cross-departmental and multi-agency co-operation. That is aimed particularly at protecting the most vulnerable adults. Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming that initiative? Will he encourage other councils to do something similar?

The aim of the 2010 act was that the Scottish Government should act as an impartial referee on the process followed by local councils. However, in the Western Isles judgment, the court ruled that, when the Scottish Government calls in a case, it must also take into account the merits of the case. What scope, if any, does the cabinet secretary see for a return to the position intended under the 2010 act?

During one of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s evidence sessions on the bill, Alex Fergusson confessed to being “a complete layman” in crofting legislation. Given Mr Fergusson’s experience in the Parliament and on rural matters, I was not sure quite where that left me. As an east coast of Scotland resident all my days, I have had little contact with crofting, so I came into the process with minimal understanding of the legislation that covers the area. I thought that my work as a member of the committee that scrutinised the bill would enable me to develop a clear understanding of what crofting legislation entails. I am sad to say that that was not the case. The more that I have learned, the more confused—perhaps it is more accurate to say “bemused”—I have become. Courtesy of the head shaking that I witnessed among MSP colleagues on the committee, I am reassured that my confusion is due not to my being slow on the uptake but to the regime under which our crofters operate and its associated definitions being so confusing as to be almost impenetrable for anyone other than the most skilled specialist legal brains. Even for those legal brains, it seems that the law is open to interpretation. If any member doubts what I said about the complexity of the issue, I draw their attention to the evidence that Derek Flyn, from the Scottish Crofting Federation, gave to the committee on the need for the bill in response to the suggestion that it was not needed: “The point is that owner-occupiers are not entitled to occupy their crofts, which can therefore be held to be vacant, and they can be asked to take tenants. However, owner-occupier crofters are entitled to occupy their crofts and must intimate to the commission the fact that they are owner-occupier crofters. Instead of their being persons who have to give notice, they are persons who give notice as owner-occupiers as well as intimating the fact that they are owner-occupier crofters.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2191-2.] Members of a certain age might remember the hit United States comedy, “Soap”, the scene-setting preamble for each episode of which concluded with the words, “Confused? You will be.” Such a phrase might reasonably preface crofting legislation. I acknowledge that Mr Flyn had the good grace to admit that the issue is complicated. Crofting lawyer Brian Inkster argued that either existing legislation could be read as providing for owner-occupiers to decroft their land or secondary legislation could be enacted. As I sought to come to a view, I was struck by what Sir Crispin Agnew said to the committee. He told us: “It is good that we are putting this right and beyond doubt.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2192.] The committee concluded in its stage 1 report: “On balance, the Committee is satisfied that legislation was required, and that given the desire to resolve the issue quickly, a bill is the most appropriate vehicle for dealing with the current problem.” Sir Crispin and others expressed concern that the bill is unnecessarily complex. As our report made clear, the committee is not expert in the legal matters and cannot judge the merits of some of the concerns that have been expressed. If people whose role it is to advise on the law are voicing concern about aspects of the drafting, it is to be recommended that the Government consider the issues in detail, so that it can be sure. The minister said that the bill is as it is “to reduce the scope for misinterpretation and disagreement”, and to provide “consistency of language between the bill and the provisions of the 2010 act”. He said: “The bill might not be the shortest one that we could have produced, but I hope that it gives the greatest possible clarity about the intent and therefore less room for an alternative interpretation to emerge.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 22 May 2013; c 2268, 2261, 2260.] Given the circumstances that brought us to this point, that is a compelling defence. However, I am sure that the Government has listened carefully to views that have been expressed and will consider whether amendments should be made, in particular in relation to the language. The committee asked the Government “to ensure that the Bill is clear and competent and does not add further complexity to an already complex body of legislation, or have the potential to give rise to further unintended consequences.”

I thank the minister for his intervention. However, Sir Crispin Agnew offered helpful advice on wording, and it is not often that a learned QC offers advice gratis. I cannot pass up the opportunity to comment on the verdict that Mr Inkster delivered in his blog on the stage 1 report and the committee. He decided to mark the report in the style of “Strictly Come Dancing” and award marks out of 10 for aspects of our work as well as for the finished product. Overall, the committee was given six out of 10, with the explanation: “They could have done better. However, no doubt they could have done worse.” At the risk of appearing thin-skinned, it is tempting to award Mr Inkster two out of 10 for humility, given that his opinion is only an opinion, albeit an expert one. However, these are serious matters, which are worthy of serious comment. Mr Inkster has taken issue with the committee for not recognising the significance of his fear of a possible problem in the bill concerning “de-crofting by owner-occupiers who are not owner-occupier crofters”. Paragraph 121 of the committee’s report shows that, although it recognises that there is an issue to be considered, it should not be tackled through this expedited bill process. Far from ducking that and other matters, the committee states in paragraph 122 of its report: “The Committee urges that, outwith this Bill, the Scottish Government reviews all of the issues raised with the Committee, in order to determine the extent and effect of each issue, consulting widely where necessary ... The Committee recommends that the Scottish Government identifies a clear timeframe for the review and provides the Committee with progress updates on this work once it is underway.” That seems to be the appropriate way to proceed—not rushing to legislate on something that may or may not be a problem and could no doubt be the subject of different interpretation. I welcome the minister’s commitment on that today. The bill is about tackling a specific matter and doing the right thing by owner-occupier crofters, affording them the status and decrofting rights that I am sure that everyone who was involved in the 2010 act thought had been delivered. It is imperative that that is done as quickly as possible. Let us not forget that the lives of 44 people and their families are at least to some extent on hold.

We are all driven by the need to address the problem as quickly as possible and allow the lives of these 44 crofters to move forward. Will the minister tell us what work the commission is doing to ensure that it is ready to hit the ground running if and when the bill is enacted, so that the 44 crofters can emerge from their current limbo?

Regardless of who deserves the credit, rail is a success story in Scotland, as the minister said. The passenger numbers on ScotRail, which manages 95 per cent of train services in Scotland—more than 750,000 journeys—continue to rise, with a 33 per cent increase in nine years. In 2013, journeys were up 2.6 per cent on 2012. Whether it be to get to work or education or for leisure purposes, more and more Scots are, as the old slogan said, letting the train take the strain. Just as the number of services being provided is rising, so are passenger satisfaction levels high. We must build on that. I will look to the future. I welcome the Government’s commitment, through phase 1 of the high-level output specification, to deliver extra commuter services through a programme that runs until 2019. From a perhaps more parochial perspective, I welcome even more warmly proposals that are being looked at for control period 5, which is 2014 to 2019, and control period 6, which is 2019 to 2024, which would have a direct impact on my constituency. I understand that a number of track and signalling works are being considered for control period 5 that would improve capacity between Aberdeen and the central belt. I look forward to the outcome of the feasibility study into that, which I believe is expected to be completed by the end of this year. In control period 6, and the Aberdeen to central belt rail enhancement scheme, we have the prospect of further enhanced signalling and, more significantly, doubling the track section at Usan. That move would have a significant price tag, but rail experts tell us that it could greatly enhance rail provision down the east coast and, of course, through Angus. There has already been welcome investment in rail provision through my constituency. With more to come over the next decade, we are very much on the right track to get more and more Angus residents out of their cars and on to trains. However, we will fully realise the potential of that only with a change in emphasis, which I will come to in a moment. The recently delivered additional weekend services that are benefiting Arbroath and Carnoustie are good news for commuters, as is the fact that Carnoustie now has facilities from which prepaid tickets can be collected. That affords locals the opportunity to make advance, money-saving purchases. I will return to that later. In the past few months, Carnoustie has installed new platform seating. Although the station is in good nick, despite the ravages that sea air can inflict on metalwork, it is in line for the provision of signage, paint works and rebranding later this year. I further welcome the fact that wi-fi will shortly be available on many of the trains serving the Angus route, although, as the minister knows, I have raised with him the issue of Carnoustie being omitted from the first tranche of in-station wi-fi provision. None of the Angus stations may tick the boxes for footfall and time spent in the location, which were criteria for the initial deployment of the provision, but Carnoustie is hosting a Commonwealth games event, which was another criterion. Achieving a transformational change is not just about infrastructure and service delivery. We as service users also have to change how we approach utilising and accessing our railways if we are to derive the full benefit from them. For example, it is surprising that in this day and age, 75 per cent of ScotRail’s custom remains walk up. We buy our food and our white goods and we book our holidays to far-flung places online yet, when it comes to purchasing a ticket for a train, we still wander up to the station and pay top dollar. If we go online, there are not just savings to be made; we can also reserve a seat on many services with a click of a mouse, which ensures that there is no need to make the journey standing up.

That is a valid point. The savings can be significant. I know from experience that booking online can save up to 13 per cent on the cost of a standard return from Angus to Parliament. A recent journey to and from Parliament that involved a detour via Glasgow—interestingly, for a meeting with a rail service provider—cost 25 per cent less than I would have paid on the day. Unlike Stewart Stevenson, I do not possess a senior citizen railcard. According to ScotRail, by booking a specified Aberdeen to Edinburgh train—on or off-peak—in advance, people can save up to £36.90 on the walk-up-and-go fare. Of course, not everyone has access to the internet, but most do, so why would we not act in a way that is beneficial to the pocket and helps rail providers to better gauge just how many carriages might be required on particularly popular services? More important, we need to strike a balance in what we demand of our rail services. We are all guilty of casting our eyes down the timetable to see just how long it will take us to get from our starting point to our intended destination. As we as a society strive to behave in an increasingly environmentally responsible manner, what is rail transportation meant to deliver? Is it only to get us from point A to point B as quickly as possible, or is it to get as many people on board as possible and so reduce the use of private vehicles? If it is the latter, fitting in as many stops as possible along the route or linking in more services—without creating havoc with the timetable—must surely be an increasingly important consideration. I accept that there is a balance to be struck. However, outwith the central belt, we will get more people on the trains only if the trains stop locally or if the connections are in place to take passengers into central points for city-to-city transfers. To be fair, that seems to be the direction of travel that we are on. People who live in Arbroath or Carnoustie in my constituency have good access to rail services. However, just two trains a day stop in Monifieth—and only on weekdays. I hope that the positive dialogue that I have been involved in with ScotRail will lead, before long, to an improvement in that situation, and I commend all those who are engaged in the process for the solution-seeking approach that has been adopted. However, the Monifieth case highlights the need to transform our thinking about rail—to tolerate sometimes slightly extended journey times because there is more traffic on the rails, linking in small towns, or because more stops are being made to ensure that more of our fellow citizens can get on the train and in so doing reduce Scotland’s carbon footprint.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact has been of the 85 per cent funding floor for local authorities. (S4O-02167)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given the financial pressures that the Scottish Government faces—not the least of which is the unprecedented budget cuts from Westminster—any reasonable person would recognise that it has provided a fair settlement to local government?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it is giving local authorities to improve access to affordable housing. (S4O-02123)

Angus Council, working in partnership with the Scottish Government, is in the midst of delivering a programme of additional affordable housing across the county that, once completed in 2015, will result in the provision of around 200 properties. The council will provide just over £18 million towards the cost and the Government will provide approaching £5.5 million. Will the minister confirm that the Government will continue to engage with Angus Council and the RSLs to enhance affordable housing in Angus?

The introduction of the word “coordinated” to this section of the bill would potentially complicate matters, rather than simplify them. By definition, a farm management agreement requires co-operation and the adoption of a degree of practical, sensible, joined-up working practices that also take into account the requirements of retail contracts. We must remember that fish farms are there to meet a consumer demand. The word “coordinated” introduces a degree of confusion, for me, particularly in relation to new subsections (4)(b)(iii) and (4)(b)(iv). The amendments have the potential to be problematic in practice, given that they do not specify what “coordinated” would actually mean. What would it mean, for example, in relation to the movement of live fish on and off farms and harvesting? Would the bill prescribe that such actions should be carried out simultaneously across all farms in an FMA—regardless, perhaps, of the temporary circumstances on a farm or, indeed, the contractual obligations to be met—or sequentially? If it is the latter, would that mean actions being delivered at individual farms a week apart or a month apart? I urge members to reject amendments 11, 12 and 13.

As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I very much agreed with the view that it expressed in its stage 1 report on the bill that it wanted “data to be collated for each Farm Management Agreement, and each Farm Management Statement where an Agreement is not in place”, and with its concern that the current lack of accessible data left an important gap in scientific research. At the time, I was also in accord with the view that what was required was access to farm-by-farm data for scientific purposes and that, at the very least, consideration should be given to publishing that data. However, that unanimously agreed position was, to some extent, informed by the lack of a credible argument by the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation against publication of data at a more granular level than the level at which it had offered to publish data, although I recall that, at stage 1, the minister articulated concerns about the possible negative commercial impact of doing that. Since then, we have moved on. Subsequently, the SSPO has engaged more positively, at least by explaining its worries about mischievous and perhaps malicious use of farm-by-farm data. More important, it has demonstrated a willingness to compromise. Norway is held up as an example of somewhere where sea lice data is published without ill effect on the industry, but we should take account of what happened in Ireland when that course was followed. From a position in which it aspired to grow the fish farming sector from an annual production level of 15,000 tonnes to 50,000 tonnes, Ireland found itself in a position in which 14,000 tonnes a year was produced. It was accepted that the use to which sea lice data was put was a contributory factor, although by no means the only one. Initially, the SSPO undertook to voluntarily provide sea lice data for 30 areas rather than the six areas for which it had been providing data, but it is now providing Marine Scotland with data for 76 FMAs. Although that data will not be published, it will be available for research purposes. I contend that that represents progress. I support that position, because it represents a balanced, proportionate step forward. Given where we are now, it is a sensible compromise. Data are to be published at a 30-area level, providing a degree of transparency that offers reassurance to the public and access to information that can be utilised to better direct the science. As I understand it, the situation can be kept under review through the ministerial group on aquaculture. The Scottish Government has the power under the 2007 act to legislate if the voluntary approach is not working. That is a fair and balanced approach, which sends the message that we are treating the sea lice issue seriously while being supportive of an industry that employs around 6,000 people, directly and indirectly. I encourage the Parliament to endorse that approach.

I admit that, in swotting up on Dads Rock ahead of the debate, I had slight pangs of jealousy. I would not have minded being part of such an initiative when my children were younger. When my oldest was of pre-school age, my wife took her along to a mother and toddler group, the title of which indicated the extent to which fathers were welcome to participate. More recently—albeit 14 years ago—when my son started attending pre-school nursery, I recall feeling slightly uncomfortable when I took my turn at getting him there and prepared for the class, as there were not many other dads around. Back then, where we lived, there was nothing aimed at dads and kids or that offered the kind of organised activities for dads and their offspring that Dads Rock does. I do not pretend to be an expert on how times might have changed generally in that regard, but a recent constituency engagement left me thinking that the answer is perhaps not as much as we would like. A few weeks ago, I attended a bookbug session at Arbroath library. The sessions are aimed at under-fives, with parents or carers invited to bring children along for songs, rhymes, puppets and movement. That was a toddlers class, admittedly, but out of the 20 or so children there, not one was accompanied by their father or even a grandfather. It is great to learn about an organisation such as Dads Rock, which exists to nurture the relationship between kids and dads—especially as the emphasis seems to be on a variety of activities. I give credit to my colleague Gordon MacDonald for securing this debate to highlight the organisation’s work. What Dads Rock achieves is perhaps best summed up by a newspaper article, in which Filip Stephen, one of a number of Polish fathers who attends, spoke about what it provided for him and his three-year-old daughter Tessia: “We bonded better than before. It has improved the daughter-father relationship … because I’m a working father it’s only us for a few hours.” There are families in which the extent of the engagement between dads and their kids is very limited. In some cases, it is restricted to the children being brainwashed from a very early age into following the football team that their father supports and getting dragged along, week in, week out, for what some people might say amounts to an exercise in child cruelty. I sentenced my son to a lifetime of embarrassment and misery by raising him as an Aberdeen fan. There is more to quality time between dads and their kids as they get older than going to the football, playing golf or going to the pictures, as the Dads Rock activity programme and the organisation’s ambitions demonstrate. I was interested to note that Dads Rock’s first outing of 2013 was to the national museum of Scotland. I have visited the museum with my kids, and we had a ball. Judging by the pics on the Dads Rock website, so did the 30 kids and 25 dads who took part. I have one question for the representatives of the organisation who are in the public gallery. Could someone explain what was behind one of the dads sporting a Red Indian chief’s headdress throughout the day? I know that the members of Dads Rock are into music but, as there was no sign of a motorcycle cop, a construction worker or a cowboy, I assume that the visit was not Village People themed. Dads Rock appears to have had a pretty successful 2012, with 48 sessions delivered that, all told, were attended by 80 dads and 90 youngsters. The year culminated in a highly successful first ever Christmas party, which it seems even mums and grandparents were allowed to attend. The group seems to be going onwards and upwards, given that more than 150 dads are now involved and its recent first birthday celebrations were followed by the securing of charitable status. There are plans in the pipeline to expand the group not only into Fife next month but, further down the line, into the Strathclyde area. For 2013, there will be visits to Edinburgh butterfly and insect world, the Scottish Seabird Centre and the BBC at the Edinburgh festival, but what really caught my eye was the plan to launch Dads Rock academy later this year. Gordon MacDonald referred to that. I understand that the academy will offer free weekly music tuition to kids—aged from five all the way up to 16—and their dads. That should be great fun, but I offer a word of warning to the dads. Six years or so ago, I thought that it would be a blast to join my son in learning to play electric guitar, but I quickly discovered that he had a natural aptitude that he had not inherited from me. I also discovered that teenagers lack any kind of tact or diplomacy in handling situations where they should let their parents down gently. Once again, I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on securing the debate and I wish Dads Rock every success in its future endeavours.

As I have noted before in the chamber, prior to being elected as an MSP, I spent some 30 years in the field of journalism and, despite the battering that the profession’s reputation has taken over the events that led to Lord Justice Leveson’s inquiry, I remain proud to say that I did so. Throughout my time in journalism, I was privileged to work with many fine journalists on a national and local level—people of integrity, who were committed to doing the job to the best of their abilities and within the code of conduct. Despite the ravages that have been visited on the print sector by the cost-cutting agenda of proprietors in response to falling circulations and advertising revenues and the devastating impact that that has had on morale in some instances, many of those individuals remain in the profession, still seeking to maintain those standards and that commitment. I will focus my contribution to this important debate on where affording protection to rank-and-file journalists fits into better regulation of the press, because if we want a more responsible press, we must bring forward a system of regulation that takes account of the experiences of not only the victims of phone hacking and media harassment but of those responsible for news output in this country and which seeks to better protect both, because their interests are undoubtedly linked. We need to come up with a system of regulation that, by virtue of its strength, affords journalists protection from editors and proprietors who, in their desperation to stem the financial tide, are happy for corners to be cut or who create a working environment in which reporters feel that they have to cut corners in order to meet the demands that are being made of them. Of course, ordinary journalists have been caught up in the appalling behaviour that has led us to this point and, where they were guilty of being willing participants in that, they should face the appropriate consequences. However, there are journalists operating in the print media who are coming under enormous pressure to behave in a manner that most decent people—including them—would find wrong. Do not just take my word for it: from within well-known newspaper titles, via the National Union of Journalists, come claims of reporters being bullied into writing anti-Muslim stories, with one female journalist walking out of her job rather than continue to manufacture copy under duress. Another hack was told to “make stories as right wing as you can” and peddle the line that “Britain is being flooded by asylum-seeking bummers.” The NUJ also has a member who felt that he had no option but to walk away from his job after his editor completely changed a balanced piece that he had written on a trade union leader during industrial action, access to whom he had secured only after giving an undertaking on the angle that would be taken. Ahead of appearing before Leveson, the NUJ’s general secretary, Michelle Stanistreet, sought evidence from her membership on the practices that were in place across the industry. In all, 40 submissions were received. According to the NUJ, the vast majority of the individuals concerned felt the need to ask for anonymity for fear of dismissal, career blight or future victimisation. Lord Leveson, reflecting on what he heard at the inquiry, commented: “I was struck by the evidence of journalists who felt that they might be put under pressure to do things that were unethical or against the code. I therefore suggest that the new independent self-regulatory body should establish a whistle-blowing hotline and encourage its members to ensure that journalists’ contracts include a conscience clause protecting them if they refuse.” As Michelle Stanistreet put it: “Journalists should always have the right to refuse assignments that contravene their ethical code; no journalists should be disciplined or suffer detriment to their careers for asserting their right to act ethically.” In contrast, the owner of Express Newspapers, Richard Desmond, told Leveson in response to questioning by Robert Jay QC on the subject of ethical journalism: “ethical, I don’t quite know what the word means, but perhaps you'll explain what the word means”. That is why section 8D of the recognition criteria within the proposed royal charter, which states that “A self-regulatory body should establish a whistleblowing hotline for those who feel that they are being asked to do things which are contrary to the standards code”, is so important. The vast majority of the misdemeanours that have been identified in relation to the phone-hacking scandal and other unacceptable practices were perpetrated south of the border, but we have no cause for complacency in Scotland. The newspaper industry north of the border, generally speaking, is not in a good place and journalists’ morale in some parts is extremely low. Although I have been away from the profession for two-and-a-half years, I stay in contact with former colleagues across a number of newspapers and I have heard some concerning things. Among other things, long-standing terms and conditions of employment are being ripped up, with practical as well as significant financial implications for those concerned—all against a backdrop of jobs being cut and those who are fortunate enough to remain having more and more demanded of them. In having to meet those increasing demands—for the daily story count or early submission deadlines—the standards that some have prided themselves on maintaining over many years inevitably suffer. That will manifest itself in a variety of ways—some of them, admittedly, relatively trivial—but if the environment in which some journalists are operating is as stressful as it is, there is inevitably potential for problems to arise. In coming up with a new system of regulation, we surely have to send a message to editors and proprietors who may be placing—albeit perhaps without fully grasping the consequences—pressure on their staff that we are on the side of ordinary journalists as well as of the victims of media misbehaviour and that treating reporters in a way that leads to sharp practice or serious errors being made will rebound on them. I very much welcome the proposal for access to the printing of public information notices, with the associated financial benefits, to be restricted to regulated newspapers, as an incentive for participation in the proposed scheme. However, I wonder whether we should not go a little further and make it clear to proprietors that any newspapers that are found to be repeatedly misbehaving or who are the subject of regular reporting under section 8D could lose their rights in that regard if the claims are substantiated. To have both carrot and stick will, it is hoped, offer enhanced protection to the public and to journalists. In conclusion, I welcome the general consensus on the way forward that has emerged in this Parliament. We urge members to bear in mind that what is ultimately put in place must protect the interests of not just the public but those whose job is to gather and present the content of the papers that the public are buying in sadly, but understandably, decreasing numbers.

Section 1.7 of the document “Shaping Scotland’s Court Services: The Scottish Court Service response to the consultation and recommendations for a future court structure in Scotland” clearly explains the drivers behind the moves that we are debating today. It states: “We need a court structure that in providing access to justice for the people of Scotland does three things: • it needs to reflect the planned reforms to the justice system • it needs to improve the facilities and services for court users • it needs to be affordable in the long term.” That one small section of the document sums up the challenges that are faced by those who seek to plot an appropriate way forward for delivery of justice. Of course, that process must be financially sustainable; we must recognise that the money that is available to the Scottish Court Service has been reduced, and that the cause of that reduction has been the funding cuts that have been afforded by Westminster to the Scottish Government. The process must also be in keeping with the nature of the future justice system and be delivered in appropriate surroundings. Although I agree with all three of the points that were made in the report, as things stand, what is proposed as it relates to my constituency will not entirely get us there. Everyone who takes an interest in the issue must have realistic expectations about what can be delivered within the budgetary constraints with which the Scottish Court Service and the Scottish Government are having to wrestle. However, I want to focus attention on an aspect of closing the court in Arbroath, which raises a concern that the Scottish Court Service has not adequately recognised. There are two courts in Angus and a case has been made for closure of one of them. Originally, it was to be the court in Forfar, but following discussions with the legal profession—I am not saying that they necessarily influenced the decision—there was a change of heart and Arbroath was targeted. However, the fact is that, whichever court closes, some users will face the same potential difficulty in accessing the surviving facility if their only means of doing so is public transport. I will return to that later in my speech. In the meantime, for the purposes of clarity it should be acknowledged that, whatever the perceived rights and wrongs of the decision to close the Arbroath court, no local campaign has been mounted to oppose the proposal. I speak as a constituency MSP who, since August of last year and before the launch of the formal consultation, has been very much involved in the issue. Along with my colleagues Nigel Don MSP and Mike Weir MP, I met the Society of Procurators and Solicitors of Angus on two separate occasions. I engaged directly with the SCS on behalf of the society to secure information that the society required in order to form a view on the matter. I also held discussions with Tayside Police on the possible impact on local policing if one of the county’s courts was to shut. I should say that the very limited opposition to the closure proposal that I have encountered has been restricted almost entirely to those with a direct and immediate interest. Even then, the opposition is neither strong nor particularly vocal. For example, in the end the Society of Procurators and Solicitors of Angus did not take a collective view on the matter. The Angus proposals attracted only 20 consultation responses, whereas the average for other location proposals across Scotland was more than double that. So why the lack of clamour to retain a court presence in Arbroath? The simple fact is that the existing court is, from a public, policing and high-street shopkeeping perspective, in the wrong place. I say that not to justify the closure decision. Along with Mike Weir, I am concerned about the difficulties that people living on the coastal strip, which the Arbroath court services, may encounter in getting to Forfar if they have to depend on public transport. I also recognise that the proposal may involve an economic downside for Arbroath’s High Street, albeit that owing to particular local circumstances, that may be more than mitigated by improved shopper footfall. I say that simply as a statement of fact. Court provision in Arbroath is in a cramped building that offers no room for expansion. The vehicles that transport prisoners to and from court need to draw up and park on the High Street. Groups of friends and relatives of accused persons loiter outside the building ahead of business taking place. As a result, local shopkeepers are left feeling that their businesses suffer a negative impact from having an undesirable element hanging about the area and older folk avoid going to the High Street post office because they are intimidated by that presence. Following the intervention of the local MSP, the police have had to deploy additional resources in the vicinity of the court to help to address those issues. In an ideal world, it would be great if we in Arbroath could be provided with a new fit-for-purpose court facility whose location did not impact negatively on sections of society or impinge on the police’s ability to go about their general work, but we live in a far-from-ideal world. The Scottish Government’s budget has been slashed and there are inevitable consequences from that—

I will not, if Alex Johnstone does not mind. I want to make some points. Those who are charged with delivering justice in the future also believe that the process will be best served by taking a different direction, and I think that we need to respect that opinion. That said, I want to highlight to the Justice Committee and to the cabinet secretary the issue of ready access and the accompanying potential issues that could emanate from closure of an Angus court. I do so in the hope that the issues can be woven into the committee’s consideration of the proposals. In its response to the consultation, the SCS document states that the number of people across Scotland who, due to additional travel and inconvenience, will be directly affected by court closures will be “very small”. I accept that. However, I take issue with the comment in paragraph 8.9, which states: “People resident in Arbroath commute more frequently to the larger population centres to access other services, including specialist medical services, and as for most people a visit to their sheriff court is a relatively rare event, we consider the journey from Arbroath to Forfar to be a reasonable undertaking.” Well, there are three ready means of getting to and from Dundee: private car, the bus and the train. For specialist medical services, there is a direct bus service from Arbroath to Ninewells hospital. However, the options for travelling between Arbroath and Forfar are restricted to car and a limited direct bus service. Those who live further down the coastal strip in Carnoustie or Monifieth, which are also served by the Arbroath court, have little or no direct public transport provision to Forfar. In that regard, the SCS needs to give real thought to how it can mitigate the impact of closure of the Arbroath court, if that goes ahead. For example, when it is scheduling cases involving individuals from the coastal strip, will the SCS take account of what public transport provision exists and the timing of its availability? I further hope that, in its consideration of the proposals, the Justice Committee will be able to secure from the SCS an understanding of what thought has been given to avoiding the—albeit that it is probably rare—occurrence of the accused, the alleged victim and the various witnesses journeying to proceedings in the same rural bus, given the potential difficulties that that might present. I certainly hope that I will have an opportunity to raise those points directly with the SCS.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the continuing use of neonicotinoids. (S4O-01977)

It is, of course, essential that any decision on the future use of neonicotinoids should be based on sound scientific evidence. Is the minister aware of the research carried out by the University of Dundee that suggested that neonicotinoids interfere with the brains of bees and that there is a striking and concerning difference between honey bee survival rates in the east of Scotland and those in the west of Scotland? Does he accept that it is becoming evident that there is a need to act to protect bee populations not only from a biodiversity perspective but to safeguard Scotland’s hugely important soft fruit sector?

It is interesting to compare and contrast the nature of and approach to the scrutiny of RPP2 and RPP1. Two years ago, RPP1 was considered by a lead committee—the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee—and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee provided a report that was appended to the TICC Committee’s report. The process involved just one cabinet secretary being questioned and only four stakeholder sessions were held. The chamber debate ran to only a little over 90 minutes. The delegated but co-ordinated scrutiny of RPP2 has undoubtedly made for a more forensic process. Each of the four committees focused on particular areas of responsibility to produce specific individual reports, although, as we have heard, some common themes run through them. Such scrutiny can only have been to the benefit of the process of consideration, as have been the level of stakeholder input and the extent to which ministers and cabinet secretaries have been questioned. I doubt that many relevant or appropriate organisations or interest groups could claim to have been denied their say. The views of many of those organisations and groups are reflected in the reports. In addition to the written submissions that it received, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee held three round-table sessions, followed by separate question sessions with the minister and then the cabinet secretary. That was replicated across the other committees. In the time leading up to the debate, some 30 per cent of MSPs eligible to serve on parliamentary committees have been involved directly in scrutinising RPP2. All told, half a dozen cabinet secretaries and ministers were questioned. Despite the challenging nature of the timeframe allowed to committees to carry out their work, I suggest that the extent of scrutiny, the nature of the four reports and what we have heard in the course of the debate testifies to not only the way in which this institution is maturing and growing, but the importance that this Parliament places on delivering its world-leading climate change legislation. There are those who have sought—for whatever reason—to assert that the committees of this Parliament do not hold the Government to account. I do not think that any reasonable person who has witnessed the committees in action—and certainly the committee that I serve on—read the reports or tuned into the debate would concur with that view. Given the sometimes critical—albeit largely constructively critical—nature of the reports, I doubt that the Government would, either. I will begin to draw my remarks to a conclusion by highlighting, as others have, the important issue of behavioural change. In evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, James Curran, the chief executive of SEPA, said of meeting our climate change targets: “This is Scotland’s challenge—it is a challenge to each and every one of us to contribute what we can”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 6 February 2013; c 1710.] He is right. As far as rising to that challenge is concerned, there is no free pass for us MSPs. It is not sufficient for us to sit in this place and pass legislation aimed at tackling climate change; we must live up to the demands created by that legislation ourselves. As a nation, we will only get where we need to get on emissions reduction by partnership working across Government—national and local—the private sector and NGOs, as Claudia Beamish noted. Just as important, we also need to change our individual behaviour where it impacts on the environment. The Government must provide leadership, but it falls to every one of us to behave in a more environmentally responsible way. Small and simple changes, if they are widely practised, can make a contribution that matters. Therefore, before we head off for the recess in 48 hours’ time, will we ensure, for example, that all the appliances in our offices are switched off and are not left on standby; that none of our bins contains recyclable material; and that we will make the journey back to our constituencies on foot, by bicycle or public transport or, indeed, by car sharing? Will we continue in that vein going forward? The clear message from the debate has been that the Parliament is absolutely committed to living up to the ground-breaking climate change legislation that it passed in 2009 and that it will demand that the Government does everything possible to make that happen. That is as it should be. On behalf of the four committees that have been involved in scrutinising RPP2, I welcome the commitment that the minister has given to address some of the points that are raised in our reports, and I reiterate that we are all looking forward to a clearer and more robust final document emerging from the process of which this debate forms an important part.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what importance it places on the delivery of health services in rural locations. (S4O-01926)

The residents of Letham in my constituency have been pressing for general practitioner provision in the village since early 2011. A Forfar-based practice has confirmed its willingness to set up a satellite operation and the Angus community health partnership is to progress a business plan. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will understand the frustration that is felt locally that after two years still nothing definitive has happened. Will he join me in encouraging NHS Tayside to treat this now as a matter of urgency?

The county of Angus is very much at the centre of Scotland’s flourishing food industry, from soft fruit to smokies to popular preserves. The part of the country that I am fortunate to represent contributes in good measure to that success story. However, in keeping with the Scottish Government’s ambitions, there will be no resting on laurels—the plan is to do even better, whatever challenges might arise. Angus has a longstanding reputation in traditional forms of agriculture, but increasingly in recent years it has come to the fore as the focal point of Scotland’s burgeoning soft-fruit sector. At the heart of that lies the Angus Growers organisation, which has 18 members growing about 1,000 acres of strawberries, raspberries, blackberries and blueberries. Recently, it began planting cherry trees, which will begin to bear fruit in a couple of years. Although based in Arbroath, the organisation has members in Aberdeenshire, Perthshire and Fife as well as Angus. It has involvement from Oldmeldrum down to Crail and west to Blairgowrie. The growers have more than 200 people working for them all year round and up to 2,000 seasonal workers between March and November. All told, they sell over £30 million of fruit a year, all packed into punnets ready for sale locally on the farms themselves or through five major UK supermarkets through their marketing agent Angus Soft Fruits, another Angus-farmer-owned business. Angus Growers members are very much at the forefront of research and plant breeding, having developed their own new premium variety of strawberry, the Ava Rosa, which is being introduced to the market in commercial quantities this year. They also work closely with the James Hutton Institute on research in looking to ensure that Scotland’s soft fruit sector continues to progress in the most appropriate way. They have for example developed the Good Natured Fruit brand, producing and selling pesticide and residue-free fruit that is grown on the farms using biological control of pest and disease techniques that have been developed in house. They have done that principally because it is the right thing to do for the environment, but the other driver is need, given the declining bee populations, which Alison Johnstone touched on earlier. To maintain pollination, Angus Growers members are actively planting suitable habitats around polytunnels that will encourage bees to remain in the area and breed. They are asking local beekeepers to bring in their hives and they are buying in bees. Without bees, growers suffer not only a reduced yield but unevenly shaped berries. The soft fruit sector is on the case but, at the same time, it is—understandably—taking a keen interest in developments such as possible EU restrictions on the use of neonicotinoids and how the Government will respond to that. As I have suggested, the leading part that Arbroath is playing in the growth of Scotland’s soft fruit industry is perhaps not as widely recognised or appreciated as it might be, although I know that the cabinet secretary very much understands the situation, as he has visited the set-up in Arbroath. Another contribution from the town of Arbroath to Scotland’s food industry that is perhaps not fully understood comes from preserves. How many members are aware that the well-known Mrs Bridges line is manufactured in Arbroath by Mackays? Mackays makes jams and marmalades using traditional copper pans that are sourced from Dundee. The strawberries, raspberries and blackberries that are used in its products come from farms in Angus, Perthshire and Fife. Products that sport the traditional Mackays tartan brand are to be found in three supermarket chains in the UK and five chains in Scotland.

I must tell Bruce Crawford that I am being entirely parochial, and Forfar is not in my constituency. Beyond these islands, Mackays exports preserves to 50 countries worldwide. Of course, from our neck of the woods comes perhaps the most renowned foodstuff of Angus—the smokie. It is generally referred to as the Arbroath smokie, but it actually hails from the nearby coastal village of Auchmithie, which is about 3 miles north of the town. Local legend has it that the smokie came about because of a fire in a store one night, which destroyed barrels of haddock that was preserved in salt. The following morning, the locals came to clean up the ruin and discovered that haddock that had cooked inside the burned barrels was not only edible but quite tasty. That might be a romanticised version of how the smokie came about, but I prefer that version. Arbroath’s connection with the smokie comes from the end of the 19th century, when the local fishing industry was in terminal decline. Arbroath town council offered the fisher folk of Auchmithie land in an area of the town that was known as the fit o the toon and the use of the harbour. The offer was too good to turn down and, all these years on, a number of businesses that are located around the harbour are producing Arbroath smokies and making them widely available through major supermarkets in the UK and worldwide via the internet. Since 2004, the smokie has enjoyed protected status. I recognise entirely that I could be accused of making a largely parochial contribution to the debate, but I hope that I will not be the last member to highlight the role that their area plays in the success story that is Scotland’s food and drink industry. The industry is as nationwide as it is wide ranging in nature. From almost every corner of our country comes a contribution. From the Parliament should come the message today that we welcome and will continue to support those contributions. The horsemeat scandal has focused attention on food and served to remind us all of the importance of having the appropriate safeguards in place, but we should not for one minute lose sight of one simple fact—when it comes to food and drink, the made in Scotland branding is respected the world over, and with good reason. I conclude by highlighting the work of the Royal Highland Education Trust. The cabinet secretary mentioned the importance of educating young people about healthy food and where food comes from. In Angus and across Scotland, the RHET does fantastic work on that. I hope that members will join me in congratulating it on that.

One of the very few positive aspects of yesterday’s announcement was that 45 Commando Royal Marines will stay at RM Condor for the foreseeable future, which is welcome news for the marines who have put down roots in the area, not to mention the local economy. My constituency is also home to Barry Buddon. Does the minister agree that, given the training facility’s close proximity to Condor and Leuchars, it is logical and appropriate that full use be made of it?

As Alex Fergusson and Angus MacDonald have said, it would be impossible to cover every aspect of the bill and the stage 1 report in six minutes, so I will confine myself to addressing two aspects, in particular the most contentious one, which is the publication of sea lice data. That topic has been the cause of considerable discussion and will continue to be so. As the minister has confirmed today, the Scottish Government is minded to continue the voluntary approach, accepting a commitment from the SSPO to move to publishing data online, with a time lag, on a 30-area basis. The committee heard evidence that, in Ireland, there has for some time been access to such information on a farm-by-farm basis, and that it has been made public within a month of monitoring being carried out. I found myself asking why we should not do that in Scotland, especially when—as I understand it; the minister might clarify this later—the data is recorded on that basis and is available to the fish health inspectorate on request. I found the resistance of the SSPO to that level of granularity to be poorly explained. Its input to the debate on the issue did not come close to neutralising the contribution of Douglas Sinclair of SEPA, who said that this is “one of the few areas in the Scottish environment in which someone can be doing something that can significantly impact on someone else‘s interests and there is no public access to what is going on ... if someone lives downwind of smoking chimneys on a factory and they want to find out what is in the smoke, they can find out from us—from the published record. Fish farming in Scotland is the one omission. For all sorts of reasons, it ought to be sorted out and the information ought to be published.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 5 December 2012; c 1431.] However, when Paul Wheelhouse made a case for the industry’s position, he revealed that there was more to it than simple intransigence. He explained that there was substance behind talk of commercial sensitivity and that there is a genuinely held and perhaps justified concern that retail contracts that are placed with firms on multiple farms might be jeopardised if it became public knowledge that one of the locations had a significant sea lice issue. There is no easy solution to the issue, or one that will satisfy everyone. The committee believes unanimously that greater transparency is required in the aquaculture industry, although we recognise that that could threaten reputational damage for companies and potential difficulty for the marketability of an important food product and employment in rural areas in an industry that is reckoned to employ, directly or indirectly, up to 6,000 people.

I do, indeed. The recommendation in our report that the ministerial group on aquaculture look closely at the possibility of data being collated and published with a built-in delay on the basis of a farm management agreement or farm management statement struck us as a reasonable compromise. However, the matter will undoubtedly be returned to if the bill reaches stage 2. In his response to the committee’s report, the minister defended the 30-areas approach, describing it as striking “an appropriate balance between public reassurance and commercial interests at this time.” He added that, although he regarded the new set-up as moving things “forward in a balanced and proportionate way,” he would “keep the matter under close review.” To shed further light on the matter, could he clarify in his closing remarks whether figures reported for the 30 areas would be subject to independent verification? I turn now to salmon netting and in particular its management. The committee heard of the conflict that can arise between the netting interests and district fisheries boards. We were made aware in evidence of the desire of some to see coastal netting removed from the management of local fisheries and placed under the control of the inshore fisheries team. Further, we heard suggestions for introducing a days-at-sea regime rather than the current weekly close time arrangements. However, as the convener indicated earlier in the debate, the committee was not persuaded that either way was necessarily the correct path to tread. The obvious question is how in practice a changed set-up could be monitored. In addition, members heard nothing to suggest that the conflict between netsmen and boards is so widespread as to justify the suggested moves. That said, no one doubts the difficulties and, indeed, dangers that netsmen can face in plying their trade, so it is welcome that the Scottish Government will look at the whole issue as part of its review of wild fisheries management. Like Alex Fergusson and others, I express gratitude to the SPICe team and the committee clerks for the support afforded members in scrutinising the bill and producing the report. As noted on page 1 of the report and as mentioned by other speakers, the process of arriving at conclusions on the bill’s proposals was not helped by the adversarial engagement of some of those holding an interest in the subject matter, who felt it appropriate to launch excessive levels of counterclaim evidence. The evidence that was gathered in the committee rooms of the Parliament and out in the field furnished members with a balanced and objective knowledge base on which to reach conclusions. However, the committee continued to receive, by way of follow-on from stakeholder sessions, many responses that did not add to the sum of knowledge on the issue and which, in some instances, merely comprised an attempt to discredit alternative viewpoints. In spite of that, the committee produced a stage 1 report that we feel appropriately reflects the situation out there and identifies areas of the bill that could undoubtedly be improved by amendment. I seek members’ support for the stage 1 report on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill and for the broad principles of the bill.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on ensuring that three and four-year-olds have access to 600 hours of nursery education per year. (S4O-01831)

The Scottish Government’s proposals are generating quite a lot of interest in my constituency. Would the minister be willing to come to Angus South to meet nursery practitioners and parents to discuss this important issue? Will she join me in congratulating everyone who is involved in the nursery class at Northmuir primary school in Kirriemuir, which received so glowing a report from Education Scotland that it is to be held up as an example to other schools across Scotland?

Moving forward, how will the Scottish Government seek to ensure that action is taken to address areas for improvement that are identified in any HIS inspection report?

Chic Brodie’s timing in securing the debate could hardly have been better. As well as coinciding with the 100th anniversary of the death of Sir William Arrol, it comes just 24 hours after the Parliament hosted an event to celebrate the importance of Scotland’s built heritage. I was delighted to sponsor—on behalf of Scottish Land and Estates and the Historic Houses Association Scotland—last night’s gathering, which celebrated the role that our privately owned houses, castles and gardens fulfil in local communities. Those who were present heard of the important part that historic houses play not only in the tourism sector, but in the running of educational and sustainability programmes—87 HHAS members have implemented renewable energy programmes, and a further 92 are planning to embark on such programmes. That is as it should be. After all, our grand historic buildings ought to be at the heart of our communities. In my constituency lies Glamis castle, which is not only a place of great history and status but a focal point for the people of Angus and beyond. It hosts musical, theatrical and historical events, not to mention the Strathmore highland games, the vehicle extravaganza and the gathering, which after showcasing each of the Angus burghs last year as part of the diamond jubilee celebrations is to be held again this year, albeit without the royal connotations. Coming from an area that very much appreciates its built heritage, I am concerned by Seafield house’s situation and congratulate my colleague Chic Brodie on highlighting its plight. Like so many great buildings, Seafield house has served its community well as an auxiliary hospital for wounded soldiers, a maternity hospital and a sick kids unit before becoming Ayrshire and Arran Health Board’s headquarters. It is a tragedy that following the fire of 2008 it lies in its current state, not least because we would surely want some monument to Sir William Arrol, even if, having served as a Liberal MP, he might—as Chic Brodie suggested—have been a little misguided politically. Upon Sir William Arrol’s death in 1913, the provost of Ayr said of him—and I believe that this is the full quotation— “Scotland has lost one of her most distinguished sons whose memory will be cherished as that of one of the greatest, most modest, most lovable of men.” Should we not, as the friends of Seafield house are seeking, be cherishing his home? The Tay and Forth bridges stand as testament to Arrol’s impact on Scotland and, in another land, the magnificent London Tower bridge bears testimony to the fact that his contribution to the built world extended beyond the borders of our nation. The B-listed Seafield house is as much part of his life and legacy as those wonderful constructions. Having acquired the estate in the midst of building the Tay and Forth bridges, Arrol promptly knocked down the house that was already on the site and commissioned the building of Seafield house as we know it. Of course, Sir William did more than commission it. Although the Glasgow architects Clarke and Bell were appointed to design the house, its general features were reputedly designed by the great man himself. It is also reputed to have contained a magnificent library and an extensive art collection as well as providing a first-class setting for musical events. That is all a distant memory, but the shell of the building remains and I offer my best wishes to the friends of Seafield house and their ambitions to restore and make some appropriate use of the building. We must value and protect our built heritage. Indeed, I was vividly reminded of that last Friday when I returned to my home city of Aberdeen. Heading northwards over Anderson Drive—something I am sad to say I do not do very much these days—I realised that I would have the pleasure of viewing the magnificent granite houses in the Rubislaw den and Queen’s Road area. However, I had forgotten that halfway up the hill stands a quite monstrous flatted development that in my view is completely out of place in those surroundings. There is something quite distressing about a beautiful part of a city or town being spoiled by the whims of modern-day planners and builders, and something even more distressing about the loss of wonderful old buildings that need not have been lost. In restoring and maintaining such constructions, we are also preserving and protecting the skills base required to carry out that work in years to come. In that regard, I praise Historic Scotland’s continued commitment to providing modern apprenticeships in stonemasonry. I again congratulate Chic Brodie on bringing this matter to the Parliament’s attention and wish those working to secure a future for Seafield house the very best of fortune.

I have never personally been a victim of a high-hedges dispute as defined by the proposed legislation. However, I have enormous sympathy with the aim of tackling the issue and with those who find themselves on the wrong end of such situations because, for a number of years, I had to contend with a nearly high hedge that bounded part of my property. I say “nearly high hedge” because the offending structure reached a maximum height of 5ft and, much as it annoyed me, could not be described as forming a barrier to light. The issue was more that it was a thick hedge rather than a high hedge. It had been planted many years earlier by a previous neighbour inadvisably close to the boundary, which meant that getting in and out of vehicles that were parked in our driveway became a problem, owing to an at times 18-inch incursion on to our property. In my case, a resolution was arrived at only with the sale of the neighbouring property and the arrival of a new owner, who helpfully hauled out the source of our irritation. Therefore, when I say that I welcome the bill, I really do welcome it, even if it will not necessarily assist someone who finds themselves in the same position as I did. Some people outside the chamber might question our parliamentary priorities in introducing proposed legislation on the subject. However, I congratulate my colleague Mark McDonald on introducing the bill, because it gives deserved respect to people whose quality of life has been impacted on by the selfishness of others. That said, I support entirely the safeguard that is built into the bill that requires applicants for a high-hedge notice to have taken “all reasonable steps” to resolve the issue before they make an application to the local authority and that enables councils to reject applications if such steps have not been taken. People who have never been involved in a high-hedge dispute might not understand how acrimonious such fall-outs can be and how entrenched the positions of the warring factions can become. In legislating on the matter, we must recognise that, whatever the initial rights and wrongs, the victim might ultimately have become almost as unreasonable in their behaviour as the high-hedge owner. I accept the logic behind excluding single trees from the scope of the bill, as the bill is about high hedges and it is right that the views of the Scottish Wildlife Trust, the RSPB and the Woodland Trust should inform the direction that we take, because we must not act in a way that has the potential to compromise wildlife and biodiversity. Any deliberations on whether it would be right to broaden the proposed definition of a high hedge should also be informed by the view of Eric Hamilton, who is a forestry officer with Dundee City Council. He stated that including “any trees of any type ... would lead to tremendous problems.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 12 December 2012; c 1522.] All of that said, I welcome the consensus that has developed on having a mechanism in the bill for review within five years, so that we can determine whether, given the experience of application, we have in fact got the legislation right. I note the prediction that more than 90 per cent of disputes will be settled without local authorities being actively involved, simply because the legislation exists. We may encounter far fewer cases of wide hedges also. It is a fact that many such situations do not have their roots in a deliberate act. People do not, by and large, plant bushes as close as they have done to boundaries or boundary fences in order to create a problem. Invariably, it is a thoughtless act that is based only on a desire to avoid a seeming waste of garden space at the time of planting. They will not have thought about 10 or 20 years hence, when that wee bush will have completely taken over a boundary, much to the upset of a neighbour. Hopefully, the passing of the bill will bring into focus every aspect of hedge planting and maintenance and will even help to alleviate that wide hedge issue, which it is not designed to address. For those reasons and for all the other reasons that have been articulated in the debate, I encourage colleagues to agree to the general principles of the bill.

Whatever the extent of underreporting, the number of serious doorstep crime incidents linked to cold calling that are drawn to the attention of the police and trading standards services has grown significantly over the past few years. All too often, rogue cold callers target the most vulnerable members of our society, particularly the elderly. Incidents involving older people losing thousands and thousands of pounds emerge with worrying frequency. Unfortunately, the response and support of enforcement agencies have not kept pace with the skills, organisation and shamelessness of the criminals involved or the changing nature of cold calling-related misbehaviour. We surely must consider how to address that. Despite various education and awareness programmes being established by trading standards services, there remains a lack of grasp of the dangers that cold callers can bring. In a national survey by the Trading Standards Institute, only 13 per cent of people reported asking for identification from cold callers and only 1.3 per cent checked out those IDs. Similarly, the use of door chains was disappointingly low, with only 39 per cent of households having fitted one and only 6 per cent ever using them. Those statistics make it clear that a great deal more needs to be done. As the TSI believes, an outright prohibition of cold calling for property maintenance, upgrading or repair has surely become worthy of consideration. Despite the campaigns, some of our most vulnerable fellow Scots continue to be open to the risk of falling victim to unscrupulous or outright criminal traders. Often, people are worn down by repeated and sustained targeting over a long time. One example provided by trading standards officers from my area concerned a man in his 80s who was widowed and living alone. He was visited by itinerant traders over a two-month period in late 2011. They sought to persuade him to have the communal track to his property resurfaced—an action that would have required the agreement of, and a financial contribution from, all parties with an interest in the track. After a brief respite over Christmas, the visits and the pressurising recommenced until, eventually, having been offered a so-called discount rate of £1,640—down from £2,600—he gave in. Some six weeks after the commissioned work was carried out, the trader’s son convinced the gentleman that he needed to spend another £650 to repair the surface further. For the grand total of £2,290, all that was done was the filling in of a few potholes and a degree of general improvement work that was independently assessed as being insufficient to last beyond the very short term. A different, more general example of scandalous exploitation of the vulnerable from my part of the country involves a very elderly consumer who had been persuaded to sign up to £10,000 worth of solar panels, paying a £1,000 deposit following a cold call. When his carer realised what he had done, they contacted the company seeking to get him out of the contract. Initially, the firm concerned agreed, before then claiming that he would be in breach of contract. The trading standards service was called in, and officers immediately realised that the gentleman had problems with his memory. In fact, they determined that he was suffering from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. They pursued the company, pointing out that the gentleman did not have the capacity to enter into an agreement. Eventually, the deposit was refunded and the contract was cancelled. However, what would have happened if trading standards officers had not become involved in the case? That example may not sit entirely within the parameters that Dave Thompson envisages, but I highlight it because it raises the question: if the regulated market is prepared to exploit the clearly vulnerable in that way, what restraint can we expect the rogues to show? In cases of wilful exploitation, prosecution is of course extremely difficult. The unscrupulous choose their victims carefully: they target those who would be incapable of being convincing witnesses in any court, if those involved were caught and a case went to court. That is why, in the instances that the motion highlights, we need to offer additional consumer protection that goes beyond the established or conventional and which might well need to take the form of prohibiting cold calling. I congratulate my colleague Dave Thompson on lodging the motion. I offer my support not only to it but to the work of trading standards officers the length and breadth of Scotland.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on direct payments being made to farmers.

The UK environment secretary, Owen Paterson, made it clear to the Oxford farming conference earlier this month that he aspires to see an end to pillar 1 support for farmers, with decisions on food production being left to the market. That could have devastating consequences for Scottish agriculture. Does the cabinet secretary agree that Mr Paterson’s concerning comments are further evidence that the future of Scottish farming can be secured only through independence?

It is accepted that if we are to hit our climate change targets, everyone—Government, business and individuals—will have to play a part. How, in practice, will the Government seek to encourage and, ultimately, bring about behavioural change among individuals at home, at work and in their travel choices?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to protect and increase employment in rural areas. (S4O-01710)

An SRDP grant of just £56,000 will allow the Building Workshop—a rurally based architectural company in my constituency that is run by a young husband and wife team—to open its first bespoke office later this year and to double its existing workforce. Will the Scottish Government continue to think smart about how it protects and enhances employment opportunities in rural areas and consider the suggestion by the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee in its draft budget report that we should allow youngsters who are seeking modern apprenticeships in rural skills to work for a range of businesses throughout the term of the apprenticeship so that they might be better placed to obtain year-round employment?

We are told that 55 per cent of children and young people access the internet every day, and that 53 per cent are online for up to two hours daily, so creating a safe environment in which they can do that free from the risk of bullying, or of being targeted by inappropriate adults, is hugely important. Bullying of any kind can be a devastating experience for a child, and anyone who has had or has worked with kids knows just how cruel—often without their entirely realising the pain that their words or actions can cause—they can be to one another. For three years while my son was completing his primary school education, I coached football as a parent helper, and was taken aback by how nasty otherwise decent children could, on occasion, be to each other. Seven years on, with the internet having exploded in the intervening period, we have seen the emergence of cyber-bullying. In a recent parentline survey, almost 19 per cent of parents revealed that their children had suffered some form of cyber-bullying. In a Children 1st survey, 79 per cent of respondents considered cyber-bullying to be an issue and 29 per cent of them revealed that their kids had fallen victim to it. In a survey of 2,500 young people that BeatBullying carried out, 50 per cent of respondents said that they had been cyber-bullied and 11 per cent admitted to being cyber-bullies. There is, undoubtedly, an online bullying issue to address. Sadly, we must also face up to the fact that a threat is posed to youngsters by some unsavoury older people. The scale of that might be hard to quantify, but in some respects the scale is irrelevant. If one child is liable to be under threat from such advances, we have a responsibility to try to stop that. I understand that those who facilitate standard social networking sites are not altogether exercising the level of responsibility that we might expect. Facebook, which is reckoned to be visited by 68 per cent of young internet users, is an example of a social networking site that is extremely easy to join. It does not verify the date of birth that is provided, so a youngster can claim to be in their late teens and gain full access to Facebook and its services. As users can send messages anonymously, the problem of trolling very much exists. I have only a basic understanding of the services that social networking offers, but a friend who is in their mid-20s and who possesses a decent grasp of Facebook tells me that even an individual who is well versed in the service can be caught out in managing privacy arrangements. A short time ago, Facebook initiated changes to its privacy rules that require every user to go to their settings and reset all the restrictions that they had set before. My friend was unaware of that requirement and assumed that their photos, posts, interactions and information would remain accessible to friends only. It turned out that several profile sections, including all photos, were visible to anyone. That highlights how easy it is to access a stranger’s profile and for strangers to find out personal information about people. That is bad enough for adults, but what about kids? The advent of Kibooku, which the motion highlights, is therefore extremely welcome. As parents, we have all been subjected to the pleading of our children when they are desperate to be the same as their pals; we have all had to endure the pressure that comes from the well-worn phrase, “Everyone else gets to, so why can’t I?” A number of parents cave in on social networking and allow their kids to lie about their age in order that they can sign up. Parents believe that, if they befriend their children on a site and occasionally check on what their children are doing, that will be fine, but that might not be the case. That is why a system that is designed with kids and their safety in mind is to be welcomed. After looking at the safeguards that Kibooku offers, I think that the question is not so much why people would sign their children up to it as why people would not sign them up to it. The fact that it allows children in the six-to-13 age bracket to access social networking only with parental controls in place, which include monitoring friend requests and private messages, makes the site a no-brainer. I say that not because Jamie Tosh—Kibooku’s creator—is a constituent of mine, but because all of us support ensuring that youngsters can participate in social networking in a protected environment. I thank Alex Johnstone for bringing this important matter to the chamber for debate and I add my support for the motion.

There is a challenge facing anyone who sums up a committee debate that does not emanate from an inquiry or a report that has been produced by that committee. As the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has not held face-to-face meetings with stakeholders or had a full opportunity to question the minister, no collective conclusions have been drawn on this extremely important issue. However, the past two and a half hours have, with the consultation responses, given us a flavour of the themes that are likely to emerge when the committee examines the 2020 challenge consultation results and considers how it will reinforce the Scottish biodiversity strategy. The debate has certainly whetted my appetite for that process. It has also left me feeling guilty for not yet being a species champion. I would like to consider some of the themes that have emerged, starting with the need to learn from the past. As the RSPB says, “Failure to meet 2010 target should be viewed as a ‘wake-up’ call”. However, when considering how and why we have failed, we should, as Claire Baker said, also examine what successes have been achieved. There is an obvious need to consider the degree of conflict that exists between economic growth and the maintenance of environmental integrity and biodiversity, and to determine how we should address that. Joined-up thinking and working between Government departments and bodies are required. There are concerns—particularly among local authorities and third sector organisations—about how we will resource the strategy. The Scottish rural development programme has been highlighted as an obvious source of funding, but a number of respondents have pointed to the well-known problems with the programme and have appealed for it to be reformed. I know that that comes as no news to members of the committee or to the minister. Biodiversity offsetting was raised in the consultation, and has been raised again today. It may well have potential in the eyes of some people, but should it be anything other than a last resort? Nigel Don answered that question in his speech. Awareness of the importance of biodiversity and of the need to improve public understanding of biodiversity if we are to hit our targets and to educate our children on the subject from a young age is absolutely paramount. Teaching five-year-olds about biodiversity when we have only seven years in which to hit our targets will not pay the kind of immediate dividends that we need. However, we need to consider the long term as well as the short term. As we have seen in facing up to climate change, kids have a powerful influence over parents and we very much need to improve adult understanding of the subject. It is claimed that nearly 75 per cent of people are unaware of biodiversity or what it means. Perhaps we need to send them to Lochore meadows country park, with its community involvement programmes and 982 species, as was highlighted by Jayne Baxter. We should certainly unleash Alex Fergusson on them. His definition of biodiversity as “the balance of nature” certainly lifts the veil of ignorance surrounding the subject. Peatlands is a favourite subject of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee—rightly so, given the carbon storage potential of peatland restoration. However, rightly or wrongly, some landowners are concerned that the scientific knowledge about rewetting and the effects of burning grouse moors is limited and insufficiently Scotland-focused. We will need to take those landowners with us on the climate change and biodiversity journey that we are undertaking. I am as excited as anyone—except, perhaps, Rob Gibson and Fiona McLeod—by the carbon capture potential of peatlands. However, those who express concerns might have a point, for it seems that only one meaningful study that has produced a full carbon budget of a burned, managed upland area has been done in these islands, and it suggested that the overall impact of managed burning on biodiversity is mixed. To muddy the waters more, that study was carried out in the north Pennines, and doubts were raised subsequently about the transferability of the findings to other parts of the UK. There is a view that shallow peat soils, primarily in areas such as Angus, might benefit from sensitive management to maintain existing stocks, rather than an active rewetting programme, with the above-ground biodiversity gains being greater than the limited carbon storage capabilities of those shallow peat soils. I am not a scientist, but it strikes me as being a valid point that a one-size-fits-all policy on peatlands, rather than a balanced approach based on sound science, would potentially run contrary to the delivery of multiple ecosystem services. Concerns have been raised, particularly by local authorities, over the anticipated leaning of the strategy and the suggestion that it might not adequately address land management for biodiversity in urban settings, and the suggestion that there is an imbalance in focus in favour of rural areas when there are also unique circumstances in and around our cities. I will address other points that members raised. Alex Fergusson and Rob Gibson highlighted invasive alien and non-native species. Rob Gibson talked about unintended consequences and gave us a vivid—perhaps too vivid—illustration of them. Elaine Murray, Aileen McLeod, Margaret McDougall and Angus MacDonald reminded us of the good work that is being done locally. Nigel Don was right to stress the importance of habitat protection, and Claudia Beamish revealed an apparent love of nightingales. Jim Hume made the link between our threatened ash trees, Morgan cars and the Stratocaster guitar, which reminds us just how far biodiversity reaches out. Alison Johnstone raised the important issue of the impact of neonicotinoids and reminded us of the role of allotments. Stewart Stevenson talked about the need for local action on a micro scale and revealed that he is walking the walk and not just talking the talk by planting a hedge and 50 trees. The debate has reminded us how diverse biodiversity is. One part of the overall discussion of biodiversity that has attracted widespread agreement is the importance of having in place effective measuring processes that allow us to quantify progress towards targets.

If Hanzala Malik does not mind, I want to get on with making a point that has not been made. I am sorry. SNH developed a set of 17 indicators that related to the 2010 targets. The most recent assessment was conducted in 2009 and showed that, of the 197 species that were covered, only 5 per cent had increased or probably increased, 33 per cent had been stable or probably stable and 22 per cent had decreased or been lost since 1994, while no trend could be determined for 39 per cent. Of 39 priority habitats, 15 per cent increased and 28 per cent were stable, but 33 per cent decreased. Those indicators will continue to be used up to 2020, along with the new indicators that are being developed to measure progress against the targets, as the minister said. We certainly need means of determining the progress that we make, which will need to be as accurate as possible if the monitoring committee that the minister announced is to have the information that it requires. I will make a plea for plants. Shortly before Christmas, a rather attractive-looking publication landed on my desk in Parliament. Sadly, the content did not match the façade. It was a report from the charity Plantlife that painted a concerning picture about the state of wildflowers across the UK. It identified that, in the past 60 years, Scotland has lost 97 species, including 28 mosses and liverworts. [Interruption.]

That has happened in a country whose Atlantic and Western Isles coasts are reckoned to be a European stronghold for some mosses and liverworts. As members will have realised, I never miss an opportunity to extol in Parliament the virtues of the area that I represent, but biodiversity is one sphere about which Angus has nothing to boast. Plantlife’s report highlights that “25 archaeophytes haven’t been seen in Angus since 1980.” That situation is concerning from aesthetic and biodiversity standpoints. A depressing paragraph in the report says: “We are witnessing a gradient of decline in which widespread species become scarce and scarce ones become rare, while some rare ones eventually tip over the brink into the abyss of extinction.” The report poses the question: “What might our flora look like in 2050 ... Will we ... defy the seemingly inevitable and hang on to today’s flora and its diversity?” I suggest that we need to take the issue very seriously in Scotland and that we need wherever possible to “conserve plants in their place: in the spaces that nature has chosen”, as Plantlife says. The debate has been very good and has been graced by some tremendous speeches. At the risk of offending people, I will highlight the speeches by Alex Fergusson, Angus MacDonald, Annabelle Ewing and especially Jayne Baxter who is, as we all know, a new member but who made a very good speech. Given the people who are involved, I know that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee will do further justice to the subject when it comes before us for deliberation in a couple of months. I am sure that the committee will play its part in ensuring that challenge 2020 provides not just a vision but the guidance and leadership that are required to alter the present trajectory, which involves a reduced rate of decline. I hope that that will get Scotland on course to reach the 20 Aichi targets.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on the plans for college regionalisation. (S4O-01680)

According to Angus College, Dundee College and it are making excellent progress towards their agreed vesting date of 1 November 2013. To ensure a successful merger, however, the new college will require financial support. The merger partnership board is working on a transition bid for funding, which, if successful, will be supplemented by judicious use of existing reserves. What encouragement can the cabinet secretary offer the colleges that the bid will be looked upon favourably?

With the construction of the Sir Chris Hoy velodrome and the Emirates arena, the Tollcross swimming complex nearing completion and the refurbishment of the Royal Commonwealth pool here in Edinburgh there are obvious indicators both in Glasgow and in the capital city that the games are very much on the way. Barry Buddon in Angus, where the shooting will be staged, as yet has no such tangible evidence of what is coming to the area in 582 days. However, a good deal of preparation is going on along a range of fronts. I intend to focus my contribution to this welcome debate on developments that are specific to the area that I represent. Glasgow 2014 organisers have carried out ecological and environmental surveys at the Ministry of Defence-owned location, which boasts three sites of special scientific interest, to provide a baseline for addressing any negative impact on Barry Buddon from hosting the shooting. Next up—within the next few weeks—will be the submission of a planning application. Games organisers are working closely with Angus Council, Scottish Natural Heritage and the Ministry of Defence. Collaborative work with Carnoustie golf links on a number of recently installed core paths to improve access to the area has also been taking place. A competition manager for shooting appointment has been made, with the individual concerned taking up their post next month. Given the experience and pedigree of Peter Underhill, who acted as shooting competition manager for both Manchester 2002 and London 2012, we can be confident that a successful event will be delivered. Angus Council is at the forefront of the preparatory activity that is taking place on the ground. A series of working groups have been established within the council to address the priority issues, including legacy and youth ambassadors, volunteering, the event venue itself, support to athletes and coaches, and external funding.

I am not aware of one—my understanding is that it is impractical to leave a legacy facility on Barry Buddon for a number of reasons. I want to highlight three other areas of working group operations—namely the baton relay, the promotion and tourism strategy and the adopt a second country initiative. With regard to the baton relay, events of that nature are a slightly delicate subject for my constituency as we were all but left out of the Olympic torch relay. Angus South boasts iconic locations such as Arbroath abbey and Glamis castle—after it emerged that neither was scheduled to be visited by the torch relay, I raised the issue with Lord Coe. As the local MSP, I asked that the decision to not take the Olympic flame to either of those renowned places be reconsidered. I suggested as a compromise that the torch might make a brief detour from its procession along the Forfar to Meigle road and travel through the village of Glamis, home of the Angus folk museum and a particularly picturesque location, which I am sure we could have packed out. That idea, however—the adoption of which would have added only a few moments to the flame’s journey—was rejected. I am therefore delighted to learn that determination of the route for the Commonwealth games baton will have local input and I know from discussions that I have had with the council that it is committed to ensuring that those iconic Angus landmarks and others are visited. I stress to ministers the importance of that happening, along with perhaps ensuring that another flaw in the Olympic torch arrangements is not replicated. I understand that people from our county were nominated to carry the Olympic torch but carried out their duties outwith Angus’s borders. I ask ministers to impress upon Commonwealth games organisers that in order to maximise interest in the baton relay and allow friends and relatives easy access to seeing their family members or pals carrying the baton they should, wherever possible along the entire route, look to have local people involved. Under the adopt a second country initiative, which I believe is based on a sportscotland proposal, a number of competing countries will be allocated to each local authority area. Angus has been allocated Gibraltar, the Maldives and Anguilla, one of the Leeward islands. Among other things, the education departments of all councils will look to have schools become involved in projects on the allocated nations, but I know that Angus Council will go a little further and will seek to promote the second countries to the wider Angus community and establish long-term twinning links. I note in passing that the lead officer for the project is Ken McKay, the council’s education development officer for physical education and sport, and I cannot think of any council official who is better suited to playing such a part. Ken McKay is a former Scottish long jump champion who competed in the Commonwealth games the last time that they were held in Scotland, in 1986, and finished eighth. I am pleased to see that Angus Council has given the promotion and tourism strategy paramount importance. As a nation, we must seize the tourism opportunity that the games present. Angus has much to offer visitors and it is imperative that people who are coming to the games as a whole, and not just to the shooting, are made aware of that and are given every assistance to get around the county and see its attractions. As part of the tourism strategy that is being developed by the tourism working group, promotional materials are to be developed and sent in advance to shooters, support staff and spectators; to supplement that, there is an agreement in principle with Dundee City Council, which is hosting the shooting village, to place such items in all games-associated accommodation. I welcome that collaborative engagement between the neighbouring councils, and I hope that it will lead to close working on a number of other games-related fronts. I well remember the last time that the Commonwealth games came to Scotland. I covered the games as a reporter, and there is no doubt that they threw up some memorable moments—who will ever forget Dundee’s Liz McColgan storming to victory in the inaugural women’s 10,000m? However, my own abiding memory occurred in the media centre and concerned a visit that was made there by one Robert Maxwell and his entourage. Those of us who were around at the time will perhaps remember Bob Maxwell’s much heralded intervention to “save” the games. What is less well known is that he sought to court favour with the press by having his visit to the media hub at Meadowbank accompanied by a tannoy announcement that, courtesy of Mr Maxwell, there would be a free bar for the press for the following hour. That incident sticks in my mind because it was one of the few occasions in my 30 years as a hack on which offering journalists free drink did not set off a stampede. I am confident that, unlike the 1986 games, the 2014 games will be remembered for all the right reasons, and that Angus will play its part in ensuring that that happens.

I will focus on one specific aspect of the Government motion, where it talks about people, communities and the public and private sectors having to “accelerate action to reduce domestic emissions and speed the transition to a low-carbon economy.” I acknowledge entirely the big picture, which is that nations must come together to combat climate change and must walk the walk, not just talk the talk. I do not duck the fact that we in Scotland missed our 2010 climate change targets. As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I, along with Rob Gibson and Claudia Beamish, look forward to scrutinising RPP2 and examining how robust it is. However, we cannot and should not leave it to Government alone to tackle climate change. The private sector and the rest of the public sector must play a part. Just as important, we as individuals must take on responsibility. That was acknowledged in evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee in September 2011, when Dr Andy Kerr, from the Edinburgh centre on climate change, said: “we have moved beyond the stage at which a Government can simply say that it will spend money on the problem. We must get individuals, communities and businesses to buy into and invest in the measures.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 21 September 2011; c 156.] Dr Kerr was right. We need to ask ourselves, as individuals, how our behaviour impacts on the environment. Sometimes that is not easy to quantify. Two years ago, when I was buying a car, three things influenced my thinking: the mileage that I would be doing; the environment; and the fact that my son, who is something of a petrol-head, had a list of cool cars and a clear idea of the type of vehicle that he would be embarrassed to see his father driving. I plumped for a diesel vehicle that had my son’s approval, which has proved reliable. The diesel vehicle is also kinder on the environment than a petrol alternative—or so I thought until earlier this year, when the World Health Organization reported that when the filters in modern diesel vehicles were trialled over long distances, in stop-start urban driving, modern diesels are less environmentally friendly than older models and might be spitting out particulates that cause lung cancer and increase the risk of contracting bladder cancer. Our understanding of how what we do as we go about our daily business impacts on the environment and contributes to climate change is evolving. We need the science to get better, so that we can be better informed. That said, it is incumbent on all of us to take personal responsibility. Surprising results can be derived from the smallest of measures, as is illustrated by what I learned in a conversation with a fellow MSP yesterday. His regular commute to the Parliament is 171 miles, and he decided to see how much difference could be made to fuel consumption and emissions if he set the cruise control to cap his top speed at 5mph less than usual. That simple move, which added only six minutes to his journey, reduced his fuel usage and carbon dioxide emissions by 10 per cent. On an individual level, it can be as easy as that to make a meaningful contribution to tackling climate change. Claudia Beamish and Tavish Scott were right to draw attention to work that involves younger people, but we need behaviour change across all age groups. I will be interested to hear from the minister how he thinks that the Parliament and the Government can get the message over. If, as a society and a nation, we are to respond effectively to the challenges of climate change, we need people to understand how they can participate in meeting the challenges as they go about their daily lives—and we need people to feel inspired to participate. There might be a role in that regard for organisations such as Stop Climate Chaos and WWF, given their membership networks and interest in the subject. If such organisations work with Government, the public and the private sector to explain to people how easy-to-implement behaviour changes, which do not impact greatly on our lives, can ensure that we leave a less damaging footprint on the environment, that will make a positive contribution to a cause that we all share.

The importance of fishing to Scotland and our coastal communities cannot be overstated. In spite of the well-documented downsizing of the industry over a number of years, at the beginning of 2012 there were still almost 2,100 vessels operating and nearly 5,000 fishermen employed within the industry. We have 18 travel-to-work areas in which more than 2 per cent of the population is employed in the sector—by comparison, there are only three such areas in England and one in Northern Ireland—so fishing still very much matters to our country. However, those who make their living from the industry continue to dread this time of the year and the crucial negotiations that will determine the level of opportunity that they will have in 2013. Although the bare figures suggest that fishing remains a Scottish success story, with a near 20 per cent increase in real-term landings recorded between 2007 and 2011, the industry faced tremendous challenges during that period and anecdotal evidence suggests that it is becoming harder to attract new entrants. That was certainly the message that I received from skippers and processors alike at Peterhead fish market during the summer. They told me that young folk are not going to sea or becoming involved in the vital processing sector in the way that they used to because neither occupation is now viewed as offering a secure and profitable future. Actually, I do not have to look far from my family circle for proof of that. Three generations of my wife’s family were involved in the industry on the Buchan coast. Her brother—the last of those—has, like so many fishermen, now turned to the oil industry to make his living. In Peterhead, it was quite depressing to meet a gentleman who told me that he previously owned Scotland’s largest beam trawler, which is now, having been stripped of its fishing gear, put to use anchored in proximity to North Sea oil rigs in order to keep fishing boats away from the installations. The industry could do with some Christmas cheer from next week’s negotiations and some sign of hope from the haggling over the reform of the common fisheries policy. As the cabinet secretary has mentioned, the science provided by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea suggests that quota increases of between 11 and 15 per cent for North Sea haddock, whiting and saithe would be in order. However, the same source points to a 20 per cent reduction in North Sea and Rockall cod and a 48 per cent cut in west coast haddock. In his statement to Parliament last week, the cabinet secretary suggested that he would have his work cut out fighting Scotland’s position, but that may prove to be something of an understatement, given the lessons of history. As we have heard, at the heart of the problem lies the inflexible cod recovery plan. On the one hand, we are told that the stock has doubled in size over the past six years and we know that Scottish boats have reduced their levels of discards by over half in the past five years, yet under the cod recovery plan a 20 per cent cut in North Sea catch is being proposed for 2013, with all the discard implications that that will have. It is to be hoped that common sense prevails in the negotiations. The contribution made to the recovery in numbers by the trail-blazing conservation measures that have been adopted by Scots fishermen should be rewarded by a reductions freeze and a rollover of this year’s quota. This is not only about following the science; it is about natural justice. These matters are of such a nature that the Parliament can speak with one voice on them, but it is imperative that Scotland’s representatives in Brussels do the same as we seek to reform the common fisheries policy. From the video-link evidence session that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee held a couple of weeks ago, which Angus MacDonald referred to, it was clear that the two participating members of the European Parliament are pretty much on the same page. Both were agreed on the need for meaningful regionalisation and for delivering reform within a reasonable timetable. Struan Stevenson described proposals to close 15 to 20 per cent of member states’ territorial water as “terrifying”; Ian Hudghton used the word “ludicrous”. They were also pretty much agreed on the need to achieve a combination of sensible rules and targets for the elimination of discards. The impression given was that Scotland’s two members of the Committee on Fisheries will speak up for Scotland’s needs, but the nature of the all-round decision-making process—with next week’s committee vote being followed by plenary consideration in February or March—suggests that we need to ensure that all our MEPs actively do so. The two Scots Labour MEPs could play a significant role in helping to secure a CFP that is appropriate to Scotland’s needs. Labour is in the same socialist grouping in the European Parliament as Ulrike Rodust, the rapporteur on the issue. Within that setting, Scots voices need to be heard, garnering support for Scotland’s interests and countering some of the rapporteur’s less palatable suggestions for future policy. I say that not to make a party-political point—I have no reason to doubt that those MEPs will do that—but simply to emphasise the need for Scotland’s MEPs, as well as its MSPs, to speak with one voice in support of one of our most important industries.

In evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee on 21 November, Scottish MEPs Ian Hudghton and Struan Stevenson were agreed on the need for the adoption of “sensible rules and achievable targets”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 21 November 2011; c 1354.] for the elimination of discards. What progress is being made towards achieving that goal?

I am extremely pleased to contribute to the debate. A vibrant media that reflects our nation’s current affairs, local aspects and culture is important. However, I am worried by some of the signs out there. In the two years since I left the field of newspaper journalism, the industry in Scotland, particularly the print side, has become unrecognisable. As advertising revenue has gone down on the back of the recession, the cuts agenda has kicked in across our print media. Experienced journalists, both reporters and sub-editors, have left the industry, albeit in many cases with voluntary severance deals, and standards—and with them circulation—have undoubtedly declined. As mentioned, the circulation figures, with the honourable exception of The Press and Journal, are on a worrying downward spiral. Although that is largely because of the availability of more up-to-date news sources, there is no doubt that the quality of the print product is in some instances also a factor. The lack of experience and the overburdening of reduced reporting and subbing pools leads, especially in instances where terms of employment and income levels might have been eroded, to poor morale, the making of mistakes and reporters cutting and pasting from press releases or other sources instead of properly researching stories. As for the establishment of contacts that happened in the old days of newspapers, time simply does not allow for it. I recognise that such issues might appear relatively trivial when over the past year there have been far more dramatic developments at the very top level of the media, including a red-top Sunday paper having to close its doors over phone hacking and Justice Leveson’s inquiry, the outcome of which we are awaiting. However, if we want a healthy written press, these things matter. The motion calls for the development of a long-term strategy for all aspects of media in Scotland to “enable stability and growth”. I do not pretend to know how that might be delivered but the establishment of a panel of experts to advise and help drive such a process would be a starting point. It would be all too easy for us as politicians, who inevitably will feel on occasion that we have had a raw deal from a newspaper or radio or television station, to leave those news providers to their fate, but we have to be bigger than that and recognise the importance of a thriving broadcast and print media that entertains, informs and—yes—holds politicians to account. On that basis, I would very much welcome the advent of a media panel to advise the Government on how we might build a Scottish print and broadcast media that is diverse, successful and proud to be distinctively Scottish. I hope that such a set-up would concern itself with everything all the way down to local television provision, community radio and—a specific interest of mine—local weekly newspapers, which I firmly believe have a role even in this digital age. The challenges facing and indeed the approach of such newspapers will vary across the country. My constituency is fortunate to have three weekly papers—the Arbroath Herald, the Carnoustie Guide & Gazette and the Kirriemuir Herald—all of which provide a good-quality offering to readers. There was a time when in parts of this country weekly papers, which have also suffered their share of resource cuts and are in some cases also struggling, were tail-end Charlies in relation to breaking stories. After all, the local daily paper had already covered the items they were carrying three or four days later. However, in some quarters, a change has occurred. As the daily papers have cut staff and lost their local connection, the weekly papers are increasingly setting the agenda, even though they are still encountering difficulties of their own. My contention is that people out there retain a trust in their local weekly papers. They tend to be read over several days and, as a parent whose children have at various stages featured in them, I can vouch for the fact that households purchase multiple copies to send to relatives outwith the area. More important, they print stories that the dailies will not run and give local organisations and good causes a publicity platform that they would otherwise be denied. Of course such things matter everywhere, but they matter particularly in rural areas. As I have said, I firmly believe that there remains a role for weekly papers and that we have to recognise the pressures that such titles are under. Many are in concentrated ownership and face increased centralisation, which carries the threat of a diminution of that distinctive local feel. I hope that the Scottish Government empowers a media panel to pay heed to the needs of and the challenges facing those print titles as well as the more high-profile newspapers and the very important broadcasting sector. I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on securing this debate and reiterate my appreciation for the opportunity to contribute to it.

I confess that my knowledge of Duchenne muscular dystrophy was, until recently, rather sketchy. I suspect that such ignorance of that awful disease is widespread. Given the fact that, as the motion notes, “one in every 3,500 male births in the UK” is affected by DMD, that is a regrettable state of affairs. Awareness of the condition and its devastating consequences for the victims and their families has increased markedly over the past few months in the major population centre in the constituency that I represent, for the most unfortunate of reasons. In Arbroath, we have in our midst one of the most heartbreaking examples of the devastating impact of DMD. The thought of seeing a child or loved one suffer and then die from a degenerative genetic condition is simply too painful for most of us to imagine. However, it has been a reality for Norman and Yvonne Mathieson, along with their daughter Claire, not once but twice, and the pain for the family goes on. In little more than two years, the Mathiesons have lost two of their three sons to the condition. The remaining son, Daniel—their firstborn—is wheelchair-bound and they recognise that he is living on borrowed time. Daniel and his family have lived with his life-shortening condition for 20 years, and the family has spent the past few months fundraising to grant him his last wish. In 2007, Norman and Yvonne took the entire family to Florida; Daniel wants to return there one more time. The family set about trying to raise the £10,000 that it would take to meet the cost of a 29-day trip to the USA. I talked to Mr Mathieson yesterday in preparation for the debate, and it emerged that the sum involved has successfully been raised in the space of only 11 weeks. In four weeks’ time, the family will head to the sunshine state. I am sure that all members wish the trip to be everything that Daniel and his family would hope for. Although I am sure that making preparations for the Florida holiday will be uppermost in the family’s minds, I am equally sure that they will take an interest in the debate, as they have been actively campaigning to raise awareness of DMD for some time. Back in 2009, they were part of a lobby of Parliament for that purpose, and they tell me that they will return to the Parliament next year to pursue that agenda. I hope that the staging of the debate—I congratulate my colleague Jim Eadie on securing it—will add momentum to the efforts that are being made not only to raise awareness of DMD but, more important, to develop some form of effective response to the disease. The campaigning group Action Duchenne argues that a centre of excellence specific to the disease should be created in Scotland. I understand that there are only 150 identified sufferers north of the border and I am not sure whether it would be viable or practical to have such an arrangement with that number. It strikes me that, for geographical reasons and because of the travel challenges that such a set-up might pose some patients and their families, the best solution might be to ensure that the national health service seeks to deliver a quality service at a more localised level. We must, of course, acknowledge that there are other forms of muscular dystrophy. Any commitment of resources in the direction of a centre of excellence would surely have to take account of that. However, such judgments can be made only on the advice of experts in the field. Although we are less expert, in this debate, we can acknowledge the advances that are being made in genetic medicine and commit ourselves to supporting them. It seems that we are still nowhere near finding a cure for the disease but, as Jim Eadie highlighted, experimental treatments are being trialled and show promise. The sad reality is that whatever progress is made in that area will come too late for Daniel Mathieson. However, it seems that there is some hope on the horizon for other, much younger DMD sufferers. I ask the minister to offer us the Government’s perspective on the advances that are being made in search of a treatment and to indicate how we might contribute to them, as well as outlining how services in Scotland for people with DMD may develop.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to realise the potential of peatland restoration for emissions reduction purposes. (S4O-01426)

I draw the minister’s attention to evidence given to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee in April that an average spend of £12 million per year over 10 years might be required if we are fully to grasp the opportunity. The sum might be arrived at by drawing down funding from a variety of sources, such as the common agricultural policy, the LIFE+ programme and Scottish Water, as well as the Scottish Government. What work is being done to determine how sufficient moneys can be amassed from such sources, to ensure that we fully restore Scotland’s peatlands and maximise their contribution to combating climate change?

I congratulate Adam Ingram on securing this members’ business debate, not simply because it allows us to recognise the fact that, through William Murdoch, Scotland gave the world gas lighting, but because it also offers us an opportunity to acknowledge the understated contribution that a range of Scots have made to the creation of the modern world. If we ask most people to name Scots who have made an impact in creating the world as we know it, I suspect that they will come back with the names Alexander Graham Bell, Alexander Fleming and John Logie Baird, but many more have, like William Murdoch, left their mark on our everyday lives. I suspect that it will not surprise members to learn that I intend to be quite parochial in focusing on that subject. The county of Angus may be considered by some to be a quiet backwater.

Thank you. Over the centuries, Angus has punched far above its weight in producing sons and daughters who have gone out into the world and left lasting marks, without perhaps becoming household names. There are obvious examples for those of us who are interested in such matters. There is William Small, the 18th century scholar who was born in Carmyllie and whose influence on Thomas Jefferson was such that that US president described him as the father who inspired him to build the US declaration of independence on Scottish bedrock. That was, of course, a reference to the US declaration of independence being based on the declaration of Arbroath. We can also point to Sir Robert Alexander Watson-Watt of Brechin, who developed and introduced radar, and, of course, to David Dunbar Buick, who was born in Arbroath in 1854. Buick emigrated to the USA and is credited with having developed a method of bonding enamel to iron for the production of baths and sinks after getting into the plumbing supply business. However, his greater claim to fame is the creation of the Buick manufacturing company to build internal combustion engines and cars. A statue in Buick’s honour is to be unveiled in his adopted town—Flint, in Michigan—later this year, and moves that have been instigated by the Arbroath Guildry Incorporation are afoot in Angus to commemorate him there through the commissioning of a series of statues of famous sons of Arbroath. It is intended that the statues will include William Small and one Thomas Moonlight. For members who have never heard of Thomas Moonlight, I say that he is reckoned to have been one of the USA’s greatest-ever soldiers before he went on to become governor of Wyoming. In that capacity, he pardoned the Sundance Kid, who went on to link up with Butch Cassidy. Perhaps we will gloss over that. I commend the Daily Mail to members, although members would not expect a Scottish National Party MSP to say that. In particular, I commend the edition of 27 October, which contained a well-researched tribute to those three men under the heading: “The Scottish town that shaped America”. The contribution that Arbroath and the surrounding area has made to the world has not been confined to the contributions of those three giants. The area also produced James Bowman Lindsay of Carmyllie, who was the scientist who perfected the first constant electric light before Edison and Swan—who are, of course, credited with having invented the light bulb.

Yes. I am simply making the point that a real Scottish characteristic is that we have made such a contribution to the world. As I said, we can consider the number of Scots who have done unsung things in much the way that William Murdoch did. Neil Arnott is credited with having invented the water bed among many other things, and Alexander Shanks was the inventor of the modern lawnmower. As we look across Angus, we cannot forget the likes of J M Barrie and Bon Scott, of AC/DC fame. Angus is one wee part of Scotland that has given much and is giving much to the world, and it will continue to give much to the world in what I hope is a soon-to-be-independent nation.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to assist small business in Angus. (S4O-01411)

The Scottish Government’s small business bonus scheme has provided vital financial assistance to high street shops across Angus and has protected existing businesses as well as encouraging start-ups. However, times are tough and shops are still closing down. Does the minister agree that the public also needs to support small-scale high street retailers on the basis of use them or lose them?

The actions of this Parliament are sometimes subject to forensic media scrutiny and, indeed, criticism. That is perhaps entirely as it should be in a democracy, even if we will, on occasion, feel that as an institution, or as the Government or the Opposition, we are being judged harshly. Generally, though, across the 13 years of its existence the Scottish Parliament has been considered to have impacted positively on the lives of the people of Scotland. Although the various parties in this chamber will and do have their differences, more often than not when it has come to doing the right thing we have come together. Compare and contrast that with recent events at Westminster, where a specific proposal was rather disappointingly not taken forward. I refer to the Winter Fuel Allowance Payments (Off Gas Grid Claimants) Bill of my SNP MP colleague Mike Weir. That private member’s bill would have permitted new pensioner claimants who rely on off-grid sources of energy to register for the winter fuel allowance in late July rather than late September, allowing for payments to be accessible to that vulnerable group by no later than 30 September. That would have allowed them to fill their tanks ahead of the increased charging that inevitably arises as winter unfolds. To be clear, it was a cost-neutral measure that attracted cross-party support from Conservative, Labour, Lib Dem, Plaid, Social Democratic and Labour Party and Democratic Unionist Party members, yet it failed to proceed because of the Westminster system, under which such bills are, for the first reading, scheduled for consideration one after the other on a Friday. The bill was never actually debated. Mike Weir’s proposal was the second up for consideration but was not reached after coalition MPs talked out the bill ahead of it and Government whips objected to it and prevented it from automatically securing a second reading. Incidentally, it might interest members to learn that the talked-out bill was introduced by Labour MP Barbara Keeley and covered the responsibilities of a variety of bodies in England with regard to supporting carers. I should acknowledge that the bill will have a second chance at progressing. It has been rescheduled for consideration, but not until next March. By that time, one imagines that the worst of the inclement weather will be behind us, and the bill is so far down the running order that it is highly unlikely to be reached. There are 488,000 users of off-grid gas in Scotland, and it is estimated that 197,000 of those are rural households. In the Angus local authority area alone, there are more than 20,000 recipients of the winter fuel allowance. Arithmetic was never my strongest suit, but from those stats I think that it is fair to suggest that there are considerable numbers of my constituents for whom Mike Weir’s bill would have provided a degree of relief. Indeed, I do not doubt that members who represent rural constituencies—indeed, those who represent most regions—have constituents who have lost out. We are not talking only about older constituents who are deemed to live in fuel poverty, although clearly they have been the biggest losers. Being able to fill the heating tank before prices climb would help out thousands of off-grid pensioners, in some cases significantly and in others by a little bit. Many who are faced with filling up their tanks at the beginning of winter—before they receive the winter fuel allowance—cannot do so. They may well choose to go for half a tank if that option is available to them. By the time the allowance comes through they will be in the depths of winter, by which point the price will have escalated. An Office of Fair Trading review of the market found that there were many competing suppliers, but by definition many of those are small. Although some of the larger players offer greater payment flexibility, many smaller ones do not. Indeed, a citizen’s advice bureau has reported a case in the north of Scotland where a client’s heating oil supplier refuses to supply anything less than £300-worth at a time. In general terms, as Dick Lyle noted, fuel costs have risen six times faster than household incomes over the past eight years. In so doing, they have undermined the Government’s efforts to tackle fuel poverty through energy efficiency measures. If we break that statistic down it becomes evident that there is considerable disparity between on-grid and off-grid supply costs. The average cost of heating and providing hot water for a typical three-bedroom house using liquefied petroleum gas—LPG—is reckoned to be £2,300. The cost for heating oil is £1,700. That compares with a figure of £1,200 for gas. Over the past four years, the cost of heating an average home with propane is estimated to have risen by £850 and with home fuel oil by £750, whereas the comparable rise in the figure for gas is estimated to be £400. Given the present economic situation, with pressures on fixed low-income households, whether they are in fuel poverty or not, any measure that alleviates the financial pressure on that vulnerable group would be welcomed. I highlight the matter principally because it is relevant to the debate. The motion refers to the taking of “simple steps” to contribute to Scotland’s being more resilient to the ravages of winter, and earlier access to the winter fuel allowance for off-grid customers surely falls under that heading. It is also worth pondering how this place might have reacted to such a commonsense proposal in whatever form and from whichever source it had come. I believe that it would have garnered widespread support and would have been implemented. Roll on the day when the Scottish Parliament has control over such matters. However, we are where we are, so I will focus my closing remarks on welcoming the various discussions that have taken place between Calor Gas, local authorities, NFU Scotland, Transport Scotland and the Society of Chief Officers of Transportation to ensure that hard-to-reach routes remain open and that off-grid customers can at least be got to during severe weather. Such households are often situated in remote locations along or off roads that are not necessarily priorities for gritting and snow clearance work. During the savage winter of 2010-11, when some rural households were running low on LPG, the problem was not a shortfall in supply but the difficulty in gaining access to that supply because of road conditions. I very much welcome the fact that attention is being paid to that issue, and I join others in acknowledging the formal and informal role that is played by Scotland’s farmers in ensuring that less accessible routes are made passable, which will protect access to sources of heating for off-grid households.

I realise that it may seem strange for a member who represents a constituency on the east coast of Scotland to seek to make a contribution to the debate. However, having visited Gigha at the end of May on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s fact-finding trip, which Claudia Beamish referred to, I want to add my congratulations to the islanders on the 10th anniversary of the community buyout. I also congratulate David Stewart on being instrumental in affording all of us this opportunity. I have two abiding memories from the visit to Gigha—the first is light hearted and the second is more significant, given some of the myths that surround renewable energy. As Claudia Beamish may recall, one of the guides on our tour of the island was, among many other things, the session clerk at the kirk. As we passed the kirk, I inquired politely about the level of regular turnout for services. I was somewhat impressed to be told, if I recall correctly, that around a third of the population attended. I discovered shortly afterwards, when we pulled over to chat with a resident, how such an impressive attendance is achieved. The session clerk, in a well-practised tone, inquired of the lady, “And why weren’t you at the church on Sunday?” I was left with the impression that she would not commit that particular misdemeanour again. My other lasting memory involved our trip to the dancing ladies. At the time of our visit, faith, hope and charity had been operational for a little over seven years. We learned from the digital information hub at the site that, during that period, the turbines had been responsible for saving 7,936 tonnes of CO2 and that in the preceding month alone they had generated 111MW of power—enough to power 371 homes—and created an income for the island of £12,680. Just as interestingly, as committee members questioned the locals about the pluses and minuses of their renewable power source, there were no tales to be told of terrible health problems afflicting residents, people leaving the island as they could not stand having the landscape blighted by the turbines, or indeed bird deaths caused by the blades. In fact, we learned that the only incidents of bird fatalities on the island stemmed from collisions with pylon cables—not with the turbines. As the technology has advanced, the heritage trust, in seeking to replace faith, hope and charity, which were purchased on the second-hand market, is looking to purchase just one turbine, albeit a larger one, thereby reducing the visual impact, although I have to say that I found the visual impact of the dancing ladies, both from a distance and up close, quite positive. As Claudia Beamish said, while we were on the island we also visited the school, where numbers have gone up from six to 19; the halibut farm; some of the new-build housing; the golf course, which I enjoyed; and, memorably, the gardens at Achamore house. However, our visit was by no means positively spun. We also got to hear of the difficulties and challenges that required to be overcome and which are still being faced. For example, the agreed roll-out of the housing improvements had run into a slight problem at the time we were there. We also learned that the odd decision or two that had been taken along the way might, with the benefit of hindsight, have been different. I think that we all came away from the visit feeling that we had been given a true insight into the buyout and the progress that has been made since what was, at the time, a rather bold—some might say brave—venture. As the motion states, Gigha is “inspirational” in the example that it sets for other communities. In closing, I associate myself with the concluding lines of David Stewart’s motion, which states that the Parliament “believes that there is much work still to be done throughout Scotland regarding land reform” and “notes the recommendations of the Land Reform Review Group”. Last week, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee heard from the group’s chair, Dr Alison Elliot, and vice-chair, James Hunter. It was encouraging to learn—David Stewart will welcome this, although Jamie McGrigor might not—that they intend to heed the First Minister’s call for them to bring forward innovative and radical proposals.

Angus Training Group Ltd, which is located in my constituency, recently announced a 50 per cent increase in modern apprenticeship trainees for this year, which means that 67 young people from Paisley to Peterhead are coming to Arbroath to train as engineers. Can the member explain how her party’s assertion in its motion that “the Scottish Government’s modern apprenticeship programme is failing to produce the necessary skills base for the growth industries of the future” squares with reality?

Will the member give way?

I begin by declaring an interest, which goes beyond acknowledging that, for many years, I worked for the publisher of the Sunday Post, whose role in highlighting the problem is to be commended. In common with other members, such as Mark Griffin, I have been and continue to be a victim of nuisance calls, both to my constituency office and to my home number. For several months, my constituency office has been bombarded as often as three, four or five times a day with automated PPI-related calls, and in common with many people my home phone number seems to be a magnet for unwelcome calls. Generally speaking, it is the standard stuff—double glazing, kitchens, changing energy supplier or that friendly person who just happens to be conducting a quick survey in my area. At least, that was until last weekend, when we were targeted by an Indian call centre that wanted to discuss the use of a computer software package. During the first of the calls, all of which my young son took, we were told that we owed the company money for using the service, which we did not. It was told not to call back again, but it did so on multiple occasions. Eventually, the company admitted that we owed nothing at all. However, in a bizarre twist, it literally pleaded with us to purchase the software for £29.99. When my son refused, the person at the other end went a stage further in the begging process, telling him that where we came from £29.99 was a sum that we could easily afford. My stroppy 18-year-old son had enough about him to stand his ground, but how many people might have been browbeaten into purchasing internet security that they simply did not need, in the same way that Liam McArthur’s constituent was persuaded to buy broadband for a computer that she did not have? The firms that make such nuisance calls are absolutely unrelenting. Two weeks ago, my home was called twice in the space of 20 minutes by the same energy supplier trying to persuade us to move supplier. In recent months, we have also discovered how unwise it is to encourage firms offering PPI services. My wife—out of interest, she tells me—told one of these firms to send out a pack to look over. It was a big mistake. She was called repeatedly—four times on one particular afternoon—by employees of the company concerned who wanted to discuss how they might take her case forward. That sort of nonsense, along with the calls that disconnect as soon as one answers them, is at best irritating. Why should we have to contend with it in our own homes? Beyond that, however, there is a deeply sinister side to the issue. Citizens Advice Scotland tells of people being scammed for hundreds of pounds at a time as a consequence of cold calling. Indeed, CAS has told me that it has heard of people receiving calls from fraudsters who claim to be from citizens advice bureaux and ask for money. I have based my speech in this debate, for which Liam McArthur is to be commended for securing, on personal experience. However, I am not the kind of person to be exploited; my stroppy 18-year-old has an even stroppier father when it comes to cold calls. I have also managed to resist the temptation to furnish that nice-sounding chap from Nigeria, whom I have never met but who wants to give me thousands of pounds, with my bank details. However, in these difficult economic times, there are vulnerable people out there who can all too easily be preyed on. For that reason, I fully endorse the call for more to be done in this area. Of course, this is essentially a Westminster issue and, as we have heard, Liam McArthur’s MP colleague Mike Crockart is campaigning there to get the relevant authorities’ powers enhanced. I am sure that we all wish him well in that regard.

Did you?

I support the motion, in particular the closing lines, saying that “the UK Government’s negotiating position must take account of the priorities of devolved administrations, which should play an appropriately full role in the negotiating process.” Alex Fergusson and, I think, Jim Hume mentioned that aspect. Some members on the Opposition benches might be thinking, “Well, a Scottish National Party back bencher would support the Government’s motion, wouldn’t he?” However, I am talking not from a party-political perspective, but because having cabinet secretary Richard Lochhead play a full role in the negotiations would be, first, in Scotland’s best interests, and secondly, pragmatic and practical from a UK perspective. It is surely common sense that Richard Lochhead be given an appropriately full—indeed, leading—role in the negotiations that involve ministers. He is the longest-serving agriculture secretary in these islands. As we go into the key stages of the CAP process, rather than have a brand-new, inexperienced DEFRA team take the lead, we should surely have there someone who knows the subject inside out and is well versed in the machinations of Europe. The fact that David Cameron felt the need to make sweeping changes just weeks ago at DEFRA, where only one of four ministers has remained in post, indicates that he felt that his Government was not getting it right. Why not take a different approach to the negotiation process? If Richard Lochhead is not handed the captain’s arm band for the negotiations, he should at least be made a mainstay of the team wherever possible. The right outcome of the process is vital for Scotland and for the other countries in these islands. I am certain that the cabinet secretary would seek to advance Scotland’s unique interests in the negotiations, but I am equally sure that the interests of the rest of the UK, where they do not conflict with our interests, would be served by the presence of an experienced hand. In a situation that is so important—members should remember that almost 70,000 people work in agriculture in Scotland—we should make use of our strongest asset. Of course, that is for the UK Government to determine. We can live in hope, and I thought that there was hope to be found in the Conservative amendment, which says: “the Scottish Government must take every opportunity to make its priorities known” to Europe. I presumed that the Conservatives wanted the cabinet secretary to do just that, and I thought that they might even have had a word in the appropriate ear, to enable that to happen. It seems not.

I appreciate that clarity, although we might differ on what constitutes an appropriate role. In the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee last week, the cabinet secretary talked about the development of a low-carbon CAP. As we challenge—rightly—some of the proposed greening measures in the CAP, it is important that we do not lose sight of the driver for the approach. As we focus on matters that are important from the domestic perspective, such as how many crops should be grown on individual farms in Europe, the big picture, which is tackling climate change, must always be at the forefront of our thinking. Although it is imperative that the one-size-fits-all, EU-wide set of greening proposals is amended to reflect Scotland’s circumstances, the aspiration to secure environmental improvement must be realised. Agriculture is estimated to be responsible for around 20 per cent of Scotland’s greenhouse gas emissions. The industry must recognise its responsibilities and be seen to respond proactively. In turn, the EU must shape a CAP that contains implementable measures that will reduce carbon emissions. In an explanatory memorandum on the CAP proposals, the European Commission calls on agriculture and rural areas to promote “low carbon and climate resilient agriculture.” I am not sure that the CAP proposals get us there. The industry, too, must demonstrate its commitment in that regard. We need a CAP that delivers genuine environmental benefit without compromising food production, generating disproportionate compliance costs or creating distractions for farmers and people who are charged with administering the system. As the cabinet secretary made clear last week and today, the greening proposals cannot, as they stand, be implemented in Scotland, given their complexity and other issues. There is a long way to go to sort out the situation. We need an effective, experienced voice to make Scotland’s case and the case for a low-carbon CAP that does what it says on the tin. We need our cabinet secretary to be given the best possible platform from which to speak up for Scotland’s agriculture and Scotland’s commitment to tackling climate change.

Jim Hume will be aware from last week’s meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee that pillar 1 modelling was done for the Brian Pack report—I have a copy with me—and that the Scottish Government has undertaken further modelling with the James Hutton Institute in preparing the way for the implementation of CAP. Does Jim Hume accept that it might be wise to wait until we have more meat on the bones of CAP and, in particular, until we know what the budget is before we take that matter any further?

15. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of the World Health Organization. (S4O-01320)

The cabinet secretary may be aware that the World Health Organization’s international agency for research on cancer has, in the past few months, classified diesel exhaust emissions as carcinogenic to humans, causing lung cancer and increased risk of bladder cancer. Dr Christopher Portier, the chairman of the IARC, has stated that the scientific evidence is “compelling”. How does the Scottish Government view those findings and what steps is it taking to measure the impact of diesel emissions on the health and wellbeing of Scotland’s people?

If a court closes, as is proposed in the case of Arbroath in my constituency, and the business that it conducts is transferred to a neighbouring court—in this case, Forfar—will some or all of the jobs at the court that is to be closed transfer over with that business?

Let me begin with a confession: I placed my first bet before the age of 16. Given that I turn 50 next month, I feel secure about making such a confession, given that the statute of limitations on that misdemeanour has probably come into play. I was able to gamble underage at a particular bookies in Aberdeen because my friend’s mum worked there; from that, I developed a keen interest in horse-racing, as a result of which I spent the August before I turned 18 in Yorkshire taking in the Ebor meeting at York and enjoying a very productive day at Beverley races. The fact that all these years later I still remember backing six of the eight winners at Beverley is testament to the joy that people derive from successful punting. However, although problem gamblers always tell people when they win big, no one ever hears about the losses. I never became a problem gambler—some might say that I was helped in that regard by being an Aberdonian and therefore too tight to part with too much of my cash—but I retained my interest for many years, especially after moving to Dundee and becoming a regular at Perth races. Nevertheless, I hardly bet any more. I cannot remember the last time that I placed a wager; upbringing, common sense and other interests probably kept me off gambling’s slippery slope. However, had I been born in this day and age—and especially into a poorer household—I might not have been so fortunate. As John Mason noted, well-off areas in the UK have an average of five bookmakers per 100,000 people, whereas the average in less-affluent areas is 12 per 100,000. Why is there such a discrepancy if there is no underlying drive to exploit the most vulnerable in our society? We are told that less than 1 per cent of society has a gambling problem. However, if we strip out from the statistics the non-gamblers and those who have only a once-a-year flutter on the grand national, we find a sizeable number of people whose lives and the lives of those around them are being impacted on. Back in the late 1970s, when I was sneaking into the bookies of a Saturday, betting shops were pretty unappealing places. Coverage of the racing was via an often crackling audio-only service and the prices were conveyed over the Tannoy and marked up manually on paper sheets on the boards. As there was not even a toilet in the shop I tended to frequent, only pretty hardened gamblers could stay there for hours on end. If we fast forward 30 years, we find that the betting shop environment has changed completely. Bookies have become far more adept at getting money out of our pockets. The Association of British Bookmakers states that over the past decade the number of betting shops has remained constant at around 950. Perhaps so—but there has been a sea change in the nature of bookmaking. The wee backstreet bookies have largely gone, swallowed up by chains that now ply their wares on high streets where the clustering phenomenon is all too apparent. Prior to 2005, bookmakers were generally not allowed to open in close proximity to rivals but, if members have a wander down Leith Walk, they will find two of the majors operating within a shop’s width of each other and, 500m further on, located directly opposite each other. On Easter Road, those same chains have shops no more than 25m apart. The change in the environment within the shops has been just as striking. There are comfy seats and sofa-type seating in some. The shops sell snacks, and one major chain even offers the equivalent of a loyalty card. The range of gambling opportunities is amazing. If there is no horse-racing on in the UK or Ireland, the shops beam in racing from South Africa or even tempt people to bet on online virtual racing. Banks of screens offer early prices on races and, as somebody mentioned, there are now roulette games on which up to £500 can be won on a spin. It is not only betting shops that entice Joe Public to part with their cash: there are telephone betting accounts, betting in running and spread betting—the possibilities are endless and potentially dangerous to the vulnerable. On that last point, I welcome the inclusion in the motion of a reference to the buying of lottery tickets, which I take it also covers scratchcards. I confess to being repeatedly disquieted when queueing in newsagents and supermarkets by the sight of elderly folk who have spent relatively little on food buying up to £10 of scratchcards at a time. It is difficult to tackle the issue. The genie is out of the bottle and, realistically, we cannot go back by reducing the number of shops. I note some of Anne McTaggart’s concerns, but I suggest that, whatever else happens and whoever drives our approach, we need to develop a far more extensive body of research on current betting practices and their impact on the vulnerable.

Following the announcement in June that a national community planning group, comprising all 32 community planning partnerships, would be set up, will the minister update Parliament on the progress being made by the group? Will he outline the part that it will play in taking forward the developments announced today?

I thank Scottish National Party colleagues, Alex Fergusson, Alison Johnstone and Labour members whose support for the motion has allowed an extremely important subject to be aired in the chamber. It is entirely fitting that members have an opportunity to recognise Keep Scotland Beautiful’s work in inspiring up to 220,000 Scots to take part in this year’s two-month-long clean-up, which removed 1,100 tonnes of rubbish from the environment. In so doing, we should offer it our encouragement as it plans an even bigger and better exercise next year, which is the year of natural Scotland. We must recognise, as KSB does, that what is needed to address the littering issue is not just volunteers trailing behind the litterers and cleaning up after them; a culture change is also needed. We need people to realise that dropping litter or fly-tipping is an unacceptable antisocial habit. In part, that might be achieved by exercising existing enforcement powers more effectively or increasing penalties to provide an enhanced deterrent. I believe that my colleague Chic Brodie will cover that issue in his speech. However, it is also about fundamentally altering mindsets. I took part in one of the litter picks in my constituency, which was organised by Colliston primary school. That school is located just off the crossroads on the main Arbroath to Brechin road, which links the village of Colliston with nearby Letham Grange. Teachers, parents and kids set out in teams to tackle the scourge of litter in an area that extended no more than 500m away from the school in assorted directions. In spite of the relatively small amount of ground that we covered, we soon ran out of litter bags; indeed, my team had to return to the school for fresh supplies within minutes. It was not just the volume of rubbish that we found that was disturbing; its nature was also disturbing. Why would anyone feel the need to dispose of a pair of Y-fronts by apparently throwing them from a moving car? Perhaps I have led too sheltered a life. Actually, our experiences were rather tame compared with those elsewhere. Among other items that were found in the clean-up were a guitar, a drum and 70 bottles of a particular brand of light perry. That must have been some party. A bed, fish boxes, a toilet seat, a park bench, the rear seat of a car, ironing boards, a wheelie bin and a whip were also found. That was the kind of whip that Indiana Jones uses, not the type that back benchers in the Parliament dread. To be serious, those are hardly items that people would drop inadvertently or accidentally—they were deliberately dumped. Before and during the litter pick in which I was involved, it was interesting to listen to what the kids were saying about littering and to note their horror that people abandon food, drink and goodness knows what all round their school. Hopefully, those youngsters will grow into the kind of adults that we should be—people with respect for the beautiful country that we are fortunate enough to live in—although, sadly, most of us have almost become oblivious to the rubbish that is abandoned in our streets and our countryside. However, that is not the case for many of our youngsters. Earlier this year, I was asked to judge a photography competition that was organised by Webster’s high school on the theme of my Kirriemuir, in which pupils were asked to produce photographic images that encapsulated their town. Mixed in with the predictable shots of Peter Pan’s statue and the camera obscura, there were disturbing photographs of rubbish abandoned in the stream running through the Den and, most memorable of all, a close with litter spilling out of bins and strewn across the area. That is how some kids saw Kirrie—a town spoiled by people lacking pride in their surroundings—but we must face the fact that those images could have come from any corner of Scotland. People’s attitude to litter must sometimes be called into question. A farmer in my constituency farms at least 7 miles away from the closest fast-food outlet. He told me of how he had watched from a distance as a dog walker dropped a half-eaten burger and fries on the private road leading to his property. Presumably, that gentleman had purchased his food and driven out to the countryside to consume it while taking a leisurely stroll with his dog only to discover, when he got there, that the grub was cold, so he tossed it aside. That is an interesting contradiction. The individual valued the countryside enough to want to drive out and take a stroll in it, but he had so little respect for those surroundings that he discarded his uneaten food there. That is the kind of attitude that Keep Scotland Beautiful wants to change by establishing a sense of civic pride. When Keep Scotland Beautiful was established more than 40 years ago, its aim was to campaign for a cleaner country. In the 21st century, that aspiration remains. KSB estimates that there are approximately 2,000 pieces of litter per kilometre on Scotland’s beaches. It also estimates that in the past year it has been involved in the removal of enough litter to fill 42,000 wheelie bins. All told, KSB reckons that the uplift of litter is costing the country £100 million a year. We cannot continue like that, especially when, as well as the eyesore that that presents, there is the lost opportunity for recycling. The Scottish Government’s important initiatives include the planned recycling on the go initiative. It has also tasked zero waste Scotland with producing what has been described as “a robust and comprehensive ‘state of the nation’ evidence report on litter’, which will inform future litter strategies. The £250,000 litter prevention innovation fund—applications to which closed last week—assists local authorities, community groups, landowners and businesses to support and implement innovative local schemes. However, successfully tackling the issue will need more than Government initiatives, local authorities discharging their responsibilities effectively or even the many worthy small-scale local campaigns that are operating around the country and which other members may choose to highlight. People must take personal responsibility and there is a need for many more people to develop a respect for their surroundings. I refer to the theme of Keep Scotland Beautiful’s 2013 campaign . If 220,000 folk could collect 1,200 tonnes of rubbish in eight weeks during the springtime, how much could be collected if 1 million people could be mobilised over 52 weeks? KSB hopes that a successful campaign will see well in excess of 10,000 tonnes of rubbish removed from the environment. It hopes that the campaign will succeed in changing the nation’s behaviour with regard to litter and fly-tipping. KSB realises that that will require it to capture the hearts and minds of individuals, communities, institutions and businesses. Those ambitions are bold but, after the unprecedented response to the 2012 national spring clean campaign, KSB is optimistic that a momentum is building with people becoming much less willing to tolerate litter and fly-tipping. I hope that the message from Parliament today is that it supports the work of Keep Scotland Beautiful as part of a general drive to make Scotland a cleaner, greener place.

11. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to work with local authorities to improve performance in relation to the planning system. (S4O-01256)

Although councils at times create difficulties through the way in which they interpret planning guidelines, it is also the case that being at the coalface gives them a feel for how the system might be simplified and improved. Will opportunities be afforded to individual local authorities to feed into the process of reform, or will the Scottish Government engage only indirectly via the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities?

My colleague Kevin Stewart is to be congratulated on securing this important debate, although I wish that we did not need to have it. I would far rather that the city centre of Aberdeen was respected and admired or, as seemed possible just a few short months ago, at least headed in the direction of again being held in esteem. I come at the subject from the standpoint of an expat Aberdonian, proud to say that I was born and raised in the granite city but, frankly, embarrassed by the state of its heart. The condition of the centre of Aberdeen is a subject that has long troubled the vast majority of Aberdonians—those still living there and those who, like me, retain a fondness for the place even though they have moved on. Thirty-six years ago, as a teenage Harlaw Academy pupil, I had a letter published in the Evening Express, which raised concerns about plans to construct the first of the now four massive shopping developments in the city centre. In the letter—actually, it was a poem and I am thankful to say that I do not retain a copy of it to quote from—I called on the unionist council administration not to rip the heart out of Union Street by allowing massive shopping centres to take a grip. My pleas, along with those of many other Aberdonians, fell on deaf ears, however, and the council ripped the heart out of not only Union Street, but George Street as well. There is nothing wrong, as such, with the likes of the Trinity, Bon Accord and St Nicholas shopping centres. The problem is that, when we wander through those places, we could be anywhere—we could be in Edinburgh, Dundee or Glasgow. They do not provide a truly distinct experience, reflect the former magnificence of Aberdeen or complement its iconic heart. Their existence has also decimated the main thoroughfare. Times change—of course, they do—and the expectations of shoppers are different from what they were 30 years ago, but I ask anyone who knows the granite city to look 200yd either side of the Union Street/Market Street lights and tell me whether, over the past few decades, the centre of Aberdeen has changed for the better. Like many Aberdonians, I was delighted to learn of the innovative plans to revitalise the heart of the granite city, which were based around Union Terrace gardens but encompassed the Denburn and St Nicholas house areas. Those plans offered a much-needed economic boost and the prospect of revitalising and restoring pride in the heart of the city. Bettering the environment around Union Street would inevitably have led to tackling the issues in that area. I know that the plans did not attract universal support, but the people of Aberdeen had their say in a referendum and that should have been that. Instead, Europe’s oil capital finds itself in danger of becoming a laughing stock while, 60-odd miles down the road, Dundee is unveiling a visionary redevelopment of its waterfront area. In Aberdeen, we are being offered restored public conveniences and a cafe in Union Terrace Gardens. When I left Aberdeen for the city of discovery in 1985, I could never have imagined that the former, which was booming at the time, would be overtaken by the latter as a magnet for shoppers and day trippers. However, I fear that, if we are not there yet, we are certainly headed that way. There was a good reason why Sir Ian Wood came forward with his private finance offer for the project. He is a proud Aberdonian who wants better for his home city, and there are plenty like him: Brian Adam, Kevin Stewart, Mark McDonald, Nanette Milne and me, to name but five. Even the Labour Party, in its heart of hearts, must recognise that, as Kevin Stewart’s motion states, “Aberdeen city centre needs transformational change.” If it does not acknowledge that, it should step aside and let those who understand what is required get on with the job.

The minister indicated that Serco NorthLink has improvements planned for the future. Can he expand on how the new operator will improve the service that is delivered to the communities of Orkney and Shetland?

I congratulate George Adam on lodging the motion, although it is disappointing that he did not take his lead from the visitors in the gallery and turn up in costume. It certainly sounds as if the Renfrewshire witch hunt 1697 event was an experience that was well worth having. However, I say to my colleague George Adam that such memorable and attention-grabbing historical re-enactments are not confined to Paisley or Renfrewshire. We in Angus have a tradition that stretches back to 1947 of re-enacting another famous moment in Scottish history. Arbroath Abbey Pageant Society, which became Arbroath Abbey Timethemes five years ago, was formed in 1947 to commemorate the signing of the Declaration of Arbroath. The big date in the organisation’s calendar is, of course, 6 April, when a re-enactment is staged just outside the abbey. I have attended a couple of the re-enactments and have even had my picture taken with Robert the Bruce. I do not normally seek such mementos; the only other famous person with whom I have had my picture taken—which I treasure—is Bruce Foxton. Some in the chamber will be asking, “Bruce who?”, but I know that, with her impeccable taste in music, the cabinet secretary will concur that such a photograph is worthy of being treasured. There is something particularly special about the re-enactment of the signing of the declaration when it occurs at the abbey, but Timethemes is also active throughout the year and throughout the area in bringing to life the events of 1320. Participants regularly attend various houses and castles across Angus and the Mearns. Earlier this year, they were asked to stage a re-enactment in front of Glamis castle, at the gathering to celebrate the Queen’s diamond jubilee. Public engagement by Timethemes goes beyond that. It takes the declaration’s signing and its significance into schools across the county. Participants attend in full costume with a range of items to help to explain what life was like in medieval Scotland. Pupils are allowed to dress up and the roles of each character involved—of barons, knights, monks and so on—are explored, along with the food, living conditions and farming of the day. The children stage a declaration signing of their own. Through their engagement with Timethemes, a number of schools have produced artwork that relates to the signing of the declaration, and some of those items are on show at Arbroath railway station. Timethemes is a strictly non-political organisation that performs a fantastic service in bringing to life a hugely significant moment in Scotland’s history. I know that Timethemes is delighted that Historic Scotland has offered it the chance to help to add to the visitor experience at Arbroath abbey. Historic Scotland has advised members of Timethemes that they are welcome to attend the abbey in costume at any time to assist in getting across the story of the declaration to visitors. I very much welcome the opportunity that the motion has provided to highlight the work of volunteers such as those from Timethemes, and those who were involved in the Renfrewshire witch hunt 1697 event, in raising awareness of significant moments in the country’s history and making them seem that bit more real. I confess that, until the debate, I was largely unaware of the case of the Bargarran witches, its parallels with events in Salem four years earlier and the fact that Paisley staged the last mass execution for witchcraft in western Europe. I wish I had been able to attend the re-enactment, if only to see how they were able to stage the scenes in which Christian Shaw is said to have pulled straw, coal, gravel, chicken feathers and cinders from her mouth. I congratulate the people behind local re-enactments such as those in Paisley and Angus, and I support the closing lines of the motion, which encourage other towns, cities and villages throughout Scotland to follow their lead.

As the cabinet secretary is aware, most if not all colleges have a single staff representative on their boards, drawn from the entire staff pool, which may mean that there is no trade union or lecturer representation at the top table. How might that change under the reforms?

When I learned that I was to serve on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I expected to expand my—at that stage—limited knowledge of farming, fishing and environmental issues. I am not sure that I expected to deal with a bill on long leases, and I am not sure that my committee colleagues would have expected to do so either. The subject matter, however, has proved fascinating, as were the committee’s evidence sessions even if they failed to provide compelling reasons to amend the bill to exclude common good land from its reach; at the outset, it might have been thought that we would do that. It is believed that only nine out of an estimated 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland are of a common good nature, but it is a case of “it is believed” rather than “the facts show”. Whatever else the process of getting to stage 3 has demonstrated, it has shown that councils are some way short of being on the case when it comes to understanding the common good portfolio. Members should not just take my word for that, but should consider the evidence that was given to the committee by Bill Miller, the property management and development manager for the City of Edinburgh Council. Mr Miller revealed that land campaigner Andy Wightman, in researching his respected book, “The Poor Had No Lawyers”, wrote to all councils in Scotland for details of their common good properties. The council responded, but with what Mr Miller acknowledged was “very poor information”. He went on: “Mr Wightman replied to us and said, ‘But what about’ and listed a number of properties that he felt should be common good and which were not on our register. At that point, we carried out a major exercise to look at those properties and ... agreed that a number of the properties that he suggested should be common good”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 29 February 2012; c 651.] Mr Miller expressed the view that, following Mr Wightman’s contribution, the council now has “a fairly good register” but admitted that there remained a “however”. I cite the example of City of Edinburgh Council not to have a pop at our capital city—indeed, Mr Miller’s candour was very welcome in informing the committee’s deliberations—but to illustrate the complexity of the issue. Given that the task involves going back to the 12th century in seeking to ascertain the status of properties, as has happened in Edinburgh, the process is clearly full of challenges. It is interesting that witnesses representing other local authorities in Glasgow and Fife also admitted that they could not guarantee the absolute accuracy of their registers. We were told that it was thought that “most of the significant common good properties in Glasgow are on the common good register”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 29 February 2012; c 653.] They did not claim that the list is comprehensive. As the bill has proceeded, a number of changes were made to what we were told regarding the number and the specific nature of common good assets that are subject to long leases. By my recollection, the number started out as five, went down to four and ended up at nine. On the way from four to nine, we were told that Rouken Glen park fell into that category only to be told, subsequently, that it did not. That is just one reason why the bill could not make an exemption for common good land. The minister made a point during a committee evidence session, and reiterated it today, regarding what would happen if the common good exemption that has been mooted was agreed to. What would happen if a lease was converted under the bill and then the council in question discovered that the asset had been common good in nature and so should not have been converted? Who would own that asset? Claire Baker questioned the extent to which legal challenge might come forward. Ahead of stage 3, I posed that question to a lawyer who specialises in land matters. His reaction was informative: a broad smile spread across his face at the prospect of arguing the case backwards and forwards, and I am sure that I saw pound signs in his eyes. I understand the genuine motives behind Jim Hume’s amendment, but the Parliament was right not to exempt common good long leases, with the uncertainties that that might have thrown up. The case for exempting common good land from the reach of the bill was not made, just as happened with the session 3 bill on the same subject at the Justice Committee. That is not to say that we do not have a general issue to address with common good, and I welcome the fact that the status of common good will be included in the consultation on the community empowerment and renewal bill. As the minister and others have acknowledged, the latest process highlights the wider issue of just how accurate information about common good is. That requires to be addressed—

As the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee recommended in its stage 1 report, the Scottish Government should work together with local councils and relevant professionals to identify better ways to gather, verify, record and maintain common good information.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to improve access to public sector contracts for small companies. (S4O-01207)

Although I accept entirely that there are legislative impediments to local companies of all sizes being favoured in procurement processes, has the cabinet secretary considered whether it might be possible for carbon footprint to become a consideration in awarding of contracts?

The minister has given a welcome commitment to offering real alternatives to road travel in rail travel and enabling travel connections for work services and leisure. With that in mind, can he say how those commitments might improve the situation that is being endured by my constituents in Monifieth who, as the minister knows, are served by only two trains a day on weekdays?

I, too, commend the Labour Party for bringing the debate, because the issue of female representation in all aspects of public life is hugely important and should transcend party politics. I must confess that gender balance has not always been at the forefront of my consciousness. As a journalist I worked on a fairly well-balanced mixed-sex, editorial floor and, rightly or wrongly, I tended to view workmates as colleagues rather than as men or women. However, I recall now that only a small handful of women held positions of authority. Now, working in Parliament and sitting in the chamber, how much of an issue gender balance is hits home. Indeed, as I sat in the chamber a little less than a week ago, how underrepresented women are within Scottish public and business life smacked me between the eyes. Last Thursday and Friday, a number of MSPs from all parties participated in a highly successful business in the Parliament event. I am sure that I speak for many when I say that it was a hugely informative and thought-provoking gathering. For me, the most thought-provoking moment came in the midst of the question-and-answer session towards the end, when I suddenly realised how few women were there. A quick headcount revealed that in a chamber that hosted around 140 people at the time, only 31 women were present, MSPs included. I do not doubt that a number of female participants who perhaps attended Thursday night’s dinner could not make it on Friday or left early. Nevertheless, that snapshot is indicative of the fact that we have a problem. However, I remain to be convinced of the merits of quotas. I accept that, as a man, I can probably never fully understand the challenges and barriers that women have to overcome to forge successful careers in business or politics, or on public bodies, but I want to gain a greater understanding of what those challenges and barriers are in order to play a part in removing them. I believe that, right across Scottish society, our aspiration should be to ensure that by 2020 we are looking to go beyond 40 per cent female representation. That may be a big ask, but surely the way to go is to identify the reasons why the current imbalance exists, actively take steps to make it easier for women to come forward in greater numbers and then sustain better gender balance. I want—we all want—even more women in our councils, Parliament and boardrooms, but not by virtue of their being favoured by their gender. I feel that that is the inherent danger of quotas. We must not only aspire to but succeed in increasing the number of women coming forward. They can then be judged on their ability as they go head-to-head with their male counterparts. Once that has carried the day, we will have in place an environment that guarantees that we have not taken two steps forward only to take one step back.

I am sorry, but I have only a limited amount of time. Jenny Marra mentioned the make-up of the ruling administration on Dundee City Council. I draw her attention to Angus Council’s new 15-strong Scottish National Party administration and to the fact that it comprises eight men and seven women—not full equality, but almost. That was achieved naturally, by selection and election, with no quotas. The only positive discrimination shown was in selecting the people who were deemed, regardless of gender, to be the most able. I do not downplay the fact that there are challenges for women in politics, but I think that that sets a good example. Further, four of the seven first-time councillors are female. I recognise that not every council is in as strong a position in that regard. Indeed, within Angus Council we need only look across the floor to the opposition benches to see that there is only one female councillor among 14. That is not a political point but a statement of fact and a further acknowledgement that there is a problem that all of us need to commit to tackle. We can bandy statistics back and forth—for example, five of the 23 United Kingdom Cabinet members are women, whereas six of the 20 ministers in Scotland’s Government are women, so we could claim to be doing better than Westminster. However, the fact is that nowhere in Scottish society can we say that we really have fair representation of women. All of us in this chamber—MSPs of both sexes—have a responsibility to address that.

When the Parliament previously debated the shaping of the new CFP back in September, I highlighted the EU’s lumbering processes and the fact that bickering over the allocation of reports had knocked back the timetable that was set for reaching a conclusion. It would be nice to say today that things are now moving apace but, sadly, that is not the case. As Rob Gibson said, eight months on, we have progressed only to consideration being given to the draft report of the rapporteur, Ulrike Rodust, which contains a staggering 227 suggested amendments to the Commission’s initial proposals. If history is anything to go by, that is a long way from being the end of the story. When the CFP was last reformed, 10 years ago, I understand that when MEPs had their crack at the proposals post the rapporteur stage, more than 800 amendments were placed in front of a committee for the haggling to commence. At that time, the EU had only 15 member states, not the 27 of today. It is not beyond the realms of possibility that more than 1,000 amendments will have been lodged by the 18 June deadline this time around; the speculation in some quarters is that the figure will be nearer 2,000. The amendments will be translated and formatted ahead of a series of informal meetings among Committee on Fisheries members to determine duplication that might exist and the scope for whittling down the numbers. The committee will then have a formal meeting to vote on the amendments ahead of a full plenary session of the European Parliament—oh, and there will be an opportunity to submit further amendments, followed by a further debate and vote later in the year. Under the co-decision process this time around, that is only half the story, as the Council of Ministers will have its processes to go through. We are making progress, but it is painfully slow. However, that might be a price worth paying if we ultimately emerge with a CFP that is appropriate to Scotland’s needs, not least because where we are currently is not where we need to finish. Scotland’s needs include securing a healthy future for the onshore sector as well as for fishermen, so I am pleased that the Government’s motion refers to safeguarding our fishing rights “for the benefit of ... seafood sectors”. It is important to bear it in mind that the CFP does not just influence the number of boats and fishermen who go to sea but has a massive impact on onshore employment and on the onshore sector’s capacity to cope with any upturn in the volume of fish that it is asked to handle. There are warnings of serious consequences for the onshore sector if we do not get the CFP right. In the past 10 years, the number of boats and the time that is spent at sea have declined, which has been matched by a steady erosion in the processing infrastructure. Since 2002, the number of processing companies in the north-east alone has fallen from 200 to 62 and the number of people employed in the sector has reduced from 15,000 to between 3,000 and 4,000. It is therefore little wonder that Will Clark, who is the Scottish Seafood Association’s chairman, describes the situation as critical. Among other things, he warns that if transferable fishing concessions are introduced—they are causing huge concern for processors—a means will have to be found to ensure that they cannot be traded outwith a member state. Otherwise, the consequences for Scotland could be devastating. Time will tell where we will end up on the CFP but, like our fishermen, the processing sector desperately needs stability, so that people can plan with at least a degree of certainty, if not optimism. I suggest that that desire is not unreasonable. As Mark McDonald highlighted, one of the rapporteur’s most concerning proposals is that member states should be required to close 10 to 20 per cent of their territorial waters to fishing within three years, to aid stock recovery. That goes completely against the decentralisation agenda that we are supposed to be pursuing and could adversely affect Scotland, despite the downsizing of our fleet that has taken place and the fact that we lead the way on conservation measures. It is encouraging to note the opposition to that proposal that has been voiced not only by the SNP MEPs but by Struan Stevenson of the Conservatives. I hope that the Parliament will unite today to make absolutely clear its demand for a CFP that tackles the broader issues that require to be tackled but treats Scotland’s fishermen and our important processing sector fairly.

Four and a half months ago, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee held a stakeholder event as part of its consideration of the bill. In the main, it was a fairly consensual meeting, until the latter stages, when the convener—innocently, it should be said—invited brief closing comments from participants. That kicked off a debate on the issue of dispute resolution that, well, kicked off. There was a clear fault line running through the apparent consensus on the bill. Although there appeared to be majority support for implementing the succession provision in the bill immediately, the majority of stakeholders were prepared to let that go in the interests of keeping Scottish Land & Estates on side. It was clear from the evidence that the STFA and the NFUS favoured further widening the definition of the term “near relative” but, again, in the interests of keeping the peace, SLE’s opposition, which was based on a fear that such a move might destabilise the balance of rights between landlords and tenants, was respected. The fact that SLE subsequently accepted that its fears about setting a retrospective precedent were unfounded, which led to the Scottish Government amending the original proposal, might have led one to think that a relative calm would descend on the agriculture industry—or as calm as it gets with the CAP renewal process under way. After all, there had been give and take on both sides. However, then came the Moonzie ruling, and for agriculture, we could read agro-culture, or so it seemed. Among other things, the Moonzie ruling brought back into focus the thorny issue of dispute resolution. Over the past few months, long-standing underlying tensions have come to the fore, with claim and counterclaim—not to mention bulging e-mail inboxes for Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee members, and even more so for the cabinet secretary, I suspect. Today’s news, which others have referred to, that the TFF has established an independent specialist short-life working group to consider agricultural rent review procedures in Scotland is therefore extremely welcome. It was particularly encouraging to read in the press release that the STFA issued on the matter that its chairman Angus McCall has hailed the four-member rent review working group as having “a wide range of technical knowledge and practical experience”. I hope that Scottish Land & Estates will be as welcoming of the development. I am sure that it will be, as that offers the possibility that a way out of the present situation will be found. The progress that this Parliament is making to furnish Scotland with a legislatively protected and vibrant tenanted sector, while safeguarding the rights of the landowning sector, has been achieved only by Government working closely with the industry. The fact that the cabinet secretary has formally endorsed the setting up of, and provided funding for, the RRWG is further evidence that governmental commitment remains as strong as ever. However, if the industry becomes riven by internal dispute, it becomes difficult to maintain the momentum that has been created or to tackle important associated issues. From an objective standpoint, it strikes me that neither side is entirely wrong or right in the situation that has developed. For example, it is nonsense to suggest, as some have, that there is little or no evidence of landowners seeking to capitalise on the Moonzie judgment. Equally, claims of demands for massive percentage increases in rent, while perhaps factually accurate, do not always tell the full story. At face value, demands for rent rises of up to 50 per cent are excessive, if not outrageous, but the facts behind the headline claim can paint a different picture. While attending an industry event the other week, I met a land agent who told me of a call that he took from an estate-owning client, who advised him of his intention to demand a 50 per cent hike in rent from one of his tenant farmers. The agent was a little disquieted by the plan, owing to the controversy and adverse publicity that such increases had been attracting. However, it emerged from the discussion that the estate owner had not increased the rent for the best part of two decades, and at £3,300 per annum the tenant farmer was paying less for their 100 acres and associated buildings than the amount for which individual cottages elsewhere on the estate were being rented out. I highlight that case not as a defence of landowners per se but simply to illustrate my point. The bill is a step in the right direction as we seek to secure a fairer, better balanced farming sector. I welcome the commitment of the Government to consider, within 18 months of the legislation coming into force, the impact of the changes in it and, in particular, how effective they have been in attracting new entrants and in helping the tenanted sector. The bill was born of consensus being secured, and it was successfully progressed by there being respect for proceeding in a manner that would not risk unintended consequences. I hope that that sets a trend for further development of land legislation because, as the cabinet secretary indicated, this is not the final chapter in the story.

I, too, commend Colin Keir for this members’ business debate, which affords the Parliament the opportunity to recognise the tremendous work of the Royal Highland Education Trust with its 12 countryside initiatives across Scotland, and which allows this member to make an unashamedly parochial speech. The Angus countryside initiative is one of the longest running in the country and is still developing. In addition to serving the schoolchildren of the county, from playschool and nursery age right through to secondary, it has moved into the city of Dundee. Although the initiative draws its board from throughout Angus, the influence of constituents of mine in driving its work could not be more keenly felt. The trustees of the Angus initiative include Gill Lawrie from Arbirlot; James Black from Backboath; Leela Martin of Letham; Alison Stoddart from Inverarity; Alistair Hodnett from Tealing; and Andy Reid of Kingennie. All told, about 25 farms across Angus have been risk assessed for hosting visits and 50 farmers are trained to go into schools to talk to kids about food production. That is taking the countryside into the classroom and the class into the countryside. Gill Lawrie and her husband William alone host a dozen or so visits a year to their Newton of Arbirlot farm, which I had the pleasure of visiting last year. A group of primary 1s from the nearby Muirfield primary school is due there a week on Tuesday and it is a matter of regret to me that other demands mean that I am unable to accept the invitation to join them. I say that not least because I am fearful that the Angus countryside initiative committee might think that I am ducking out of actively supporting its work. I also have an invitation to attend a schools visit that the committee is hosting this Friday prior to the Angus show, in which 90 primary school children will gather in Brechin to hear about various aspects of farming, including dairy, arable and soft fruit production. That field-to-plate type event, which will utilise various of the show’s marquees as they are being prepared for the weekend, was the brainchild of a couple of groups of young farmer volunteers. The ACI committee, along with Angus Council’s education department, seized upon it. I wish the committee every success with that. Unfortunately, along with many members, I will be in Edinburgh attending the business in the Parliament conference, which it should be said will spare me the usual soaking that one gets in Brechin during the Angus show weekend, although that pleasure still awaits on Saturday. However, I promise to get along to an event in future because, as an Angus MSP, I am entirely behind the terrific work that the Angus countryside initiative does on the ground in our county. I thank Colin Keir for securing the debate. I encourage all members who attend the Royal Highland Show to drop in on the RHET’s stand, which I am told is located a couple of avenues behind the National Farmers Union Scotland stand, so that we can see for ourselves the work that the organisation is doing. However, I am advised that Thursday and Friday are perhaps best avoided, as that is when the majority of the 25,000 schoolchildren who are expected to visit will attend, so it might be rather congested.

During my schooldays in Aberdeen there was little choice available when it came to learning languages—there was little associated fun, too. There was no access to a foreign language at primary level and no choice when we entered secondary school. Like everyone else, I was sentenced to French—at least, that is what it felt like. I recognise entirely the picture that Sandra White painted. The teaching approach in those days, certainly at my school, was simply to drum the vocabulary into us. No attempt was made to get us to embrace French, and the net result was that we—or mostly the boys, it should be said—were utterly disengaged long before the advent of S3 and the escape route that it offered. To this day I can reel off the days of the week, name certain colours and count to about 20 in French, but if I am asked to converse in the language I am completely lost. That is something that I deeply regret. The lack of a decent grasp of French or indeed any other foreign language returned to haunt me in post-school life. My career in journalism took me to many corners of Europe, and I was thankful that our cousins in mainland Europe are widely capable of conversing in English, which allowed me to get by. However, my trips were not without moments of linguistic embarrassment for me and for colleagues who were similarly linguistically challenged. Perhaps the worst moment for me came on a trip to Italy, when I thought that I was asking for butter to apply to my bread but had actually requested a donkey. I was not alone. A colleague who tried to tell a Spanish waiter that he was embarrassed about something or other declared that he was pregnant. Sadly, unlike Kezia Dugdale, I am too long in the tooth to put right my lack of grasp of foreign languages. Members: Never! Well, I am aware that my predecessor constituency member, Andrew Welsh, became well versed in Mandarin while serving in the Parliament.

I don’t think you really mean that. We can and must ensure that coming generations of Scots are encouraged and supported to do better than I did. That will require starting them younger, and where better to start than in primary 1, when kids are most receptive to learning, as Liam McArthur said? A Dutch acquaintance who moved to Scotland in the late 1980s brought his young daughter with him. She had no difficulty settling into school life in Dundee, because even as a youngster she had a decent command of English. Indeed, she had a developing command of four languages, all told, because at her school in Holland several languages were on the curriculum. If my memory serves me rightly, I think that at the time Scotland had not even started to introduce French or German into the latter stages of primary education—at least, not to a significant extent. Here we are, years later, still playing catch-up. I watched a late night TV programme on the subject last week and was taken by the manner in which primary school children were learning French. They were role playing and acting out a scene in a cafe, with customers giving orders to waiters. It struck me that if I had been taught French—or any language—through such methods, I might well have taken to the subject. However, in his foreword to the languages working group’s report, the chair, Simon Macaulay, said: “there has been a significant and worrying decline over the past decade in the number of languages taken forward to SQA certification. There is, moreover, evidence that young people are not always sufficiently challenged and motivated by current language learning approaches.” The suggested solution to that—earlier access for primary school children to language learning and so on—strikes me as entirely sensible. The need to head down that road is just as obvious. Of course there are challenges to be overcome, not the least of which is how to ensure equality of access. How do we ensure that a child attending Isla primary school or Mattocks primary school in my constituency is as able to learn French, German or Spanish as the kids who are schooled in Arbroath and Kirriemuir? We must also ensure that a full range of languages is available, stretching from Gaelic all the way through—in light of the growing influence of China’s economy—to Chinese. As we look to build a more prosperous Scotland, there can be no doubt about the need to equip our children to engage more fully with the world, and to do so in the other languages of the world. It would be arrogant in the extreme not to challenge the perception that learning languages does not matter, because everyone speaks English. As the minister and Liam McArthur reminded us, 75 per cent of the world’s population do not speak English. In addition, it is worth noting that less than 27 per cent of internet usage last year was conducted in English. It would be wrong not to go beyond merely learning the language and seek to develop an understanding of the culture and protocols of the country where that language is spoken. Hopefully, the 1+2 approach will allow many more Scots to do just that. Some months ago, I was approached by a German television station that wanted to interview an SNP MSP on the subject of the referendum. The production team chose Arbroath abbey as the location of the interview because they understood its historic connection with Scottish independence. It was also clear from the questioning that they understood entirely the arguments that can be advanced for and against a yes vote, and the context that they are set against. It was not just that they put a wee bit of preparatory work into putting together the piece; they actually understood the subject. It should go without saying, too, that the interview was conducted in perfect English, much to the discomfiture of this interviewee, who could not help but think of his complete lack of German, not to mention his limited knowledge of that country’s political scene. Scotland’s people have a rich tradition of going out into the wider world and making their mark. There are many high-profile examples of that, and many other less well-known examples, too—how many members here today are aware that the Buick motor company was founded by an Arbroath man? However, it is a different world now, and we must furnish our children with the language skills that they will need if they are to follow in those footsteps. The 1+2 approach offers hope that we might just be able to do that. That is why I am delighted to support the motion.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on providing selective dorsal rhizotomy on the national health service. (S4O-01024)

NHS Tayside has approved referral pathways and criteria for the use of SDR. My constituent Brooke Ramsay has been advised that, as she meets the criteria, her operation will be funded by the NHS. Will the same or similar pathways and criteria be adopted in other parts of the country and, if so, will the detail of the pathways and criteria be made available to parents of young cerebral palsy sufferers so that they can determine whether their child is likely to benefit from the procedure?

Last week, I saw my 17-year-old son bedecked in a cow costume, off to his last official day at school—it was him in the cow costume, not me. I make it clear that, although I live in and represent a rural constituency, cow costumes are not the recognised uniform of the local secondary school; rather, that was part of the sixth years marking a landmark day in the way that only teenagers could. When I turned back down our hallway after locking the door behind my son, my eye was drawn to a picture of Lewis and me preparing for his very first day at school, some 13 years ago. Initially, I was struck by how much thinner I was and by how much more hair I had back then, not to mention the fact that my son was quite cute back in 1999. Inevitably followed the thought, “Where on earth have the years in between gone?” That moment gave way to pondering whether my wife and I had, as parents, done a decent job in raising not only our younger child but our 23-year-old daughter. Given the people whom they have become, I think that the answer is yes, but the credit for that belongs not only to us but to our parents, because is it not the case that a person’s take on parenting derives mostly from the manner in which they were raised? When someone has kids, no one hands them the A to Z of parenting. Advice—sometimes welcome and sometimes not—is offered from a variety of quarters but, generally speaking, people go with their instinct, which inevitably has been heavily influenced by their experiences of growing up. Why else do we parents find ourselves, after we have picked up our kids from something or sought to guide them in a particular direction, thinking, “Oh no—I’ve become my mum and dad. I remember them saying exactly the same thing to me”? Not everyone who becomes a parent has such great experiences growing up as my wife and I did or has the family support network that we were fortunate enough to enjoy. That is why I warmly welcome the national parenting strategy, which is designed to enable parents and carers to provide the best environment possible in which to raise children. It aims to remove barriers to positive parenting and is about creating a truly nurturing and supportive environment for the forthcoming generations of Scots. I was struck by a comment that Donna Bell of the growing up in Scotland study made a couple of months ago. She said: “A lot of the international evidence and some of the evidence from Scotland suggests that some people in ... straitened circumstances are very good parents. We would not make a link between such circumstances and poor parenting. It is very clear ... that it is about what parents do, not what they are”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 7 March 2012; c 842.] That is a valid observation. It is extremely easy to make sweeping generalisations and to assume that kids from disadvantaged backgrounds are automatically more likely to be poorly raised and to end up not realising their potential. Financial circumstances and the home environment are of course determining factors, but plenty of kids from less affluent backgrounds are raised well. There are kids from wealthier families who are allowed to do as they please and end up getting into bother. I have previously mentioned the issue of underage drinking in certain towns in my constituency. If we talk to the police officers charged with dealing with that issue, they will tell us that the problem crosses all sectors of society. Indeed, they will tell us that, all too often, the least supportive responses they get when they take home inebriated 12 and 13-year-olds are from the relatively affluent households. I hope that the national parenting strategy reaches out across the social spectrum, educating and supporting parents from all parts of society so that we improve the life chances of our children. Although this debate will not command the television minutes or column inches that others do, it is no less important than others we have had or others still to come. I can think of nothing more important than, as the motion says, “making Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up”. Independence, and putting Scotland’s wealth to work for the people of Scotland will greatly assist in that process, but today we can start our country on that path. I support the motion.

The First Minister has indicated that he is aware of the potential implications of the UK Government’s defence review for our historic regiments. I draw his attention to the concern and anger felt by my constituents in Angus and shared throughout Dundee, Perthshire and Fife at the possibility that the local identity and proud traditions of the Black Watch will be lost either through regimental merger and its simply being renamed 3 SCOTS. Will the Scottish Government seek to make Westminster understand just how unacceptable these proposals are for Scotland?

One issue that came through loud and clear in the committee’s inquires on the bill was that of land agents and their practices. In his evidence, NFUS chief executive Scott Walker summed up the situation when he said that “it is extremely rare for the land agent to be breaking the law ... but we tend to find that some of their practices might leave a little to be desired”. He called for the introduction of “a strongly enforced code of practice” that would be signed up to and—more important—adhered to by all sides of the industry. Andrew Wood of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors advised the committee that the RICS already has rigorous guidance in place for chartered surveyors, but suggested that the problem is that “not all agents are chartered surveyors.” He also pointed out that sharp practice does not happen solely among landlords, but that tenants’ agents can be equally guilty of it. Mr Wood undertook to work up and present a code of conduct to the TFF, with consideration being given to what he termed “the wider range of people who are involved in advising landlords and tenants and how they might deal with issues.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 18 January 2012; c 538, 539.] It was the unanimous view of the committee that greater consistency in practice and behaviour among people who provide land-agency services—whether they act on behalf of landlords or agents, and irrespective of whether or not they hold membership of the RICS—is desirable; that the code must have teeth; and that the Scottish Government should monitor development of the code to ensure that it is fit for purpose. The commitment from the Government to work in partnership with the TFF during the development phase and then to assess the need for further strengthening once it is being utilised is therefore welcome. It is also positive that Scottish Land & Estates has indicated a willingness to explore proposals to improve relations between tenants, agents and landlords. However, it should be said that that commitment might sit better were it not for the organisation’s other recent pronouncement on the subject. According to its chief executive officer, there is little evidence to support the recent claims regarding the behaviour of landlords and agents. In the organisation’s in-house magazine, he said: “It is clear to us that there is a determined campaign by those with a land reform agenda to hijack the current constructive discussions around the tenanted sector. The reality is the vast majority of tenants and landlords enjoy healthy working relationships. It is therefore apparent that those generating this propaganda simply want to see the break-up of Scotland’s estates.” Of course, not all landlords, or those who act for them, behave poorly, but it is to be regretted that SLE appears to adopt that view on such an important issue. The majority of landlord-tenant relationships might function adequately or even well, so to claim that things are almost entirely hunky-dory is somewhat wide of the mark. The negative influence that individuals or organisations acting as land agents can have on landlord-tenant relationships should not be underestimated. I am aware of one situation in the north-east of Scotland in which a tenant family and their landlord enjoyed a first-class and problem-free relationship for many years. The landlord then changed land agents, after which plans by the tenants to install a wind turbine on their land were met by a demand from the new agent for a cut of the profits from the turbine, which created resentment and mistrust where none had existed. Perhaps more concerning for the wider rural community was that a halt was then called to plans for further diversification that had the potential to create new jobs in the community. Better regulation of land agents is a must, as is consideration of dispute resolution, which the TFF identified as a priority. The Scottish Government’s commitment to consider the outcome of the work that is being undertaken by TFF member the Scottish Agricultural Arbiters and Valuers Association on developing a short-form rent arbitration system, is also welcome. As the stage 1 report makes clear, there is a need for an appropriate, fast and cost-effective dispute resolution mechanism. The changes that were brought in by the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 were widely supported at the time on the grounds that the existing set-up was too costly and overly bureaucratic. However, the situation today is that the Scottish Land Court is the only body that can rule on disputes, which is not a viable state of affairs, particularly for people in the tenanted sector. I understand that the Scottish Land Court has settled just one rent-review case since the act came into existence, which is proof—were it needed—that the present arrangements are not fit for purpose.

The TFF is looking to arbitration as a way in which to resolve that issue. I suggest that that is the way forward.

The minister will be aware of plans to site, off the coast of my constituency, two wind farms that will have a combined potential to power up to 1.2 million households and whose construction and servicing offer the prospect of new jobs coming to the Dundee and Angus area. Today’s welcome statement follows the securing of the headquarters of the green investment bank. Will he advise what impact, if any, that might have on developments in that respect?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the claim by the Educational Institute of Scotland that “many College Boards of Management have become emasculated by powerful College Executive Groups led by powerful Principals.’’ (S4O-00777)

The Griggs review, to which, as the cabinet secretary has acknowledged, the EIS made that assertion, suggests that the new FE regional boards should not exceed 12 members and should contain within that number a member of staff and the elected president of the student association. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, where there is collaboration between two colleges in a region, each college should have a staff and student representative on the board to ensure that differing interests of staff and students in individual colleges are properly protected and their voices heard?

Whatever the future direction of Scottish tourism—and I am sure that under this Government it will be positive—one thing is certain: it must involve utilising every tool at our disposal to entice visitors to our country, as the minister said. That opportunity, in my constituency, at least, has still to be fully grasped. I make no apology for taking a parochial approach to today’s debate and getting in ahead of my colleague George Adam—although not, I have to say, Siobhan McMahon and Joan McAlpine—in extolling the virtues of the part of the country that I am privileged to represent. The case for putting Angus at the heart of our tourism marketing, at least in relation to the United States marketplace, is surely beyond challenge. It is reckoned that last year our present marketing campaigns generated a little over £20 million from American visitors, whose numbers, as the minister pointed out, went up 18 per cent in the first nine months of 2011. Although that upward trend in visitors is clearly encouraging, one can imagine the numbers that we could be posting if we employed more fully every resource at our disposal. I suggest that Arbroath abbey is one such underemployed resource. We have heard how the arrival of the V&amp;A in Dundee will draw visitors in their thousands from the UK and beyond, and that Angus will enjoy spin-off benefits from that, which it will. However, Angus already has much to offer and right across the county we can and must play our part in realising the full potential of the V&amp;A project for Tayside as a whole.

The member makes a reasonable point. Of course, this is all about enticing visitors to the country and being confident in the belief that, once in Scotland, they will find their way around and sample the many great things that we have to offer. The on-going enhancement of hotel provision in Dundee can be only good news for both our constituencies, as it will provide tourists with a much-needed east Tayside base. Returning to specifically parochial issues in Angus South, I note that great efforts are being made to enhance the attractiveness of Glamis castle to visitors. The area also boasts among its attractions Barrie’s birthplace, the camera obscura, the RSPB reserve, the open championship venue that is Carnoustie and a small part of the Cairngorms national park. In the midst of all that lies a largely underexploited means of luring tourists to the area in the shape of Arbroath abbey. It is great that sizeable numbers of Scots and English visitors are vacationing and staycationing in Scotland, but the fact that foreign visitors represent 16 per cent of total tourism numbers surely indicates that we should be looking to do better in this area. Unless we become more efficient and effective in telling our story to that particular audience we will not get that improvement. What is so special about Arbroath abbey and why should we give it much greater prominence in the promotion of Scotland as a tourism destination? I am not for a moment suggesting that we should base our entire efforts in this regard around Arbroath. However, most of us in the chamber will be aware of the incredibly strong links between Arbroath abbey and the USA. The signing of the declaration of Arbroath at the abbey and the American declaration of independence might be separated by more than 450 years, but the connection between those documents and therefore our two nations is beyond challenge. It is accepted that through the influence of William Small on its principal author, Thomas Jefferson, the US version was heavily based on the document that set Scotland on the road to freedom in 1320. William Small was born in Carmyllie, just outside Arbroath, and, after moving to the US, was in 1758 appointed professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. Among his pupils was Thomas Jefferson who, 18 years later, chaired the committee commissioned to draft a declaration of independence. After being tweaked by Benjamin Franklin and John Adams, that document was signed on 4 July 1776. Jefferson, who went on to become the third president of the USA—and who it is claimed was a descendant of one of the signatories of the declaration of Arbroath, Thomas Randolph—never hid his admiration for Small, admitting that meeting the Angus-born academic had “probably fixed the destinies of my life.” Many years later, in 1998, the US Senate moved to mark the links between the declaration of Arbroath and America’s own declaration by unanimously backing Senator Trent Lott’s resolution to fix 6 April as the day on which Americans would acknowledge the contribution of Scots to the development of their country. In the preamble to the resolution, Lott stated: “April 6 has a special significance for all Americans and especially ... Americans of Scottish descent” because “on April 6, 1320, the Declaration of Arbroath, the Scottish Declaration of Independence, was signed; and ... the American Declaration of Independence was modeled on this inspirational document”. Why do we not make more of that connection in marketing Scotland to America as a tourism destination, or indeed the fact that nine Scots and two Americans of Scots descent, including Jefferson, are believed to have signed the document that freed the USA from British control?

In common with other members, I am sure, I knew what was coming there. We are told that half of all visitors to Scotland visit historic sights and 63 per cent of non-domestic visitors have links to this country. It is reckoned that 6 million people in North America claim Scottish ancestry. What greater historic sight do we have, in terms of influence beyond these shores, than the abbey? We need to make it all that it can be, but also to ensure that our promotion of it to a surely ready overseas market is all that it should be.

I ask the minister to encourage those who are responsible for promoting our country to turn their gaze to Angus. Let us see VisitScotland and Event Scotland specifically target visitors and attempt to entice them to Arbroath. In summing up, I believe that it is imperative for the good of both Angus and Scottish tourism that we put the abbey at the heart of our efforts to attract US visitors to our shores, and that we do so quickly. After all—

There is every possibility that, come the latter part of 2014, Arbroath and its abbey will no longer be able to claim exclusivity when it comes to Scottish declarations of independence.

6. To ask the Scottish Government whether carer information strategy funding will continue in and after 2012. (S4O-00734)

The minister will be aware of the benefit of local carer information strategy funding for carers centres and carers themselves. However, carers organisations have to apply for that lifeline financial support on an annual basis, even when it is directed towards continued activity and projects that are already acknowledged to be successful. Would the minister support health boards in offering such organisations three-year funding to enable them to plan more effectively?

7. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what provision there is for foreign visitors to access information on the workings of the Parliament in their own language. (S4O-00694)

In the light of the heightened interest in Scottish politics and the Scottish Parliament because of the forthcoming referendum, what steps is the SPCB taking to enhance translation and interpretation provision for overseas media and other visitors?

The curriculum for excellence is already transforming education throughout Scotland. How does the McCormac report support the curriculum for excellence agenda?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

In consulting on plans to reform post-16 education, the Scottish Government has consistently stated that local access to college education will be maintained. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that that is still the case and that the plans for further education governance that have been outlined today will help to achieve that?

Does the member agree that, in seeking to promote Scotland’s culture in the US market in particular, we should actively highlight the significant historic links between our countries? Does he agree that we should specifically encourage American visitors to celebrate the link between our declaration of Arbroath and their declaration of independence, perhaps by visiting Arbroath abbey?

13. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to meet its commitment to keep college student numbers at current levels in 2012-13. (S4O-00621)

I welcome the protection of student places. Is the cabinet secretary committed to the introduction of collective bargaining and national pay scales in further education, which has the potential to ensure that the hard-working lecturers at Angus College are better rewarded, to the tune of an estimated £3,000 a year?

Can the cabinet secretary give further details on the current compliance with the targets for category A and B calls?

As Alex Fergusson—whose recent departure from the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has deprived the committee of a valued and considered contributor—is, I am concerned about the proposed redistribution of the financial support for farmers under the CAP and its potential impact on food production. I do not understand how such a move will in any way protect, let alone enhance, existing production levels. At this point, I should declare an interest: I represent an area that will be adversely affected by redistribution of direct payments. However, aside from my obvious constituency interest, I come at the matter as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee who believes that there ought to be a demonstrable return on financial support that is provided under the CAP. I know that these days we skirt around the issue but, in reality, subsidies exist largely to protect and encourage food production. According to the Commission, the early CAP focused “on encouraging better agricultural productivity so that consumers had a stable supply of affordable food”. Although, with environmentally sound farming coming to the fore, the connection between subsidy and production has been—at least at face value—apparently severed, does not that initial driver still remain? I accept that the existing system, which is based on historic criteria and is biased against new entrants, is skewed and should be rebalanced, so my question is this: What guarantee do we have that fairer distribution will do what we want? Provided that active agriculture takes place, justification can be found for moving to area-based payments, even though the English experience has shown that such a move has its difficulties. However, as George Lyon told the committee, “a move to an area-based payments system could drain a whole lot of money out of productive agriculture”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 30 November 2011; c 444.] if subsidy is provided without some tangible return being secured. I would be interested to hear the views of the cabinet secretary, on whose watch Scotland’s food and drink has flourished, on how we can safeguard and build on existing production levels. After all, we must be concerned about this. If any reduction in support to areas such as Angus leads to a drop in production, what assurance do we have that the situation will be mitigated through more money to less-favoured areas? We need a proper regional framework that allows Scotland to set deliverable and appropriate criteria in different areas and to target payments flexibly across the regions in order to maximise return on subsidies while providing better support to vulnerable farming areas. We must not have a set-up that disincentivises efficient farming. Instead of working to some uniform diktat, we should approach the issue on the basis of what we are trying to achieve and how we might achieve it. Although the move in the CAP to link pillar 1 subsidies to implementation of agreed greening measures is, in principle, welcome, the problem is in how we implement greening without jeopardising food production. As others have said, a prescriptive one-size-fits-all approach across the European Union is not what is required if we are to achieve the ambitions that we should have in this regard. In evidence to the committee, Alan Boulton of the Tenant Farmers Association said: “measures need to be regionally appropriate, and to deliver some green environmental benefits”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 23 November 2011; c 402.] Other members have highlighted examples in that respect. However, let us be clear: it is not enough for the agricultural sector to say that it recognises that the CAP needs to be greened and to embrace the principle; it needs to act. We should be in no doubt that agriculture, which is reckoned to be responsible for about 20 per cent of Scotland’s greenhouse gas emissions, must—willingly or otherwise—contribute to cutting them. There needs to be better use of fuel, feed and fertilisers and we need to encourage innovative measures such as the filter fences that were designed by the James Hutton Institute and the Scottish Agricultural College and which have been, and remain, on trial in Angus. These fences can be installed for limited periods to trap harmful silt following the growing of tatties or other vegetables; I understand that the indications are that they might be particularly effective on sloping fields. During the initial five-month trial, a 70m-long fence trapped about 70 tonnes of soil and 40kg of phosphate. The cost effectiveness for mitigation of phosphate pollution was estimated to be around £30 per kilogramme. Individuals who are more knowledgeable than I am think that those results compare favourably with the results for many buffer strips. Should implementing such schemes not be considered to be a qualifying measure under the 30 per cent greening top-up? There have been suggestions from some quarters that we should allow an opt-in system when it comes to greening, but how can Scotland, which has set leading climate change targets, go along with allowing a section of the farming sector to ply its trade in a way that does not pay regard to the environment while still receiving substantial public subsidy? It should be acknowledged that, to a greater or lesser extent, many farmers are already seeking to be environmentally responsible. Right across the board, we need buy-in to the greening of the CAP, albeit with the assurance that what we sign up to will do what it says on the tin.

As we have heard, the Commonwealth games will be Scotland’s games and not just Glasgow’s games. As the MSP for Angus South, I am delighted that one of the 2014 disciplines is being staged in the constituency that I am privileged to represent. Of course, this will not be the first time that Barry Buddon has been involved with a Commonwealth games. Back in 1986, when the games was last hosted by Scotland, the Ministry of Defence property on the outskirts of Carnoustie staged the full-bore target rifle event, with the remainder of the competition taking place at Musselburgh. In 2014 though—and no pun intended—we in Angus get the full shooting match. I am sure that we will seize the opportunity to demonstrate once again our ability to host a major sporting event, as we have done so successfully with golf on the nearby links, as well as to showcase everything that Angus has to offer as a tourism destination. The games shooting coming to Barry Buddon will provide a significant and welcome economic boost to Angus and Dundee. Like Jenny Marra, I welcome Dundee being the site for a satellite village to accommodate competitors, support staff and officials. Commonsense and practicality require those who are taking part to be billeted somewhat closer to the venue than the athletes village in Glasgow, and realistically, with 40-plus countries expected to be represented and more than 600 people requiring beds, Angus is not an option. That being the case, I am pleased that Dundee was the choice. It is the logical option and locating there further highlights the growing, mutually beneficial bond between Angus and its neighbouring city. Just as my constituency will enjoy the wide-ranging and considerable benefits of Dundee attracting the Victoria and Albert museum, the jobs boost from Michelin and the massive economic fillip from the promise to develop Dundee port as a renewables hub, it is good to see the city sharing the benefits of our games involvement. Even without competitors and officials being based in Angus, we will, if the shooting in previous games is anything to go by, be in for a significant economic boost courtesy of the influx of spectators. I understand from past evidence that we should be gearing up for in excess of 3,300 visitors daily over the five or six days of the event, and I have written to the chief executive of Angus Council to encourage the authority to seize the economic opportunity that that presents. I hope that local companies will enjoy some success in bidding for the £4 million-worth of construction and other related contracts at Barry Buddon, thereby safeguarding and enhancing employment in our area. I can also tell the minister that, from discussions I have had with its management, Angus College is keen to explore possible temporary job opportunities for its students. Having the games in Angus affords an opportunity to promote our area as the fantastic tourism location that it is. That is why, as the local MSP, I have been in touch with both Historic Scotland and the National Trust for Scotland to encourage them to join the council in engaging with games organisers and ensuring that visitors are made aware of the appeal of nearby tourist attractions such as Arbroath abbey and Barrie’s birthplace and are encouraged to stay on and sample everything that Angus has to offer. John Mason and Bob Doris are right: delivering a successful games and fully exploiting their potential will depend on partnership. However, this debate is about a lasting legacy from 2014 and I am mindful of concerns within Scotland’s shooting community about the spin-off for the sport. Back in 1986, temporary ranges were used for small-bore rifle and pistol shooting. The only permanent facility remaining from those games is at Barry Buddon. I understand that, 28 years on, that full-bore set-up will again be utilised, although I presume that it will receive a revamp beforehand. The remainder of the infrastructure that will be put in place for 2014 will be temporary in nature, which, of course, is a similar scenario to that which is planned for the 2012 Olympics. I understand that suggestions have been made to hire or purchase buildings and equipment that are in service for the London games for redeployment here two years later. In economic terms, that would make sense. However, the Scottish Target Shooting Federation is concerned that we might miss an opportunity if we do not establish a permanent home for this infrastructure. No new target shooting facilities have been built in Scotland since 1986, and the STS would like us to hang on to the infrastructure and persuade the MOD to have it located in some small part of the massive Barry Buddon complex, with Scotland’s shooters having an access arrangement for competitions, training and whatever else. Again, as the local MSP, I would welcome such a move as it would provide a lasting legacy in Angus. However, given that the Scottish Government might have difficulty in persuading the MOD to play ball, can the minister advise the chamber what consideration is being given to ensuring a lasting shooting legacy in the country, wherever such a facility might be? After all, Scotland has a proud shooting tradition, especially at the Commonwealth games. Unfortunately, shooting did not feature when the event was staged in Edinburgh back in 1970. Although the sport debuted in 1966, it took until 1974 for it to become a fixture on the programme. Having drawn a blank in 1966, which—let’s face it—was not a good sporting year for Scotland, we won a silver and bronze in Christchurch before the legendary Alister Allan won gold in Edmonton in 1978 and began a remarkable run that saw him win two golds and a bronze in Brisbane, two silvers and a bronze in Edinburgh in 1986 and then, remarkably, a further silver and bronze in Victoria in 1994, making him the second most successful ever Scottish Commonwealth games athlete behind Alan Wells. In Delhi in 2010, we had an all-time record haul of nine shooting medals, including four golds, and we witnessed some remarkable efforts from Jen McIntosh, who won two golds and a bronze, and Jonathan Hammond, whose two golds, a silver and a bronze made him the most successful ever Scot at a single games. I hope that, on home soil, there will be further success to come, although I understand that there might be fewer pairs competitions included on the Barry Buddon programme. That will make getting close to the Delhi target rather challenging. I hope, however, that Angus will host domestic success and witness the raising of the saltire at the medal ceremonies. Hosting the 2014 Commonwealth games is an immensely exciting prospect for Scotland and Angus looks forward to playing its part in making them a triumph.

What assessment has been made of the impact that the negotiations will have on the fishing industry as a whole? What help or advice will be available to fishermen who are struggling to adjust to the outcome of this year’s talks?

David Milne, the chair of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, has said that fewer days at sea would wipe out the whole industry—everyone from fishermen to fish processors. How optimistic is the cabinet secretary that the combined efforts of the Scottish and UK Governments will make the European Commission understand the devastating potential consequences for the Scottish fishing industry and ensure that they row back?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement. (S4F-00304)

Following George Osborne’s admission of defeat on his economic plan A, and the miserable legacy of the Labour Party, which created this economic crisis, does the First Minister agree that it is high time that this Parliament was given the necessary financial powers to run its own affairs, so that Scotland does not have to be burdened by a union dividend of economic doom and gloom?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how much it has spent on plant machinery, gritting and other materials for resilience purposes this winter. (S4O-00432)

Does the minister agree that coping with the ravages of winter is as much about people as it is about planning and hardware? Will he join me in acknowledging the many individuals and organisations that will contribute to ensuring that, whatever extremes of snow and ice might lie ahead for us, Scotland does not grind to a halt?

There is a pessimistic backdrop to the upcoming discussions in Durban that is deeply disappointing. Not just one, but a series of recent reports have reinforced—if reinforcement were needed—the pressing need at the very least to extend the commitment period of the Kyoto protocol, which is due to expire next year. That will allow time to agree a binding treaty, to come into force by 2015 at the latest, that will bring inside the tent countries that the protocol does not cover. However, it seems that some of the world’s richest countries still do not get it on climate change, or simply cannot summon the will to address the situation. Following the failure of the Copenhagen summit in 2009, it appears, sadly, that no new global climate agreement will be reached before 2016, at the earliest. Such an agreement would not come into play before 2020, which is eight years from now. The International Energy Agency’s chief economist Fatih Birol and leading United Nations climate change official Christiana Figueres have both warned that time is running out if we are to keep temperature increase below 2°C increase. Worryingly, however, that may be understating the seriousness of the situation with which we are confronted, because it has also been suggested that the chances of restricting the increase in global temperature to 2°C above 1990 levels are already all but gone. The IEA’s “World Energy Outlook 2011” publication tells us that if recent climate change commitments are implemented by Governments only in what it terms “a cautious manner”, we are heading in a direction of travel that is leading to an average long-term temperature increase of 3.5°C. If Governments renege on those commitments, we are looking at an increase of 6°C or worse. There was more bad news this week when we learned from the World Meteorological Organization’s “Greenhouse Gas Bulletin” that the volume of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere reached a new high in 2010 and that the rate of increase has accelerated. However, it appears that leading nations are planning to turn a deaf ear or a blind eye—characterise it as you like—to those warnings and to the predicted consequences that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change outlined a few weeks ago in a report that made clear the extent to which continuing global warming will produce increases in extreme weather events. For members who have not read the IPCC report—given the volume of material that we each have to digest weekly, I realise that that may be the majority of us—I will summarise its most pertinent and worrying points. Looking ahead to the unfolding 21st century, it predicts that there is a 99 to 100 per cent chance that the frequency and magnitude of warm daily temperature extremes will increase globally; that it is 66 to 100 per cent certain that the frequency of heavy rain or the proportion of total rainfall from heavy precipitation will increase over many parts of the globe; and that there is a 66 to 100 per cent chance that average tropical cyclone wind speed will increase. It says with 66 to 100 per cent confidence that droughts in some areas will intensify, and it predicts with 99 to 100 per cent certainty that coastal erosion will continue and that rising average sea levels will, along with increased cyclone speeds, pose a significant threat to small tropical island states. I, as other members have, read the Scotsman story this morning on Lord Krebs’s report on climate change and its impact on Scotland. Of course, who would say that the prospect of fewer winter deaths, lower heating bills, fresh business opportunities and a boost to tourism would be unwelcome? However, along with those comes increased risk of flooding and storms. In any case, should not we be looking at the bigger picture and, in particular, at the overwhelmingly detrimental impact that climate change is having on the third world? On a global scale, so much—much more than has been done so far—needs to be done. It is an opportunity for Scotland, with our world-leading climate change legislation, to lead the way. As Stop Climate Chaos Scotland summed things up in its briefing: “It is therefore of utmost importance that ... Scotland continues to set an example to others. Other countries, some of which are on the cusp of legislating on climate change, are looking towards the Scottish example to see what is possible and achievable.” Of course, leading the way means walking the walk as well as talking the talk. It was therefore heartening to hear Stewart Stevenson’s response when he was challenged on the issue during an evidence session with the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. I hope that he repeats that message in Durban and tells the world that Scotland remains absolutely committed to meeting our climate change targets; that it is not acceptable to adopt a “We’ll move if you do” approach to the issue; that the world is past the point at which that sort of conditionality will address climate change; and that somebody must seize the initiative. He can point to the progress that is being made towards fully unlocking the potential of offshore wind, tidal and wave power as evidence of Scotland’s commitment to delivering. I agree with Sarah Boyack and Rob Gibson on the importance of seizing the opportunity that is presented by our peatlands to propel Scotland towards fulfilling its emissions-cutting targets. Fully exploiting the natural carbon storage option that that represents is a work in progress. First, we need Durban to agree to count carbon that is stored in peatlands, although it is anticipated that that will happen. We also need to agree on a counting mechanism, which it is anticipated will happen a year from now. We need to gather the evidence that shows the extent to which temporary methane gas emissions, following on from peatland restoration, militate against what we seek to achieve. What a chance that offers Scotland to cement its place at the forefront of battling climate change.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it is creating a supportive environment for small business start-ups. (S4O-00341)

Figures that I obtained from the local business gateway service in Angus show that, between April and August this year, 33 per cent more businesses were launched across the county than in the corresponding period in 2010, and almost 90 per cent more than in 2009. Does the minister share my view that Angus—along with, I am sure, many other parts of Scotland—is demonstrating the entrepreneurship, ambition and imagination that are required if we are to overcome these difficult economic times?

I, too, have a personal tale to relate from last winter. In the midst of the heaviest snowfall, which was certainly the worst that I have experienced in 20 years of living in Angus, I had unavoidable cause to journey from Carnoustie to Aberdeen to collect a vehicle. I completed the journey by foot, bus and train in just under two and a half hours, which was a remarkable achievement in the conditions. Indeed, the most challenging part was tramping the 500yd from my home to the bus stop and from the bus stop to the garage at the other end. That was largely because of the attitude and approach of Strathtay bus drivers and rail staff. I had a ticket for a specific train, and when I got to Arbroath rail station, I faced a wait of about an hour for its arrival. The staff told me not to worry about that and to jump on the first train that came along, because although the network was open, the service was patchy. When I got to Aberdeen—quickly, as it turned out—I had a short walk to Union Street, a quick bus trip to the Lang Stracht, an undignified hike through 2ft of snow, and I was there. I realise that far more serious weather conditions struck the central belt, but my point is that we can overcome at least some of the consequences and inconveniences of extreme weather by applying common sense, adapting and pulling together. I take pulling together down to a basic level. I hesitate to say this because, at four days short of my 49th birthday, I dread starting any sentence with the words, “When I was a lad”, but here goes: when I was a lad and heavy snow came, we did not sit back in the house failing to go to school or work because the council had not turned up to clear the road and pavements. I have just realised how uncannily like Norman Tebbit’s rant about people getting on their bikes and looking for work that sounds. It must be true what they say: the older you get, the further to the right you move. Anyway, I recall going out with my dad and all the other dads and kids to help clear the road down the back of the terrace where we lived so that everyone could get their cars out of the garages, which were in the basements of the houses, and on to the road. Then we cleared the front path and the pavement on either side and then we helped to clear the drives and pathways of the older folk in the area who could not do that for themselves. It was not some grand gesture; it was just the natural thing to do. However, I have to say that, nowadays, Richard Lyle’s tale of neighbourhood coming together is not all that commonplace—and, sadly, not only because people have a fear of being sued because someone has slipped on a piece of ground that they have cleared. Clarity on the issue of liability is to be found in the advice that is offered at www.readyscotland.org, although I accept that some of Dennis Robertson’s constituents might have a problem accessing it. The website states: “There is no law preventing you from clearing snow and ice on the pavement outside or on paths to your house”. It continues: “Provided you are careful, use common sense and don’t do anything which would be likely to cause harm or distress to others, it is highly unlikely that you will be found responsible for any accidents.” Some people still get out there and clear the drive, the path and the pavement and then salt the area to ensure that it is safe to walk on. However, certainly in towns at least, all too often we sit back waiting for an overstretched council workforce to get to our street and then complain about the length of time that it takes them to reach us. Actually, it is worse than that. I know of a businessman who decided to lend his council—I should add that it was not my local council—a helping hand by taking a digger from the plant hire business that he owned and clearing a path all the way to his home, which lay at the far end of a rather well-heeled estate. He also cleared various roads that lay off the route that he had an interest in making accessible. Imagine his surprise, therefore, when his generous gesture was greeted by one ungrateful neighbour complaining in all seriousness that he might have cleared the pavements while he was at it. The thing about extreme weather is that it is just that—extreme. As individuals, we must play our part in overcoming it, as several members have said. Although the Government and other relevant agencies and organisations must be suitably prepared for the onset of winter and ready to discharge their responsibilities—based on what we heard from the minister, that certainly seems to be the case—at a local level it cannot be left entirely to councils, which simply cannot maintain for 12 months of the year the resources that are required to spring into action when bad weather arrives to ensure that our communities do not grind to a halt. I say that as an SNP member whose local council is not of my political persuasion. Since my days as a young journalist, I have had an enormous regard for the men and women who do their best to keep our country functioning in the worst of the winter weather, particularly those who are involved in ploughing and gritting the roads. During my time as a trainee reporter back in the early 1980s, I was sent out with a snowplough driver whose beat was the Glens of Foudland—I was to do a story on the nature of his job. That was in the days before the tachograph, the working time directive and health safety, when drivers did an extended run, grabbed a cup of tea and then went back out on another extended run in an almost endless cycle. Members such as Mr Stewart who know that area will know that that is pretty much what is required to keep the road from being blocked. Even now, we still see people rising to the challenge of a severe winter. We need look no further than the men and women who are keeping our roads open now, the electricity company employees who are out in savage conditions repairing damaged power lines or the two Network Rail workers who last winter were hospitalised with frostbite after working in temperatures that plunged to -22°—incidentally, that happened not in some remote corner of Scotland but in Rutherglen. Given what those workers do to try to ensure that our lives are as normal as possible, is it so much to ask that we as individuals step up to the plate? I realise that time is pressing, so I will make one final point. I say to Chic Brodie that the community spirit is still out there in our rural areas. In one of my villages in Angus South the locals came together some years ago to purchase grit bins, which they fill every year. They live on a brae; there are about 30 households living on or off the brae on an unadopted road. I draw to the minister’s attention the fact that this time last year, in preparing for the onset of winter, those residents purchased salt at around £70 a tonne and this year they purchased it at £75 a tonne. It was disturbing to hear that during the depths of last winter, when a top-up of the bins was needed, they were forced to pay up to £190 a tonne. I understand the laws of supply and demand and that grit became harder to source, but, frankly, that reeks of profiteering. I ask the minister to do whatever he can to ensure that if we are hit by another bout of severe weather, communities that have to ensure that their own roads are kept clear are not ripped off.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what importance it attaches to the provision of health services to rural communities. (S4O-00256)

As the local MSP, I recently attended the 50th anniversary of the Queen Mother wing of Arbroath infirmary, which delivers a range of health services to the town. However, 12 miles or so from Arbroath lies the thriving village of Letham which, by some historical quirk, has no on-site general practitioner provision. Will the cabinet secretary join me in encouraging the health authorities in Tayside to look favourably on the local campaign to address that situation and deliver appropriate locally based health cover for the village?

Given the cabinet secretary’s detailed knowledge of the situation, how hopeful or confident is she that a sustainable solution—that the union membership buys into—will be reached in the next few months?

As a recently elected member, I admit that I can still occasionally be genuinely taken aback by things that I come across as an MSP. With the passage of time, I suspect that I will become more hardened to such things, but I hope that I never reach the point at which I am so immune that events of the type that have put the reform of the CFP on ice for the past two and a half months do not provoke a sense of dismay and disappointment. As Scotland’s fishermen face with concern the formulation of a new CFP, they deserve better than to have progress towards that delayed by the petty party-politicking in Europe on which Elaine Murray touched. The six separate reports that the European Commission published on 13 July should have been allocated to the various political groups before the summer, but a dispute over who got what created an impasse. It will be next Monday at the earliest before the matter is resolved. The next phase in the process is—or was—due to get under way on 10 October and to conclude by December. Resolution might have been reached at Monday’s planned meeting of the Committee on Fisheries in Brussels, but that meeting was scrapped after the European Parliament building was struck by a power cut—as the saying goes, you could not make it up. However, there is little humour to be found in this farce, because a two-and-a-half-month logjam, especially at this initial stage, raises the possibility that aspects of the new-look CFP that may be hugely important to Scotland will not be as well scrutinised as they might have been. I am sure that this debate will cover in detail every angle of the CFP and what it might mean to our fishermen. I will focus on just two aspects: decentralisation and the threat of the Commission imposing mandatory transferable fishing concessions on member states. Greater decentralisation and regionalisation is long overdue. Centralised micromanagement from Brussels has dogged the CFP for years. For a while, it seemed to be accepted that what is actually needed is a menu of management options from which member states can select what is best suited to their needs. However, no sooner had fisheries commissioner Maria Damanaki spoken about ending micromanagement from Brussels than a problem emerged over a claim that it might be illegal to do so. Commissioner Damanaki told us that the EU should be “the lighthouse ... showing the way. Member states, the regions and industry have to steer the ship—and avoid the rocks.” Almost immediately, doubts were raised about the legality of such a move. It was claimed that transferring significant powers from Brussels back to member states would be a treaty breach. Now, interestingly, Ms Damanaki is on the retreat and qualifying everything that she says on regionalisation with the rider that it is as far as the treaties allow for. There is, of course, a degree of contradiction from the Commission, which talks about devolving power to member states while at the same time proposing an EU-wide programme of tradeable fishing concessions. Scotland should be extremely wary of the establishment of transferable quotas as proposed. We are told that the quotas will be tradeable only within member states and not between member states and that safeguards will be put in place. However, as Elaine Murray touched on, that is not what is proposed in articles 32.2 and 31.2. The fears that are raised by those proposals are supposed to be calmed by claims that the wording in the proposals, which present a back-door threat to the principle of relative stability, should have been clearer and that they refer only to temporary leasing or the transfer of unused concessions. However, as Alex Fergusson said, when Scots MEPs Struan Stevenson and Ian Hudghton, who are both members of the Committee on Fisheries, gave evidence to the Parliament’s Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, they left no one in doubt about the seriousness of the issue. One of the aims of establishing tradeable fishing concessions is to reduce further the capacity of the EU fleet by 20 per cent without compensating fishermen for decommissioning. It is accepted that there are too many boats chasing too few fish and it is generally accepted that, despite the conservation efforts of recent years, up to 75 per cent of EU stocks are still overfished. However, there remains considerable doubt over the science surrounding the issue.

No. I want to finish, if I may. Just as we accept the need to tackle the issue of discards, so no one disputes that overfishing is a problem. Commissioner Damanaki can argue that the EU fleet remains “obese”, but the problem for Scotland is that the Commission is effectively admitting defeat in trying to force the likes of Spain to take its share of cuts and settling instead for fleet reduction wherever and whenever. It wants market forces to do the job, but that takes no account of the fact that in Scotland since 1998, through a mix of consolidations, decommissioning and retirement, 48 per cent of our pelagic fleet and 41 per cent of the demersal fleet has gone. According to Struan Stevenson and Ian Hudghton, one of the major dangers of such a scheme is that if the rights were bought off Scots fishermen by large mainland-Europe fishing operations, the catches would be landed there, which would sound the death knell for Scottish ports such as Peterhead and Fraserburgh. Both MEPS pointed to Iceland as a prime example of how things can go wrong. The Icelanders introduced a system that was designed to ensure that quotas were held only by fishermen in their smaller village fishing communities, but those quotas were subsequently bought up by big Reykjavik companies and eventually fell into the hands of a financial conglomerate in the USA. That New York-based conglomerate then went bust, leaving the Icelandic Government with a shambles on its hands. There is a warning there for us, and we should heed it. Last week, Struan Stevenson gave the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee an undertaking that Scotland’s MEPs would set aside party differences and work together in the interests of our fishing communities. I hope that the Parliament, too, will come together and speak with one voice in support of Scotland’s fishermen to secure CFP reform that protects Scotland’s fishing interests in future. The Labour amendment calls on the Scottish Government to work closely with London. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will fight Scotland’s corner by any and all means necessary, including working closely with the UK Government, but there are two very good reasons why Richard Lochhead needs to be given a leading role in securing a CFP that protects our fishermen’s interests. First, as he pointed out, Scottish vessels land 70 per cent of the UK catch and almost 10 per cent of the EU. Secondly—and more telling—such is the London Tory and Lib Dem coalition’s interest in fishing that it has not included a single reference to it in its 409-point coalition agreement. I urge members to support the Scottish Government motion.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding reducing the rate of VAT. (S4O-00187)

The minister will be aware that the Irish Government has introduced a temporary reduction in the rate of VAT pertaining to the tourism and golf services sector. Has the Scottish Government raised with London the possibility of its addressing an 11 per cent disparity in VAT rates between Ireland and Scotland, which is placing our tourism and golf sectors at a competitive disadvantage?

Yes.

A review is also under way into the governance of Scotland’s universities. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the issue of financial accountability will be at the heart of that review?

Does the cabinet secretary feel that, in addition to the welcome measures that she has announced today, there might also be a specific need in the future to regulate charges that are being levied by private care homes?

As the First Minister has made clear, the Government does not claim a monopoly on wisdom, be it on the issue that we are discussing or on any other matter. However, it is interesting to note the long list of legal experts—including, to name but two, Paul McBride and Elish Angiolini—who have echoed the Government’s concerns about the Supreme Court. I am mindful of the wise counsel of a constituent of mine who has a long-standing interest in matters legal. He has made clear that “There is a perfectly adequate system within Scotland for criminal justice appeals to be taken in Edinburgh.” I do not agree on everything with that constituent. Indeed, I am sure that he was not among the 16,000 or so people who chose to vote SNP in my constituency in the recent election. However, just because Lord Fraser of Carmyllie remains misguided politically, that does not mean that his opinion on the Supreme Court is unworthy of respect. After all, Peter Fraser is a former Lord Advocate and Solicitor General and someone who, on legal matters at least, ought to know what he is talking about. So, too, one would think, is Ian Smart, who is a former president of the Law Society of Scotland. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice mentioned, he has stated: “we have drifted into a situation where there is a second layer of appeal which was never anybody’s intention. The Court of Criminal Appeal is the final appeal court in Scottish criminal procedure. If anybody had any intention of changing that, it would have been changed in Statute. Nobody intended that routine cases should be dealt with by the Supreme Court.” Perhaps so, but that is where we found ourselves. The Government’s opposition to what is happening is not, as Iain Gray has claimed, “constitutional grandstanding”. It is not, as Johann Lamont said, driven by a political agenda; it is about standing up for Scotland’s distinct legal system and seeking to prevent further erosion and interference.

The member is right that there is a range of opinions. I have here a list of people who tend to agree with the Government. The issue is not about seeking special treatment; it is about ensuring that our legal system enjoys the same respect and status as exist in other parts of these isles. The unionist parties in the Parliament are happy for Scotland to be part of Britain, so why are they seemingly prepared to accept that Scottish defendants can appeal to the UKSC without leave from our High Court, while English defendants require no equivalent permission? Where is the equality of partnership in the union in that? As a Parliament, we would be failing in our duty if we sat back and accepted a situation where a court in another UK jurisdiction can intervene in our judicial system. Enshrined within the act of union is the principle that courts outside our borders should have no jurisdiction over Scottish criminal matters. Are those who defend the union really saying that the act that underpins it—or at least an aspect of it—can be ridden roughshod over? Perhaps independence is closer than we thought. The interim report of Lord McCluskey’s independent specialist group is to be welcomed, at least to the extent that it recognises that there is a need to put the High Court on an equal footing with its counterparts in England and Wales by requiring the granting of a certificate that says that the case raises a point of general importance before a Supreme Court appeal can proceed. The report does not go far enough, in the view of some of us in the chamber, but we are where we are and we need to make the best of a bad job. I want to address Johann Lamont’s amendment and some of the comments that have been made. We require to move on in this matter. I agree that it would have been preferable if we had been spared the use of words such as “arrogance”, “conceit”, “bile”, “intemperance” and “sneering disregard” in relation to this issue. Unfortunately, the leader of the Conservatives was unable to exercise restraint while participating in First Minister’s question time a couple of weeks ago. That was then; this is now. Let us focus on the issue being debated and the options for resolution.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is regarding the demand on police resources of tackling underage drinking and whether these resources could be better directed. (S4O-00063)

Two litres of cider, seven bottles of alcopops, 1 litre of vodka, 4 litres of wine, 1 litre of Buckfast and 11 litres of lager—that is the haul of cheap booze that was taken off children aged 15 and under in just one Angus town on the night of 3 June. Fast forward a fortnight and Tayside Police are called into action to—

Sorry. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary shares my view—I speak as the father of a 16-year-old—that parents should help to free up police time for tackling crime by better monitoring how their children spend their money and what they are up to when out and about at the weekend.

At the risk of being parochial, I suggest that in real terms, few parts of this country better encapsulate the traditional strengths, difficulties and benefits of Scottish Government support and the fantastic potential that we possess, than my home constituency of Angus South. Angus has fantastic farming and fishing-related traditions. Despite the challenges that those industries have faced, the Arbroath smokie still enjoys world renown and we continue to play a lead role in food production, not least in the soft fruit sector. However, the rural parts of Angus and, indeed, Scotland are about more than food production, important though that is. Rural Angus is the scene of many small and medium-sized business success stories. Castleton of Eassie is home to Agrico UK, the Scottish arm of one of the leading seed-potato exporters in Europe, which does business around the globe from its base on the western edge of my constituency. Monikie hosts Denfind Stone, which is expanding its production at the reopened Pitairlie quarry and making its mark on the sandstone cladding and dry-stone dyking scenes. Kirkbuddo is the location of Sturrock’s Joinery, which has carved out a reputation second to none for producing bespoke wood products. In the village of Newtyle, we have the thriving James Pirie and Son—butchers and producers of champion haggis and sausage. Those are just four examples of the kind of success to which I refer. Scottish Government backing is very much at the heart of what is being achieved. Agrico talks positively of the training support that it has received from Scottish Enterprise, and Denfind Stone’s move to its new on-site headquarters, with the accompanying jobs boost, is being funded by an SRDP grant. The Newtyle post office and shop, which is the butcher’s sister operation, has been able to open a takeaway business, thanks to backing from the post office diversification fund. Between them, the post office and the butcher employ a dozen people, which keeps local folk in employment in their own village. There are challenges out there for our communities, of course. Another village that I am privileged to represent bears testimony to that. The Letham area boasts a population of around 2,000, but it has no on-site general practitioner provision. In general, local folk have to travel to Forfar, which is five miles or so away, to see a doctor. That is fine if the person is fit and healthy or has ready access to a car, but Letham has an unusually high proportion of elderly residents and a fairly limited bus service. Locals are able to take the bus to a GP appointment, but all too often there will be a £12 to £15 return taxi journey if they do not want to hang around thereafter. A strong community council-led campaign that the local SNP and Conservative councillors and I have backed is pressing NHS Tayside to address that unacceptable situation. Poor bus services are, of course, an issue for much of rural Scotland. Thank goodness, in that case, for the free bus travel scheme that the Scottish Executive introduced and the previous SNP Government expanded. Those who, during the recent election campaign, wished to deny people access to free bus travel until the age of 65 should be in no doubt about the importance of that scheme to rural Scotland. As the cuts from Westminster bite through national Government in Scotland and down to the local government level and make subsidising unprofitable bus routes more difficult, it is essential that we maximise footfall on rural buses. Bus drivers will say that, if it was not for their use by free bus-pass holders, many routes would be under greater threat, or worse. There are other difficulties in rural areas, one of which is fuel poverty. Between September and December last year, some of my constituents were hit by a price hike of 50 per cent for fuel oil. The cost of fuel, whether for keeping our homes warm or powering our cars, is in the control of another place, of course, but that should not prevent members from recognising the hardship that Scots face on that front, or from applying pressure to have such matters properly addressed. Access to high-speed—indeed, half-decent—broadband is another issue. A constituent of mine runs a wedding photography business less than 10 miles from our major population centre of Arbroath. She has told me that, because of poor-quality broadband access, she is effectively running her business 24/7, with all the associated costs that that involves, simply in order to download and receive the images that she needs. That is not good enough, so we should surely all welcome the Scottish Government’s next generation digital fund and the cabinet secretary’s determination, which he outlined at this morning’s meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, to see greater focus being given to meeting the needs of rural communities. In recognising the problems that rural communities face, we should acknowledge that there is also much to celebrate and anticipate. This debate is about taking rural Scotland forward. In Angus, we are very much looking to the future, not least on the renewable energy front. Plans for an offshore wind farm to be located 25km off the coast promise to place Angus at the forefront of clean green energy production. As the local member, I very much welcome that. Phase 1 of the Firth of Forth offshore wind zone will stretch from Carnoustie to the boundary with north Angus. That project has the potential to power 850,000 homes. The export cable will come ashore at one of three possible locations around Carnoustie before it continues its journey underground across south Angus to Tealing, where it will link up with the national grid. Planning permission will be applied for next summer, construction should begin in 2015, and it is hoped that the field will become operational in 2017. I hope that Scotland will have control of the Crown estate long before then and will therefore be able to enjoy the full financial benefits of that coastal energy generation. The development is about more than energy production, of course; it also has the potential to bring jobs to Angus. The scheme will require a construction base, which could be at Montrose, although Dundee is also being considered. I know that Seagreen Wind Energy has been actively engaging with Angus Council’s economic development department about involving local businesses in the project. Angus was the scene of the signing of the declaration of independence and the battle of Dunnichen, and it lays claim to being the birthplace of Scotland. We are proud of our position in Scotland’s history, but we also look to the future. We aim not only to protect and develop our rural communities, businesses and agricultural sector, but to be very much at the forefront of the rapidly developing renewables revolution.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that if rural schools are to close, the example in Angus South, where Angus Council worked closely with the communities of Lintrathen, Kilry and Glenisla to secure agreement on closure of their local primaries in favour of an environmentally friendly new build serving all those communities, is to be commended?

I pay tribute to my predecessor, Andrew Welsh. Eighty per cent of Angus South is drawn from the Angus seat that he represented in this Parliament for 12 years. Prior to that, he represented the county for many years in another place. Andrew never tired of telling people how proud and honoured he felt to have been elected by the people of Angus to represent their interests and those of Scotland in the Parliament. I now know how he felt and I acknowledge what a hard act I have to follow. Sport and sporting success are hugely important to Scotland—30 years spent working as a sports journalist taught me that. During my journalistic career, I was fortunate enough to cover a football world cup and two European championship finals, and to witness my team, Aberdeen FC, lift the cup winners’ cup. Sadly, I fear that it may be some time before Scotland and the Dons scale those heights again, but I live in hope. It is not only at the top level that sporting success of whatever nature excites and inspires. The sense of pride and achievement that youngsters and their families in particular take in even modest success is tangible. Indeed, during my time in journalism, one of the biggest challenges that I faced was placating relatives who believed that their youngster’s triumph was worthy of far greater coverage in the newspaper than it had been granted. However, that sometime lack of proportion does not detract from the many success stories that there have been and continue to be throughout Tayside, Fife, Perthshire and, in particular, Angus South, the constituency that I am privileged to represent. Several years spent on the judging panel of the Angus sports council awards brought home to me just how blessed we are with emerging and established sporting talent in our part of Scotland and how fortunate we are to have the volunteers and coaches who nurture that talent. I am sure that the same holds true throughout the rest of the country. Sport not only helps to shape a healthier nation; it builds confidence, lifts the spirit and instils a sense of pride. I say in passing that, in Angus South, we could not be prouder of our only senior football club, Arbroath FC, which during the season that just ended lifted the first major honour in its 133-year history. I look forward to watching the red lichties fly the flag for Angus South in the second division. On a perhaps grander scale, the next few years promise to enhance greatly Scotland’s standing in the sporting world. In the short term, I look forward to the women’s open coming to Carnoustie, my home town. Our friends and neighbours south of the border once boasted, “Football’s coming home.” Golf—in the shape of arguably the greatest golfing spectacle that exists—is coming home in 2014, when Gleneagles will host the Ryder cup. It will be the first time since 1973 that the event has been staged in Scotland. With 250,000 golf fans expected to descend on Perthshire and a global television audience of several hundred million tuning in, the country really will be in the sporting spotlight. As we have heard throughout the debate, 2014 promises to be truly special, with the Commonwealth games heading for Glasgow. I reported on the games back in 1986, when Edinburgh was the host city. Despite the boycott and the financial troubles that marred the lead-up, it was a truly memorable event—in a domestic context, it was memorable most notably for the achievement of one of my constituents, Liz McColgan, who literally ran away with the inaugural women’s 10,000m. With Shona Robison overseeing the games, I am certain that there will be no repeat of the problems of 25 years ago and that, just as the people of Edinburgh got behind the event then, so the good folk of Glasgow will in 2014. Indeed, I am sure that the whole of Scotland will get behind the games and the Ryder cup and that those events will provide a huge boost to our sense of national pride and confidence. Former First Minister Jack McConnell, in a fine speech on the final day of the third session of the Parliament, said that, after 12 years of devolution, “more Scots walk a little taller, cringe a little less and occasionally have ideas above their station.”—[Official Report, 22 March 2011; c 34788.] I believe that, come late 2014, Scotland—its confidence swelled by successfully hosting the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games—will stand upright, the Caledonian cringe will be a thing of the past and, with the indisputable case having been made, we will be ready to take our place among the independent nations of the world. For that and many other reasons that previous speakers have articulated, I support the motion.