I thank Neil Findlay for bringing this important debate to the Parliament. Over the past number of years, we have seen difficulties with the transportation of disabled passengers with special needs. I certainly hope that the companies that dealt with Mr Findlay’s relative are responding to the issue in a proper manner. Mr Findlay raised the issue of disabled people travelling on airplanes and, indeed, the whole experience of disabled people travelling through an airport. It is vital that we get that issue right. As Mr Findlay may or may not know, I chair the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on aviation. I asked some carriers for their comments on this issue, and some of them were quite interesting. I was reminded of my days working in the bus industry, because it took Lothian Buses here in Edinburgh—I worked for the company for a number of years—the best part of 10 years to move its fleet from the old Olympian buses, which for various reasons could not be adapted, to the point at which every vehicle in the fleet is now disabled compliant. Making that kind of adaptation is not easy and there is obviously a cost implication in doing so for older aircraft. I am obviously delighted that companies such as BA and Virgin have done their best in that regard. Such is the seriousness of the issue that Mr Findlay has raised that, to be fair on easyJet, which Mr Findlay mentioned, Mr Andrew McConnell from easyJet has come up to listen to this debate. He is willing to talk to any MSP who has an interest in disabilities and the likes.

I thank Mr Findlay for his comments—I am just saying that, when I saw that there was a debate kicking off on the matter, I thought that I would put a call out, and Mr McConnell from easyJet is here if Mr Findlay wishes to speak to him after the debate. I am aware that easyJet is commissioning a new fleet. The company has a disability forum that runs independently of it and is chaired by David Blunkett. He will be advising the company in the springtime and the new fleet will apparently deal with some of the issues. It is vital to consider other issues, such as staff training. It is shocking that anyone can go through the experience that Mr Findlay’s relative went through, and it is not surprising that they would view such an experience as nothing less than a damning indictment of the carrier that was involved. It is vital that we get the facilities right for people who are disabled. My late father had a long-term degenerative illness, and I know that it is vital that people are allowed the dignity to travel on aircraft while they are fit and healthy enough to do so, and to have an enjoyable experience. I know about that from the difficulties that I had in bringing my father back through Heathrow, for instance, where the arrangements that had been made—it was some years ago—were certainly not satisfactory for someone who had a long-term degenerative illness and required transport between terminals. That was not easy to arrange. I have every sympathy with Mr Findlay’s relative and there is no reason for that sort of thing to happen.

As a result of my investigations, companies such as BA, Virgin and easyJet, and the airports that have replied to me, have given me plans of action. I am happy to pass those emails on to Mr Findlay if he wishes me to, and Mr McConnell from easyJet is up in the gallery. I think that the way forward looks a bit better than what we have had so far.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is commendable that Ryanair has such facilities. However, the airline has had a high level of growth over the past eight to 10 years, which has enabled it to purchase brand new planes. The storage implications of someone having a wheelchair are therefore a lot easier for Ryanair, as the company can have the facilities fitted at the point of delivery.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has received an update from the United Kingdom Government regarding the future use of European arrest warrants in Scotland. (S4O-02813)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the way that UK Government handled the matter could have meant that Europe would, had the UK withdrawn from the European arrest warrant system, have been a haven against prosecution in this country?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what the economic impact would be of the proposals on childcare outlined in the white paper on independence. (S4O-02787)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that that transformational policy matches the drive and ambition of the people of Scotland and that it would, following independence, ensure that Scotland acted as a beacon for progressiveness and fairness in helping those who struggle with childcare costs?

I associate myself completely with the comments made earlier about David McLetchie’s sense of humour—he is definitely missed in this chamber. Like my former colleagues on the Justice Committee, I thank the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee for our inquiry. We went from feeling that it was a dry debate to feeling that it was a very important and quite fascinating one. Members have highlighted most of the inquiry’s findings, but I will explain what I got out of the inquiry. I could feel Patricia Ferguson’s frustration when she was speaking earlier about the difficulty of getting things changed in relation to landlords, tenants and buildings. In my previous existence as a councillor, I was chair of the City of Edinburgh Council regulatory committee that dealt with licensing for houses in multiple occupation. We dealt with all the problems of burdens and the fact that factors did not act responsibly in some instances. It was deeply frustrating, for example, trying to get representatives of eight properties together when three or four of them were absentee landlords. I fully understand where Patricia Ferguson is coming from on that kind of issue, which can be very difficult, particularly when it comes to common repairs and the like. Dealing with those matters took a lot of time. As an MSP, I have dealt with various related issues in my constituency. In my area on the west side of the city, we have a number of suburban-type properties that have factors and burdens, including management fees, and we have had difficult situations with them. For example, as was mentioned earlier, although developments might have been built with the idea that there would be residents associations, many of them become moribund. The fact that there was no residents association made it difficult for me in a particular case to identify who was paying what to whom and who represented and could speak for the community. In that case, frustrations built up among residents regarding the relationship with the land management company that dealt with a grass area. The residents felt that they were not getting value for money and that there was no way of getting their voice heard by the management company, so the relationship between the two parties fell apart. Indeed, it was a good example of how things can go wrong. There had been a turnover of residents, but the current residents thought that one area was supposed to be a part of the land management scheme. It turned out that the land was not part of the scheme. The land was terribly overgrown, but the land management company said that it could not deal with the land because to take it on would mean that the company would be seen as being liable and having presumed ownership. I thoroughly agree with the comments that all members have made about the difficulties, and I welcome the minister’s comments. The legislation deals with something that is very important to people who live in particular areas. We must do our best to sort out the difficulties.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what it has done to mitigate the impact of the cancellation of the fixed broadband capital infill programme of the United Kingdom Government’s superconnected cities broadband initiative. (S4O-02716)

Can the cabinet secretary provide an update on when we can expect superfast broadband to be rolled out in rural west Edinburgh?

I welcome the strategy for youth sports and in particular the input by the young people’s sport panel. It is good that those whom we want to encourage to participate in sport have taken part in the direction finding that, frankly, we have required for some time. As I see it, there are two issues. The first, which a number of members have dealt with, is how we get young people into sport. What is sport at a youth level? It was only in the latter part of the debate that the idea of fun has been introduced. People need to find a real sense of fun when they kick off—that is the only way that we will get youngsters in primary school interested. The transition between primary and secondary school has been mentioned, and there are the physical changes that happen during adolescence, which particularly affect girls’ involvement in sport. Those are all issues, but they have been around for years. Dealing with them is the first part of tackling the problems. Obviously, I am delighted with the £5.9 million that the minister mentioned and that 89 per cent of schools have met the PE target, although I would love 100 per cent of schools to have the full amount of PE. However, having read the report, I want to raise the issue of how we help people to continue when they identify the sport that they are interested in. At school, PE provides a taster to allow kids to get into sport and to find out what sport they like, what is good for them and how they can continue doing it. Another issue is that we want high-level athletes. Ken Macintosh mentioned Ian Stewart. The first time that I ran a 5,000m for Edinburgh Athletic Club back in the 1970s, when I was 17, we stayed with the Stewart family in Birchfield. Those people are role models to us. I get very despondent when I see that the last time that a Scottish record for a flat race between 100m and the marathon was broken was 19 years ago with Tom McKean. We have to go back to 1975 to the 400m record by David Jenkins. There is therefore an issue with role models. Those people have been and gone and a lot of people do not remember them—we were having a laugh at who remembers Ian Stewart—but I do. Graham Williamson, who holds the Scottish record for the 1 mile, was my captain in the Scottish schools cross-country team, but that is going back so many years. We have to get people involved now. This is where the people aspect comes in. When I went to Craigmount school, it was great. The head of physical education was Peter Gallagher, a Scottish B international rugby player. At that time I had no interest in rugby, but my English teacher was the five times Scottish marathon champion, Colin Youngson. He got me into running and, through that, I became an international and carried on from there. It was absolutely fantastic. People are the key. We have to involve people who inspire and really want the kids to do well. If we do that, people will have fun at sport and take it through their entire careers into adulthood and we will, I hope, start to see the results in future years.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what evidence there is that the community councils short-life working group recommendation “that there is continued drive aimed at the community and Community Councils for contested Community Council elections” has been achieved in the recent community council elections. (S4O-02629)

Does the minister intend to take any further steps to encourage participation in community councils and, in doing so, increase the number of contested elections to community councils?

I am delighted to have been given the opportunity to introduce this debate. For 100 years, the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland has maintained a park to the west of the city of Edinburgh, in Corstorphine. The vision for a new zoological park in Edinburgh came from Thomas Gillespie, who was an Edinburgh lawyer. In 1908, after a number of years of thought, Gillespie was inspired to take forward his dream by two events. He read an article that described the fine new animal park at Stellingen, near Hamburg, which was run by Carl Hagenbeck, and then the highly successful Scottish national exhibition of industry, science and art was held at Saughton park, which is in the west of the city, not far from where the zoo is now. That seemed to be the proof that Gillespie required at the time. He said: “people here would patronise a place of open-air resort if it were presented to them on attractive lines.” With the formation of the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland in 1909, Gillespie had the mechanism to persevere with his vision, but it was not always plain sailing. Public subscription was slow to pick up, and help had to be provided by Edinburgh Town Council and others. After an extensive list of possible locations had been drawn up, the estate of Corstorphine hill house was offered to the society for the princely sum of £17,000.

The society did not have the sole purpose of being a zoo. Its purposes included advancing research and education, which has remained as a driving force today. Although some animals had been acquired, others were loaned out by the owner of a private collection of animals, Mr G H Tyrwhitt-Drake of Maidstone—a fine name, I must say. Stories about the arrival of the animals at Corstorphine railway station are rather funny and I encourage everyone to read the story of Edinburgh zoo by Thomas Gillespie, in which he describes the movement of the animals from the railway trucks to the zoo. The zoo was opened as the Scottish national zoological park to the general public on 22 July 1913. The zoo has many wonderful stories from the past century, including how it survived two world wars, the depression, the granting of a royal charter, and Luftwaffe bombing. The zoo has had many famous residents: Wojtek, the Polish army bear; Mercedes, the polar bear; king penguin Sir Nils Olav, who is the colonel-in-chief of the Royal Norwegian Guard; and the very famous Tian Tian and Yang Guang, the giant pandas from China. Theirs are great stories, one and all. However, there is so much more to the zoo and the zoological society. John Muir, the Scots-born naturalist, once said: “When one tugs at a single thing in nature, he finds it attached to the rest of the world.” As a leader in science-based conservation, the society works here in Scotland and internationally to support local communities so that they have the chance to live and learn alongside nature. There are flagship international projects such as the Budongo conservation project in Uganda, which deals with forest conservation and primate research. One of the stories from that project is absolutely wonderful. More than 100 ex-hunters have been given breeding goats as an alternative to snaring animals. Work is also being done in the Brazilian Pantanal, the largest freshwater wetland in the world, which is being threatened by development and change in land management practices. Much of that work is helping conservationists to trace numbers and gain knowledge of the little-known and threatened giant armadillo. The society and the zoo do not just work internationally. There is also the initiative known as the Caledonian ark, which has the mission of preserving our native species. In Scotland, the society runs the Highland wildlife park, and much of the work that is being done there is part of the nationwide programme to save the Scottish wildcat. The society is implementing a series of projects that combine the potential for public education and breeding of, reintroduction of and research into native species that have been or are under threat. Among the other highlights, the society is the lead partner in the Scottish beaver trial at Knapdale in Argyll. That was the first licensed mammal reintroduction programme ever to take place in the United Kingdom. The project consists of four beaver families, and its purpose is to assess how reintroduction affects the local environment and tourism. Education programmes are being run alongside the trial with an education officer on site to provide guided tours. As far as I can gather, monitoring of the project will end next May, the Scottish Government will collate the research results, and the results will be known in 2015. Those are just the highlights of what is happening right now, but there must be ambitions, particularly in education. The creation of a multifaceted nature discovery centre that provides a 21st century visitor experience is the way forward. The society’s chief executive officer, Chris West, has had to leave the gallery but some of his colleagues are still there. He said: “The discovery centre will be a combination of science centre, mini-zoo, early-learning centre, exhibition space and tropical house, focused upon connecting people with conservation and action.” I wonder what Thomas Gillespie would think of Edinburgh zoo and the society. It is not just a patch of land on Corstorphine hill: it is way beyond that. It is a zoo that is globally respected for its research, conservation and education, and it is second only to Edinburgh castle as a tourist attraction, providing many millions of pounds to the Scottish economy, particularly the Edinburgh economy. From an Edwardian vision, through some tough times, we have what we have today. The zoo has a great century behind it and many more years ahead of it. What we require is more education and more conservation, especially if mankind continues to pressurise the natural environment. The zoo and the society are global institutions—international in outlook with an eye to the local. Their work here in Scotland is every bit as important as their international work. I wish the society team led by chairman Jeremy Peat and chief executive officer Chris West, the staff and members my congratulations. I hope that they have many more successful years ahead.

I am not terribly sure that I am delighted to be speaking here today, but it is my last hurrah as a member of the Justice Committee. There is an element of déjà vu about the debate. After the previous debate on the subject, my late colleague David McLetchie said to me on the way out of the chamber, “Colin, with all your wittering on about the citizens advice bureaux you’ve given me an extra two minutes for my summing up.” However, he still did not manage to fill his allocation of time, such was the agreement among members on the subject. I miss David and his humour—many of us do. However, this debate is somewhat different. A number of eminent people gave the Justice Committee evidence, verbally or in writing, on the bill . The issues raised were quite fascinating, so I agree with Elaine Murray that aspects of the bill are interesting. The tribunals are designed to provide an easier and less expensive method of justice for society, and we hope that that will carry on. Their set-up is such that, in some cases, it is not necessary to employ legal counsel, although we all know that tribunal cases can also become extremely complicated, so a lawyer is required in most. As we can see from the concerns that were raised in witness statements to the committee, the possible judicialisation of management and procedure of tribunals is worrying, because it would mean that tribunals would be out of step in terms of accessibility. It has been suggested that tribunals might be subjected to what I think has been called “courtification”—according to my notes, the word was used by Christine Grahame, so it obviously cannot be wrong. In broad terms, I agree with the committee in feeling strongly that individual aspects of the various tribunals—for example, the Additional Support Needs Tribunal and the Mental Health Tribunal—should not be lost within the new system. Under the bill, the Mental Health Tribunal will become an individual chamber within the first-tier tribunal and the Lands Tribunal for Scotland will also transfer. As several speakers have pointed out, Lands Tribunal cases can be incredibly complicated, so perhaps we need to consider whether it is not so much a tribunal as a court. I know that the complexities were described by the minister. Fears about loss of identity and loss of methods of working that have been gained over many years should be allayed. Another concern that is highlighted in the report relates to the children’s hearings system, which has just undergone a period of reform. We should keep that in mind if further reforms are required, and we should try to avoid children’s hearings being included in the tribunals system. A power to make such a modification is given to ministers in section 26(2)(b), which requires that regulations that are subject to affirmative procedure be laid before Parliament. I have a lot of notes on that, but Margaret Mitchell has already kindly raised all those concerns, so I shall not mention them again.

No—I refuse to mention them again. Ms Grahame should just sit there. She has had her shot. Anyway, use of affirmative procedure will provide some parliamentary protection. The two-tier structure is quite interesting, given that over the months we constantly complained about people going into their silos and using all their own terminology. However, everyone seems to be in agreement regarding the two-tier structure and how it will work; it seems to be the right way. Again, previous speeches have explained the matter better than I could; members will not hear my description of it, as I hope to run out of time fairly shortly. Much has been made about the suggestion by the Lord President that he would name Lady Smith as president of the tribunals. I welcome the clarification that has been provided by the minister that that is not an appointment but an assignment. That is important because that was, as far as I am aware, the first time we have heard that description. When the Lord President gave evidence, I accepted that Lady Smith is more than qualified for the post—I certainly would not argue against her credentials or suitability—but it seems to be a little strange to see a name being presented for the position before the legislation to establish the post is in place. On the people who sit on tribunals, there were a number of comments, including on whether the term “judge” should be used to refer to the person who presides over the tribunal. In one respect, it may be useful to keep a clear distinction between a court and a tribunal—I understand that point and I think that it is quite important. Certainly, as a matter of symbolism, it is perhaps a better idea to lose the title “judge”. I will avoid using the quotations that three or four other members have used. That leaves me to say only that, as Elaine Murray mentioned, the legislation deals with a relatively small amount of work, but at least—if I can be a little bit parochial—should we vote yes next year, we will have plenty of scope to bring the other tribunals into the system.

We are all aware that police stations are reassuring to the public. Everyone likes to see them. However, the issue is how much they are used and how they are used. The key issue is how we carry on providing a service to the Scottish people when we are under constant attack from vicious budget cuts from London. We have heard all about what we should be doing and what we should keep; it would be really great if any of the Opposition parties said what it would cut.

No, I am sorry. I came across a press release on the Scottish Police Federation website.

Brian Docherty, of the Scottish Police Federation, said: “If under used police offices can be shut to save money then we have no problem with that. It would be nice to have a police officer on every street and a police office in every community but we have to live in the real world.” Even the police are saying that. Police officers—front-line officers—are saying that. We accept that we do not live in a perfect world and we are trying to do our best. We are doing an awful lot better than our colleagues down south are doing. I wish that the other parties would at least accept that, because it is their parties and their colleagues who are responsible for what is happening to people down south.

Sorry, but I do not have an awful lot of time left. How do we produce a modern police force? Surely it is like any business in the sense that it is about communication and speed of action. I am very lucky. In my constituency, Edinburgh Western, under the leadership of Chief Inspector Dykes and his team, the police work in conjunction with the local community and local council officer. They are moving the Corstorphine front office up to the Drumbrae hub. They are doing something similar over in the cabinet secretary’s constituency, and it puts the whole set-up together. There is, I suppose, an issue of cost—whether it is cost neutral or saves money—but whatever happens it is partnership working. It is doing the best for our communities. The record low figures are not just national but local. The people who accept the figures are the people who live there.

Here in Edinburgh, the local newspaper is running a campaign on saving the counter facilities. Like at least one other member, I have not received one letter or email about the issue. The campaign is not run on the back of what the police or locals want; it is a campaign that is run by Opposition parties. Quite frankly, I would rather see police out on the street, doing what they are supposed to do, producing record figures and coming out with results that the people accept and realise are the best in 40 years.

The bill has been one of the most interesting pieces of legislation that I have worked on in my time on the Justice Committee, and I believe that many of my colleagues feel the same. The submissions that have been provided by individuals and groups have shown the real experiences of real people affected by crime on their journey through the justice system, not necessarily as the direct victims of crime but as victims who have lost loved ones as a result of crime and negligence. As Christine Grahame mentioned, perhaps the most informative session that the Justice Committee held was the round-table event that was held in private, which victims of crime attended to give their stories and experiences of and comments about the justice system. Some of what we heard was quite harrowing, and I felt that some negative experiences could have been avoided merely by the authorities’ using a degree of common sense. It was difficult not to leave such a session demanding wholesale change, such was the effect of some of those traumatic stories. However, justice must be balanced, and I hope that the committee’s stage 1 report strikes a good balance as a starting point in identifying necessary reforms to the way in which we deal with victims and witnesses in the Scottish justice system. As the cabinet secretary mentioned and as Malcolm Chisholm highlighted, it is only reasonable for those who enter the justice system to expect care and service of such a standard that a very difficult situation is not made even more traumatic. As we have heard, many victims and witnesses felt that every time that they moved further down the justice system chain, they had to describe and relive their experiences for a different official. I believe that that problem can be avoided, but like the majority of my colleagues on the Justice Committee I am not minded to support the idea of a case companion. Like others, I want to ensure that the victim has the right to be questioned by someone of the same gender—a particularly obvious request in serious sexual assault cases. However, I take on board the fact that, due to other factors in the police service, such as shift patterns and court work, that may be difficult to achieve at all times. I am content with the assurances that have been given by Police Scotland that every attempt will be made to ensure that investigation officers of the same gender as the victim are made available when required. Another difficulty is the definition of vulnerable witness. Only as the difficulties of keeping a truly balanced justice system were highlighted, after hearing from the likes of the children’s commissioner, Children 1st and others, did the rather settled view that I started this legislative journey with change slightly. I totally agree that, if possible, we must ensure that vulnerable witnesses—certainly, victims under 12—are given the opportunity to give their testimony away from court. Along with other special measures, that will ease the intimidation that is felt prior to and during court proceedings, especially if the victim or witness is a child, and it will improve the quality of that person’s testimony while protecting them from the full force of our adversarial system. That can only be good. Nevertheless, there are certain individuals aged under 18 who have seen the justice system at first hand over a number of years and are extremely tough nuts to crack. Should those people, in the interests of justice, not be allowed to face interrogation in court because of their age? That is something for discussion. I am of the belief that there is a case for challenging the granting of special measures in some cases. I am not convinced that a one-size-fits-all approach is correct. However, caution is called for and, as the stage 1 report points out, clarity is required “as to where responsibility lies in relation to establishing the vulnerability of ... witnesses”. During the committee’s deliberations, I had personal difficulty with the issue of the relatives of victims of road traffic accidents obtaining, as a matter of right, all information relating to the investigation of the fatality. I fully understand the wishes of relatives to obtain information relating to the loss of a loved one, as I went through the same heartache when my brother Lindsay was killed in a motorcycle accident just over four years ago. Of course, the relatives want to know what happened—there needs to be closure. In my experience, Strathclyde Police dealt with the problem in an exemplary manner. They showed me the crash scene and went through the details of what happened, as seen by witnesses and taking into consideration the road conditions. On a personal level, I am unclear about why more detail is required. My problem with full disclosure as a right is that the description and, in particular, the photographs of the accident may be gruesome and rather harrowing in nature. If the cabinet secretary is minded to support the right to full disclosure, I ask that he ensures that the systems are in place to explain to relatives what is in the documents, and that that is done sensitively. I suggest that raw data should not just be handed over as a matter of course.

Many issues in the bill are worthy of discussion—members have raised some fascinating issues. The bill is vital. I hope that we can maintain cross-party solidarity. I will most certainly support the bill at stage 1.

Does Jenny Marra agree that grieving relatives would not necessarily know what they were seeking, even though they were asking for all the information? The information might include harrowing details of road traffic accidents, which might do more harm than good.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what the implications are for the ambitions set out in “Scotland’s Digital Future: A Strategy for Scotland” of the United Kingdom Government’s superconnected cities initiative funding for Edinburgh not meeting state-aid rules. (S4O-02254)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, although the superconnected cities initiative is well intentioned, it has involved a huge waste of public funds because of the Westminster Government’s apparent lack of awareness of state-aid rules, which has resulted in my constituents in rural west Edinburgh, in places such as Kirkliston, not having the broadband connection speeds and infrastructure that they were promised and which they deserve?

Does Mr Pearson have any thoughts about the public-private partnership contracts that were signed under the previous Labour Administration? For example, when Craigmount high school was rebuilt under PPP, the school lost half its playing fields, and its only remaining grass playing field, which used to be a football pitch, is not kept to a sufficient standard because the PPP contract designated it as a green space. As a result, the school has to send its football teams, of which there are a few, to various centres around the city.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether consideration has been given to using a financial model for regional parks based on that used for national parks. (S4O-02206)

Given the financial pressures on local authorities to maintain and manage regional parks, will the Scottish Government consider investigating the possibility of a more sustainable form of management and financial governance, with a view to easing pressure on local authorities and park management teams?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding devolving air passenger duty. (S4O-02103)

Given recent reports, does the cabinet secretary agree that APD causes enormous damage to competitiveness, investment, connectivity and business opportunities, and that, with events such as the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games coming to Scotland, that damage is something we can do without?

I congratulate Mrs Fee on securing the debate and on her thoughtful speech. There is certainly much in the motion that is commendable. Mary Fee has identified one of the major problems in the justice system: reoffending by short-term prisoners. The almost revolving door of entry into and exit from prison is not an easy nut to crack and, as the motion concedes and Lewis Macdonald mentioned, there is “no single solution” to the problem. I have been in the fortunate position of sitting on the Justice Committee and the Public Audit Committee when reoffending has been discussed. I have also had a couple of tours around HMP Edinburgh, where I have talked to staff and prisoners and sought their views. It is rather sad that for re-education, working on life skills and preparing prisoners for life on the outside generally, the prisoner needs to be inside for quite a bit longer than six months or a year to see results. The lifestyles, when they have their freedom, of many people who serve short-term sentences are chaotic. Drug and alcohol dependency—as Jackson Carlaw pointed out—and lack of literacy and numeracy skills are impediments to prisoners who would benefit from some form of education and training. Time is needed to work with those prisoners on their underlying problems before we even think about such things as vocational courses, either within or outside prison. That is where the problems with short-term prison sentences come in. Nowhere in the prison system—as far as I have seen—is anyone saying that effective training can be provided for someone who is serving a sentence of six months. That is not just because there may in some cases be a resource issue in the prison, but because there is not enough time to work effectively with the prisoner. Another issue is that some prisoners have no interest in attending educational courses because they hated their schooldays. The staff at HMP Edinburgh have had real difficulties in engaging with those prisoners and getting them into classrooms, which reminds me of the old saying, “Better one volunteer than 10 pressed men.” On my trips around HMP Edinburgh with David McLetchie, we saw some excellent examples of training and education opportunities, but prisoners will lose the skills that they gain if there is no opportunity for them to expand their knowledge and skill set when they walk through the gates to freedom. Prisoners require help when they are released. There is no point in releasing a prisoner at 5 pm on a Friday afternoon, particularly if they are not local to the area and have nowhere to sleep. They are likely to be met by the local drug dealer at the prison door, or to end up looking for help from the so-called friends who were part of their life before imprisonment and most likely encouraged them into crime. The chances are that they will be back inside the cell by the end of the weekend, and no amount of retraining or education will help that situation. In the opinion of many people, the answers to those questions lie not just inside prison, but outside, too. Local authorities, the third sector and voluntary organisations all have parts to play. Many of the problems that short-term offenders face can be dealt with by using nothing more than common sense. On release, a prisoner should have access to accommodation and be registered with a general practitioner’s surgery, and know whom to speak to for information and advice. If prisoners are to be reintegrated into society, they need self-respect. I have met people in my constituency who have followed a path to prison since their schooldays. If that is not a depressing thought, I do not know what is. Education at an appropriate level for each prisoner will always be the key, otherwise we will endure a situation in which there is an ever-revolving door for prisoners who look on an 18-month sentence as nothing more than an inconvenience.

It is clear that there is a fair degree of agreement across the chamber this afternoon. I associate myself with many of the comments that other members have made. We know that the most persistent reoffenders are those who serve short-term sentences. The revolving door in and out of prison is used by many in our communities. If we could slow down that movement, we would see an easing of prisoner numbers and of other pressures on the justice system. For that to happen, we require those who enter the justice system—many of whom live chaotic lives, whether due to poverty, drugs or the psychological problems that they suffer—to be shown a path other than to the front door of a prison. We require a management system that can be at home in a national policy context but which is flexible enough to allow local decisions to be made that ensure that local priorities are met. Therefore, I welcome the consultation document as well as the report of the commission on women offenders, which was chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini. Both documents are valuable, in that they bring to the debate information that could previously have been seen as anecdotal. I am a member of the Public Audit Committee, which last year scrutinised Audit Scotland’s report, “Reducing Reoffending in Scotland”. A clearer picture has emerged of the actions that are required. CJAs across the country are not uniform. They have different governance systems, arrangements and lines of accountability and there are different levels of success on reoffending. Certainly, CJAs have brought organisations together, but it was obvious that they work, as people say in horrible managementspeak, in silos. Communication between many CJA partners is limited and, as a result, the system can fail the people whom it was designed to deal with. Dealing with cross-territory prisoners is another problem. A good example would be a woman serving a short-term sentence at Cornton Vale prison who comes from, say, Aberdeen or Galashiels. On release, does she have a family and home to return to? She is highly unlikely to have a job lined up, so does she have a point of contact to help her, especially if she is released on a Friday afternoon when there is little time to arrange benefits or council services? Throughcare is difficult enough at local level, let alone on a cross-territory basis. It is also something that CJAs and other partners have difficulty managing. That is why I am not all that keen on option B in the consultation. I am also not convinced that local authorities are fully geared up to provide throughcare and other services on their own. The third sector, the national health service and others must have a part to play, particularly in evolving a national strategy. However, local authorities are vital partners in delivering with other stakeholders a plan for their own area and tying in national and local priorities. I have no real view at this time of whether I prefer option A or option C—I am certainly not going to introduce an option D, as Christine Grahame suggested she might—but if we are to go down the road of national management, a form of true local accountability will have to be found. Every speaker in the debate will have some real-life stories to tell. I will give members two examples. A few months ago, David McLetchie and I visited Saughton prison in Edinburgh. We looked at the facilities and talked to staff and prisoners. We tried to ascertain the difficulties faced by staff and prisoners—in particular, how to get prisoners back on track through the prison system. We met two prisoners who were being released the following week and who had quite clear views that the 18 months that both had served was nothing more than—I quote—“an inconvenience”. It was not the first sentence that they had served, they had not learned anything in their time inside, and I do not suppose that it will be the last sentence that they will serve. Facilities are geared up for longer-term prisoners. The system cannot work for short-term prisoners; there is just not enough time for the rehabilitation side of things to work. The second example involves a male aged around 17 whom I met with members of the Streetwork organisation. He was leading a group of younger boys. In front of them, he was bullish. He was proud to have already done time in a young offenders institution. He also appeared proud that he had another charge against him and that it was likely that he would find himself sentenced to time inside an adult prison for the first time. Only afterwards, when we started to talk to him after we got him away from the youngsters he was with, did we realise that perhaps he was not quite so bullish after all. He saw his life in prison as inevitable, but if he had the full support that perhaps he deserves, there would be a way out for that lad. Those are two examples of why we need a total redesign. The partners that we have already are vital. They have experience, but the issue is the management of bringing the system together. I thoroughly believe that there is hope for the people out there, that we have a way forward and that there is common ground across all these benches. We can make this work and ease the pressure on the prison system. I am convinced that we should get rid of short-term prison sentences. When I became an MSP, I came here thinking that many of the problems that we face locally should be sorted out by sending people to prison. I have learned that sentences of anything less than two and a half to three years are a waste of time—I have been converted to that. There are better ways to deal with people in our system. I support the cabinet secretary’s motion.

The closure of any local amenity usually brings objections, some of which are based on the available factual data and some of which are based on emotional ties. There are key questions that need to be asked. Is the service that is provided fit for purpose? How accessible is the service not just in terms of the cost to those who use or work in it, but in terms of the buildings that are being used? Does the service meet modern business requirements in the 21st century? Indeed, how often is it open for business? Is the service model that is being used affordable and sustainable? Other members have said that we are facing perhaps the toughest economic challenge in many generations, with devastating cuts to the Scottish grant from Westminster. That is undeniable. The cuts were forecast by Alistair Darling and have been implemented with venom by the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition.

Let me carry on. I will take an intervention later. Meanwhile, the Scottish Government is left to juggle a shrinking fixed income in order to support vital public services, of which the Scottish Court Service is but one. Is the Scottish Court Service affordable under its present business model? The answer is no. Is the service sustainable in its present form, given the financial cuts from Westminster? It is certainly not. What are the options? If there is no reform, the entire legal system, let alone the Court Service, could collapse. Among other things, people will have to be extremely wealthy to be able to afford to enter a legal dispute.

It is absolutely not. It is possible that a lot of the business at Haddington comes from Musselburgh, Tranent and other places, and people in some places have an easier journey into Edinburgh than others. [Interruption.]

If money is so easy to get, why is Mr Gray’s party leader—indeed, every party leader—down south calling this an age of austerity? That means that there is some problem with finance getting through to public services, which is something that we are trying to help with. In the interests of sustainability, and if any reforms are to work, the entire justice portfolio must consider sustainable change. There is no point in just salami slicing the budget of each department or body if we want to keep our world-renowned legal service intact and available to all. The closures have been identified by the Scottish Court Service, which believes that the proposed changes will work, given the financial constraints that it faces. Opponents cite problems with overloading of work in the remaining courts. The SCS chief executive, Eric McQueen, does not believe that it is in the best interests of the service to allow such overloading to happen; indeed, he does not believe that that will happen under the proposals. I am sure that some people will have longer journeys to make, but Eric McQueen believes that the numbers will be small. In most cases, unreasonable travelling demands on those involved in court proceedings should be avoided. In this day and age, videoconferencing—which has been mentioned by Sandra White and others—is an option that can be made available in certain instances. In an evidence session at yesterday’s Justice Committee meeting, a panellist expressed the opinion that videoconferencing has limitations because it is not possible to get a clear vision, so to speak, of the true demeanour of the witness or defendant. While I partially agree with that comment, high definition TV on a modern link would be able to pick up facial expressions or any of the other things that people look out for when they are working out whether someone is trying to hide something from them. Videoconferencing has come a long way in a short time. If the Scottish Court Service is to keep a lid on costs, new technology must be used—after all, the service cannot stay looking like a bit-part player in a Dickens novel. Given the age of the Scottish Court Service’s estate, there is also the possibility of business being moved to modern court buildings or law centres where victims and those who are charged with offences are not able accidentally to meet one another before proceedings begin. Although I understand that we cannot guarantee an end to such problems other than if we use highly designed modern courts or law centres, in our older buildings, the accused and victims have been known to sit outside the court room in the same corridor, which is not a pleasant experience. An example of that was given to the Justice Committee a few weeks ago in a closed meeting with some victims of crime. Of course it is regrettable that the SCS wants to close some court buildings, many of which are seen as historic pieces of a town’s fabric. However, if the SCS is to change its mind on any of the proposals, there must be more to the argument for saving a building than just history. I am sure that the members affected by the proposals have been looking into that. To politicians who are taking a more strategic look in opposing the proposals, I say let us see the colour of their money. It is as simple as that. What do they want to cut to pay for the status quo? How can the service be made sustainable and available to all? It is time for Labour to come clean. Perhaps the best saving that we could make is by losing the Westminster Parliament.

I will confine my comments to how the bill affects my constituents, particularly those in Queensferry, which will bear the brunt of the civil engineering on the southern side of the Forth. As Gordon MacDonald pointed out, the history surrounding the two present bridges makes them an integral part of the community of South Queensferry. There will be many years of civil engineering and there will be some problems along the way. Recently, we have had problems with lorry traffic movements. I look upon what we may have to deal with in the near future as we move through the construction phase. In particular, the construction efforts that are required in Echline, Springfield and the Clufflats, which are more or less in the line of the bridge, will produce some major inconveniences. I am delighted that, so far, there has been engagement with the local community, as Gordon MacDonald pointed out. Almost every month, issues are brought to my attention at surgeries and in my mailbag—they are usually something to do with the bridge. They concern the noise, what is likely to happen and how people will be affected in general. When I hold my surgeries in Queensferry in particular, those are the issues that come across my desk more and more often. There has been a long-standing relationship between the local community, the community councils and other local groups, such as the bridge replacement interests group south. I am sure that BRIGS has appeared at the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which I should thank for its report, which is an excellent piece of work. FETA has been a part of Queensferry for quite some time—it is a relationship that has grown and grown. Some people who live in the Ferry work for FETA. I am delighted with the arrangements that have been made to TUPE staff over to the new management company and with the pension arrangements that have been put in place. Those are welcome steps and will make the process a little bit clearer for those people who are going through it. The regeneration—the new bridge—may be the catalyst that makes economic development more likely in the surrounding area. I am thinking about the future job and development prospects, particularly around the Port Edgar area. Now that we have the new education and tourism centre, if we could get something up and running at Port Edgar, that would make the area a catalyst for development in relation to employment and sports. It is something for the future. I see that I am running out of time. I fully support the bill. If we can do something to progress the world heritage site application, so much the better.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether the United Kingdom Government has indicated by what mechanism criminals will be repatriated to Scotland if the UK opts out of the European arrest warrant. (S4O-01945)

Given that I wrote to Theresa May last November and have so far received no reply, I ask the Scottish Government what discussions have been had with the secretary of state on Westminster’s proposed opt-out. Moreover, what financial or other impacts will such a move have on UK or Scottish taxpayers?

It is always nice to follow Jackie Baillie. “Our independent deterrent has become virtually irrelevant except in the context of domestic politics. Rather than perpetuating Trident, the case is much stronger for funding our armed forces with what they need to meet the commitments actually laid upon them.” That is not from the letter mentioned by the minister but from another written to The Times in January 2009 by former chief of defence staff Field Marshal Lord Bramall, former Adjutant General Lord Ramsbotham and General Sir Hugh Beach, the former deputy commander-in-chief of UK land forces. They pointed out that the huge cost of replacing Trident would be better spent on improving conventional forces. They say: “We argue that it is conventional weapons that we now need for their pinpoint accuracy and their ability to help our forces in the sort of conflicts that are taking place”. That means that we have to question the huge expense of Trident, which is limiting what we can do. They point out that it is also clear that Britain’s nuclear deterrent is not truly independent. We do not own the missiles and it is absolutely unthinkable that we should ever consider using it or threatening to use it without the clearance of the United States. The generals point out that Trident is an inappropriate weapons system—for example, they cannot see Trident being used against nuclear blackmail by international terrorists. Trident is a cold war weapon; it is not a weapon for the situation that we are in now. It is suggested that the decision to renew Trident was driven more by political considerations than the true requirements of national defence. When we consider the defence and basing reviews of current and past Westminster Governments, the arguments for ditching Trident become clearer. Current planning by the Liberal Democrat-Tory coalition requires that the number of full-time army personnel be dropped to 82,000. That means that you will be able to fit the entire British army into Wembley stadium with 8,000 seats to spare. Does that make Trident a first strike weapon? I think that that is morally repugnant and we should fight against it. As Bill Kidd pointed out, that, along with soldiers being handed their P45s as they return from Afghanistan, shows the true commitment that Westminster has to our fighting forces. We do have weapons of mass destruction and they are sited less than a couple of hours’ drive up the motorway from the Parliament. Over the years there have been countless debates on nuclear weapons, countless protests and numerous protesters arrested. At no point has any Prime Minister, Secretary of State for Defence or—even more worrying—Secretary of State for Scotland taken the slightest notice of those protests. In my opinion, those who have held such offices of state have all held similar views. It is a set of views based on the past power of the British Empire. I am convinced that many senior politicians and Westminster mandarins still believe that Britain is a huge world power and that atlases are dominated by the colour pink. There is also the fear that, should those abhorrent weapons be given up, Britain would lose all influence with the major powers of today. Even the generals dispute that in their letter. Under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty five states—the US, the UK, France, Russia and China—are apparently legally entitled to possess nuclear weapons. How can it be right that any country in the world can have a legal power to obliterate all the others on the planet? Surely none has that right. In Scotland we have a crazy situation in which the views of the vast majority of the population are solidly against nuclear weapons. The irony is that if every member sent from Scotland to the Westminster Parliament was mandated by the Scottish voters to get rid of the weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde, they would lose the vote—it is as simple as that. It is the basic arithmetic of having only 59 out of 650 MPs. Besides, I do not see a mad rush south of the border to re-site the nuclear missiles down in Portsmouth, Devonport or wherever. That makes us really redefine the phrase “democratic deficit”. I, for one, am sick and tired of waiting for Scottish Westminster politicians, particularly Labour ones, to use the influence that they claim they have and to show the so-called union dividend. As we have seen this afternoon, the self-proclaimed party of socialism is now firmly nuclear—there is no change there—and all those Labour politicians who have appeared on countless stages over the years can now be disregarded. It has been shown that the party is hypocritical. The bases that are currently being used for our nuclear forces will be required after the missiles have been removed. A strategy will be put in place to ensure that Scotland is defended properly. I believe that any constitution that is drawn up should have a declaration against weapons of mass destruction ever being deployed here. We cannot trust Westminster Governments of any political persuasion to get rid of those weapons of mass destruction or to look after our conventional forces. Next year, Scotland will get to choose between a Parliament that will end the existence of nuclear weapons on our soil and the Westminster Parliament, which will keep them. I believe that Scotland will vote yes to a nuclear-free Scotland. I support the motion.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the suggestion that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency may remove the Fair-a-far and Dowie’s Mill weirs on the River Almond. (S4O-01912)

Given the strength of feeling locally, will any decision on the future of the old weirs on the River Almond be subject to full consultation of local people and stakeholder groups before work is actioned?

Does the minister agree that the closure of military bases in Scotland such as Craigiehall, in my constituency, will have a devastating effect on the economy of local communities and shows that the biggest danger to the defence of Scotland is Westminster politicians who choose to lavish billions on new nuclear weapons while disproportionately cutting defence personnel in Scotland?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent contact it has had with representatives of China and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01803)

What is the Scottish Government doing to take advantage of the improving cross-strait relationship between mainland China and Taiwan to increase trade and culture links with Taiwan?

I thank Mark McDonald for introducing his bill, and I thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its work, as well as the campaigners such as Scothedge. The bill is one of those that cause people to think, “Is this frivolous?” In this case, it certainly is not. Believe it or not, the issue was one of the biggest problems that I had as a councillor—forget about the budget negotiations or anything like that. Representing a ward in Edinburgh that happened to be made up mostly of low-rise homes, I saw a lot of problems with high hedges. I received a telephone call one day from an irate woman who said, “Councillor Keir! Get down here very quickly, please, or my husband might kill the next-door neighbour!” They were arguing over a high hedge—the lighting issues, the irritation, the antisocial behaviour and the whole shooting match that comes with neighbours’ disputes. By the time I got down to the place, the two men were literally fighting in the garden. It is no joke. This is a big issue for people in such areas. We can blame all sorts of things—such as the planners who, in their wisdom, allow houses to be built extremely close together, and those who plant leylandii, which sprout up at a rate of knots and soon reach heights of 30ft, rather than the 6ft that the person was expecting—but the issue is important to people who live next to each other and end up in a dispute. I welcome this bill. If it clears its third stage, people who live in areas where a lot of houses are crammed together will heave a collective sigh of relief—as will their councillors. The bill introduces a clear process for dealing with a dispute after the preamble, which involves neighbours talking to each other—something that Sarah Boyack talked about. These disputes can go on for a long time and the bill gives people a way of sorting them out. Not a lot of people will want to go down this road. There are cost implications, and I am not sure how happy the councils will be to put extra officer time into the measures.

I am glad about that and, if it is the case, I welcome it. Councils have knowledgeable professionals who deal with these matters and who might be able to help people who live in areas such as I have described to understand what sort of shrubs and plants should be planted. I realise that I have run out of time, but I want to address one issue before I close. As Derek Mackay said, planners need to think carefully about the issue and plan areas sensibly. Hopefully, people will talk to each other and we will not need to use this legislation.

13. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the City of Edinburgh Council to discuss the impact of PPP/PFI on its budget. (S4O-01568)

Does the cabinet secretary have an idea of the total cost of the City of Edinburgh Council’s repayments for PPP/PFI schools in Edinburgh in the past financial year? What impact are such contracts having on the council’s ability to finance front-line council services?

I have read the Labour Party motion and I have just a hint of a feeling that it is a wee bit premature. I asked the new chief constable and the chair of the SPA at the Justice Committee: “How far have you got with resolving the two areas that are still under debate and, indeed, when can we expect a resolution in that respect?” Vic Emery replied: “We have said publicly that all of the structures will be in place before the end of the year.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November; c 2109.] The new chief constable agreed with that assessment. I firmly believe that we should wait for and allow the discussions to continue to the timescale provided by Mr House and Mr Emery. After all—as has been pointed out—their actions will show how effectively the two have developed their working relationship, if nothing else. Given how determined the two appear to be to resolve any problems, it is not necessary for the Scottish Government to step in. As far as the First Minister’s use of the term “creative tension” is concerned, that is just a storm in a teacup caused by the slightly mischievous Opposition in this chamber. The future of policing is positive, despite the cuts handed down from Westminster that were pointed out by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. We have a new chief constable who has believed in the creation of a single police force since before the Scottish Government introduced the legislation. Going by his evidence to the Justice Committee, he is holding strongly to that view and is determined to make it work. The new single police force will inherit record numbers of police officers, the lowest level of recorded crime in 37 years, the highest level of clear-ups for 30 years and rates of violent crime that are at a 30-year low. It has been proven that Scotland’s communities are safer with this SNP Government and I fully expect a drive from the new chief constable to maintain the quality of service being provided under the present management regimes. In my Edinburgh Western constituency, there is proof that communities are getting safer. For the year ending in September alone, there has been a 16 per cent reduction in crime rates in the council wards in my constituency. Of course, that adds to the longer-term success that I mentioned a few moments ago. Having spoken to senior police officers in the area, I know that all are positive about the upcoming changes and I believe that the flexibility of the less prescriptive approach, with local authorities, police and communities engaging with each other in identifying local priorities, has been a success. Indeed, that has certainly been the case in my constituency. Moreover, the consultation on the community policing plans is on-going. In fact, at a meeting this evening at the Drumbrae hub, council officials, the public and the police will discuss the future. Obviously, changes are not easy in any large organisation. However, considering the savings that have had to be made, I am heartened by Chief Constable House’s evidence to the Justice Committee with regard to backroom staff and the backfilling of posts. Other members have already mentioned that issue. It is difficult not to compare what is happening in Scotland to what is happening south of the border. The coalition at Westminster has quite clearly lost the faith of the police service and I suspect that at some point the Prime Minister will have to order a review of that Government’s policing policies. If he does not, it is fair to say that there might be an almighty crash in the system. A prime example of how the coalition has misread public feeling can be found, as Christine Grahame pointed out, in the recent police commissioners elections in England and Wales. Commissioners’ salaries ranging from £65,000 to £100,000—

I am at the end of my speech—

The fact that the elections cost £75 million is nothing short of a scandal and represents a waste of money.

I, for one, will keep supporting the Scottish model of policing.

I was in South Queensferry on Sunday and was approached by a rather well-to-do retired gentleman who informed me that he had been interested in politics for many years without being a member of any political party. As well as asking the usual questions that all MSPs have to answer, he told me that he had followed the Leveson inquiry since it began. His interest had begun with the anger that many people experienced after finding out about the actions of some none-too-reputable journalists, newspapers and others. The tragic case of Milly Dowler had made him think that the Government should take a hard line with, as he called them, the parasites of the press. As the months passed, my constituent followed the stories of Lord Justice Leveson’s inquiry on TV, on radio and in print. He informed me that, the more he knew, the more confused he had become on the subject. He still has no regard for those who acted illegally but does not know how to bring the press back into line without some serious, hard-hitting legislation. However, he said that he still liked the idea of a free press. My constituent’s views mirror those of many. We know that something must be done, but the consequences of getting it wrong are massive. In his report, Leveson points out that there is much to admire about the UK press. As politicians, we may not necessarily like what we see in print, but that is life and democracy. However, as is shown by the example that Willie Rennie gave, it is clear that the current set-up using the Press Complaints Commission has failed miserably. The public simply do not have faith in a system that has failed to deliver anything more than a slap on the wrist to print media offenders. We should act in a cross-party way if possible. I welcome the fact that the First Minister has offered to hold talks with other party leaders on Thursday. I also welcome the idea of an independent implementation group, chaired by a Court of Session judge, to determine how Leveson’s proposals, or a variant of them, can be implemented in Scotland. I particularly like the idea that no politician should be involved in the group. Yes, I believe that we require a Scottish solution simply because there are differences between our law and the law in England and Wales. However, I believe that some statutory underpinning of Leveson’s recommendations would be acceptable, although in principle I would like Scots law to be applied on all issues without our having to defer to Westminster. The Irish model of regulation has some attractive points, particularly the Press Council of Ireland and the appointment of an ombudsman who can provide redress. It would also give some degree of similarity of process across these islands, not just within the UK. However, I am still open minded on the issue. We live in extraordinary times for the print media. Circulation figures for most titles are falling to a pale shadow of what they were just a few short years ago. Therefore, there should be protection for journalists against unscrupulous editors and proprietors. Journalists are under pressure due to the nature of the job, with deadlines and accuracy to take into consideration. I am glad that there has been a suggestion that a whistleblowing hotline should be set up for journalists who feel that they are being pressured into breaking any code. Leveson was not just about illegal phone and computer hacking, of course. Issues surrounding the relationships of politicians and the police with the press came into focus. The rather cosy relationship between some journalists and senior officers in the Metropolitan Police should send out warnings to those who are drawing up new legislation that clear boundaries should be in place. While there is a press that provides political opinion in its pages, politicians will try to influence that opinion. Every party leader, whether at Westminster or at Holyrood, has tried to get their message out and, with a bit of luck, have a campaign or an article with a slant in their particular direction. For as many years as I can remember, party leaders have been accused of being too close to newspaper proprietors. Some complaints are more justified than others. I am pleased to see that the First Minister comes out of the report well, to the point that Leveson says that he cannot be criticised. I cannot agree with Graeme Pearson that the First Minister should stand down from the talks. I do not believe that he has anything to be defensive about. He is the right person for that job.

No, I do not think that the First Minister has to stand down. I think that Leveson has provided the answer to that—the First Minister has nothing to answer for. He cannot be criticised, to use Leveson’s words. We have an opportunity to collaborate on a cross-party basis. The alternative is that consensus is lost and probably the trust of the general public as well. My elderly constituent in South Queensferry wants to see politicians sort out the mess and then stand back from it. He wants to see the press returned to a set of institutions that can be trusted and which report the news instead of being the news. I believe that this is a subject on which we can park up the sometimes tribal nature of how we debate in this chamber. Thursday will be a first step; let us try to rise to the occasion.

Like every other business sector, those stakeholders who deal with or are on the periphery of the aviation industry fight their corners. Passenger groups look for better deals from airlines and better airport services, airlines look for better deals from airports, and so on. However, air passenger duty achieves the almost impossible and has everyone singing from the same hymn sheet. On 31 October, I was fortunate to chair the first full meeting of the cross-party group on aviation at which air passenger duty was the main item on the agenda. Among those present were airline representatives from British Airways, easyJet, Virgin Atlantic and Loganair. Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen airports were also represented, as were others from tourism, chambers of commerce and other business sectors. The main source of information was the report that the consortium of Scottish airports commissioned from York Aviation—and what a damning report it is. As has been mentioned, APD rates have rocketed since 2007, with short-haul flights being penalised to the tune of around 160 per cent. The report gives what it calls real-world examples, which might be closer to what Patrick Harvie said. Before the APD increases in 2007, a family of four going on holiday to Spain would have paid £20 duty, but in the summer of 2012 that would have risen to £52. If that is not bad enough, the APD that is levied on long-haul passengers has leapt by between 225 and 360 per cent. Prior to 2007, the APD rate for the same family to fly to Florida would have been £80, but this summer they would have had to pay £260. Although I would not expect to hear many complaints about that from ex-Etonians, particularly those who are in Mr Cameron’s Cabinet, I would expect complaints from those who are on a fixed salary and have had to save for months to take their family on holiday. There is also a wider picture, and APD not only harms families but carriers, airports and general business. Edinburgh airport, which is in my constituency, will have lost about 1 million passengers by 2016 thanks to high APD rates. That is not the only example of Scottish airports suffering—Aberdeen, Prestwick and Glasgow airports are experiencing knock-on effects.

I do not have that number on me, so I cannot give Patrick Harvie a definitive answer. However, I am pretty sure that one of my colleagues could answer his point. I hope that he will take my apologies for that. Whichever way we look at it, there is a lost opportunity for economic development in many ways. It beggars belief that George Osborne and Danny Alexander do not see the revenue benefits as well as the possible capital spending benefits and the benefits to the wider economy of having another 1 million passengers at Edinburgh airport.

I have already given way. It is disappointing that the Tories and the Liberal Democrats do not accept in their amendments that the problem is UK-wide. Responsibility for APD is devolved to Northern Ireland, so why not Scotland? We are debating the subject here because the Westminster coalition is ignoring pleas for help from the industry. It would be good to know what lobbying the Tories and the Liberals are doing in London. As the minister said, competitiveness is the key in the airline industry, and APD affects low-cost airlines in particular. A high level of air passenger duty could make the difference to profitability, which could mean the loss of a route and, in some cases, jobs. In many countries in Europe, such as the Netherlands, the problems of an air tax were found early. The tax lasted only a year in the Netherlands, after Schiphol airport passenger numbers dropped significantly. After an 8 per cent reduction in passenger numbers in Ireland, the ticket tax was dropped from €10 to €3. At the cross-party group’s meeting, Roddie MacPhee of Barrhead Travel informed us that he had found that some of his customers had changed their travel habits. Customers—particularly those who were making international connections—were choosing to fly from Dublin, Schiphol or Frankfurt airport, just to avoid paying the UK’s ridiculously high APD. I suspect that, in the medium and long term, we in Scotland will be better off concentrating on and encouraging more direct flights where possible and probably using hubs other than Heathrow, particularly if APD remains high and other hubs such as Schiphol, Frankfurt, Dubai and Istanbul continue to make their customer improvements, which might make them more attractive hub destinations. Scottish passengers should not be financially penalised for where they live. It is clear that APD influences carriers in other ways. In its report in August, the House of Commons all-party parliamentary aviation group pointed out that “It is a matter of public record that Continental Airlines ... would have abandoned flights from Belfast to the US if the level of APD were not reduced”. Aviation plays a major part in the Scottish economy, and thousands are employed directly and indirectly by the sector. Edinburgh is a city that is and will be the driver of the Scottish economy, regardless of the result in 2014. As a country that is on the edge of Europe, we require the incentives to compete not just on a local scale but on an international scale, and civil passenger aviation is a key industry that we need to succeed. Air passenger duty is a major hindrance to improvement, and it denies travellers from our part of this island and others a fair deal. If Westminster cannot fix it, we should be given the tools so that we can do it. I support the motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on improving air quality in cities. (S4O-01432)

Queensferry Road at Barnton and St John’s Road in Corstorphine in my constituency have some of the highest air pollution levels in the city of Edinburgh. What action is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that local authorities comply with carbon monoxide targets, to mitigate the health effects of air pollution?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how many criminals have been brought back to Scotland through a European arrest warrant. (S4O-01393)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Home Secretary’s position on the European arrest warrant is at best confused? Will he comment on what impact a short term or permanent opt-out would have on Scotland?

4. To ask the First Minister what recent progress has been made with the Forth replacement crossing. (S4F-00927)

Does the First Minister agree that Elaine Murray MSP’s comments, which questioned the necessity of Scotland’s largest infrastructure project, show the shambolic nature of the Labour Party’s transport policy? Will he confirm that the Government will remain fully committed to delivering this vital artery in Scotland’s transport network on time and on budget?

It has been fascinating to be a member of the Justice Committee, which, over the past few months, has listened to organisations and individuals—many of them distinguished—from within the legal profession. It is clear that managed change is required over the next few months simply because of the pressure on public finances. Every public and Government department has to manage its budget in the most efficient way, and justice can be no different. We must, however, maintain a quality of service that is fair to those who are involved in the system. On the first part of the bill, the Lord President made a compelling case for reform. Although no witnesses were against the principle of the new council, there were some concerns about its make-up, as many members have said. I am happy with the number of council members being between 14 and 20, as anything larger could become overly bureaucratic. However, that is where some of the witness disagreements begin. Who should have a place on the council? Is the legal profession overrepresented? What about more laypeople being involved? There are also questions relating to the powers and role of the Lord President. For those of us who are not legally qualified, the modernising and maintaining of court rules were probably not major issues when the bill was introduced. However, one witness had the foresight to bring along copies of the rules for both civil and criminal courts, and both sets of rules appeared to be between 6 and 8 inches deep. That may seem a minor point of showmanship, but given the complex, technical nature of the rules and the need for modernisation I believe that there must be—as the Lord President suggested—a very strong presence of legally qualified members, especially in the new council’s formative years. Of course, the new council must also have lay members. We received strong representation on that from Scottish Women’s Aid and the Association of British Insurers.

Yes, of course. I have no objection to that at all. Over the years, I expect the composition of the council to change, especially after the court rules have been modernised, and more lay members will be involved—whether or not they are legally qualified. Some of the technical work can be done by committees set up by the council, which should help to speed up the process of court rule change. I am pleased that the Scottish Government will remove the requirement in section 11(4) that the deputy chair must be elected from the judicial members of the council, thus opening up the possibility of a layperson taking up the position. Some witnesses thought that too much power is being given to the Lord President, particularly in respect of appointments. In the early stages, I had my concerns about that as well. However, having heard the evidence I am now convinced that the office of the Lord President is the correct avenue to travel. With the council being required to lay an annual report and business plan before Parliament, and with the Lord President publishing a statement of appointments practice, I believe that the checks and balances exist to allay fears. Another problem to be faced is that of administrative justice. Like my colleagues on the Justice Committee, I see the future as being uncertain and will be interested to see what is proposed in the coming months. I suspect that the second part of the bill will be regarded as the most contentious part. The cost of legal aid has risen over the past number of years and, like my colleagues on the Justice Committee, I am not opposed to the principle of the recipients of criminal legal aid making a contribution towards its cost. In the words of the convener of the Justice Committee, the system must be proportionate to the means of the individual and must be sufficiently flexible to take into account individual personal circumstances. That is particularly important for those on benefits, who may not be in a position to pay anything towards the costs. I am delighted that the Government has agreed with Capability Scotland and the Scottish Legal Aid Board that any payment of disability allowance or its successor, the personal independence allowance, should be disregarded in any assessment of the applicant’s disposable income. As we have heard during the debate, there are concerns about the level of disposable income—which has been set at £68—at which a contribution would have to be paid. I am glad that the Scottish Government has clarified that that figure is a starting point and can be amended upwards in regulations. I am also happy that it will be kept under constant review. The fact that the Scottish Government has agreed that income and capital thresholds must be kept under review—and regular review at that—makes me feel a good deal easier about those within the system who have little in the way of personal funds. Among other aspects of the bill that are worth highlighting is, as others have already pointed out, the effect of contributions being collected by solicitors rather than that job being given to the Scottish Legal Aid Board. However, I will leave those matters for another day.

This is an incredibly interesting subject and there have been some excellent speeches from members. Over the years, we have trusted the integrity of journalists and news providers to ensure that the proceedings from a court of law are handed down to us understandably and truthfully. Journalists, proprietors and editors also understood that there were legal limits that could not be crossed. Woe betide anyone who did cross them, as they might have ended up facing a charge of contempt of court. However, the reality was and is that journalists, editors and proprietors always pushed the boundaries of law and journalism in the race to get a headline-grabbing story for the next print edition or broadcast. As Joan McAlpine said, we live in a society in which journalists and editors are under pressure because of falling sales. The new thing is news media on the internet. It is fast paced and updated every minute or so. Anyone can be a media journalist, can they not? Therein lies the first of our problems. A well-trained journalist knows the boundaries that they cannot cross without running into contempt of court. However, what happens if someone reading a third-hand report of proceedings produces a report outside Scotland? My second problem—I am sorry to pick on it—is Twitter. Tweets have a maximum of 140 characters. The author sits in court and produces numerous tweets, all of which sit nicely on the screen for any reader. However, if a reader subsequently picks a tweet, puts it into an inappropriate context with some of his or her comments and that tweet goes viral, lo and behold, we have a possible contempt of court. Who would be charged: the original author or the person who doctored the original text? Steven Raeburn and Aamer Anwar mentioned those problems and connected ones at the 2 October Justice Committee meeting. It was one of the most fascinating meetings that I have attended in a long time, not least because, as the convener pointed out, she did not get much chance to speak. How do we police the internet in a manner that is fair to the reader and the author? How do we maintain an adequate quality of reporting online? Should we allow Twitter to be used in criminal courts? At this moment, I just do not know. What is the difference between Twitter and journalists sitting in court passing paper messages out the door? My answer is that I suspect that anyone who passes paper notes out the door would be far more concise than someone who has just 140 characters. As has been pointed out, Magnus Linklater suggested that the law in Scotland is tougher than that in England. There is also the problem that, at the end of a day’s proceedings, a juror could go home and start doing research on the accused and the witnesses involved in the trial. How are we to stop that so that the juror can come to a determination on the information that is gained in court alone? What happens if the news source that the juror uses is not professional and reliable? I suggest that there would be even more chance of a wrong judgment. The question that has to be asked is whether the current laws on the reporting of trials are fit for the 21st century. My point of view on the televising of court proceedings is probably closer to Mary Fee’s at this time. We have all seen fictional courts of law on television or in films. They are often perfectly filmed, with camera angles chosen to show the drama and emotion of the cross-examination and verdict, and they often have little regard for the legal niceties. However, that is not what we are likely to see. I am aware that there is a review of television access to criminal court proceedings, but I cannot imagine that it would provide riveting viewing. There would not be Hollywood-style productions. What has been shown of previous trials suggests that watching live proceedings would be boring to anyone but those with an interest in law or a particular case. I would have concerns about images of the defendant, witnesses and jury being shown on television. A court appearance is stressful, and unless the defendant is a trained actor, his or her demeanour might be seen as a look of guilt by viewers. If the defendant’s demeanour allows viewers to believe in their guilt, what will happen afterwards if they are found not guilty? Donald Findlay QC raised concerns about the safety of participants in a criminal trial should their images be seen on TV. Should the rules on TV coverage be relaxed in the event of an appeal? After all, the defendant is seen as guilty at that time. Another issue is how the media react to friends and family outside the court. The reaction can be quite shocking in some instances—Aamer Anwar’s media scrum comes to mind. The Justice Committee’s round-table discussion on the issue was phenomenally interesting and it gave us some food for thought, but the priorities should be the welfare of the victim and the principle that people are innocent until proved guilty.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what cultural exchanges it is pursuing with non-European Union European nations. (S4O-01352)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer. Has the Scottish Government been made aware of non-EU cultural organisations having difficulties in obtaining United Kingdom visas, which makes participation in events such as the Edinburgh festivals more difficult?

There has been excellent input into the debate this afternoon. Since we last debated the Carloway review, there has been much discussion in and around the legal fraternity on the issues that have been raised. These are times of change in the Scottish legal system. We have not just the Carloway report but Lord Gill’s recommendations for reform of the civil courts as well as Sheriff Principal Bowen’s proposals for sheriff and jury reform. There is also the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill, which is being discussed at stage 1 in the Justice Committee and which will establish the Scottish civil justice council and reform legal aid. Given the scale of the changes that are proposed, it is understandable that the legal profession feels a bit nervous. After all, how many of us like major change in our lives? Many people in the legal profession have been in practice for many years. The proposed reforms in the making justice work programme amount to some of the biggest changes in the legal profession in decades. As we heard from the cabinet secretary and others, the headline issue is the future of corroboration, although there are other interesting reforms in the mix. Lord Carloway’s criticisms of the rules on corroboration were severe. He said that the requirement “has no place in a modern legal system”. It is obvious that his view is not shared by everyone in the legal profession. In his evidence to the Justice Committee, Lord Carloway explained: “Corroboration is a misunderstood term. The important thing to recognise is that corroboration is about the number of witnesses there are to speak to a given fact.” He also said: “we need to switch the thinking away from the quantity of evidence—the number of witnesses—to the quality of evidence.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 29 November 2011; c 528, 527.] It took him quite a bit of time to explain what corroboration means. In principle, I have no problem with quality coming before quantity when it comes to evidence. The fact that most if not all other legal jurisdictions have abandoned the requirement for corroboration should give a degree of comfort that the sky will not fall in if we abandon the approach as a mainstay of prosecution. However, if we move to a system in which corroboration is not required, as Lord Carloway proposed, there should be more checks and balances, as is the case in other legal jurisdictions. I look forward to more discussions on the matter. The organisation Justice mentioned the matter in the written submission that it provided last year. On rape cases, I warmly welcome the comments of Christina McKelvie and Margaret Mitchell. I am not sure whether an effect of the removal of the requirement for corroboration will be more convictions—Margaret Mitchell talked about that. However, I take on board the comments of Rape Crisis Scotland in its written submission last December, every one of which is worthy of further discussion. I agree with what Christine Grahame said about fears about how a victim or the accused behaves in court. How individuals act is important and might lead to problems with securing a conviction. There is the question whether the legal system currently accords victims more dignity. As Christina McKelvie said, there are serious problems for women in the court system. Issues to do with the clarification of the SCCRC and High Court roles are also worthy of further discussion before we make a decision. I am pleased that Saturday courts are in the mix. Saturday courts would help with detention times, particularly in the context of weekend detention. In the previous debate—I say this more to Michael McMahon—I asked the cabinet secretary whether he would consider the issue of the three-verdict system within the parameters of the Carloway discussions. I look forward to any information on that subject that Mr McMahon may produce. I am very comfortable with the issues that relate to dealing with arrest, the point at which people require to be offered legal representation, and the time for which people can be held by the police. Again, Saturday courts are the way forward, and I hope that we will be able to come to an agreement on that. I have said before that I warmly welcome the proposed changes on how we deal with children and vulnerable adults. We had a discussion not quite about that, but about a subject that is very close to it in the Justice Committee. There are serious problems. People do not necessarily know or understand what is happening once they head into the court system. Everyone should have a right to at least have information about that. That is the way forward. The law and the process of law can, of course, be daunting to those involved at the best of times. Lord Carloway informed the Justice Committee that the reference group involved in the review was not asked to vote on the issues because there could have been disagreement, so the report is in his name. It would have been good to know the breakdown of the views that were held in that group. As Lord Carloway pointed out in giving evidence, we live in the 21st century. The legal establishment now is a highly trained professional group unlike, he suggested, most of those who practised several hundred years ago. Unlike their predecessors, 21st century lawyers work in an interdependent legal system that must take account of international law, which, of course, includes the European convention on human rights and the work of the United Kingdom Supreme Court. I look forward to seeing the results of the consultation paper, and encourage people to take part in the consultation in the little time that is left. I support the motion.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made by the Hall’s of Broxburn task force in relation to the company’s future. (S4T-00042)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that Vion’s decision not to accept the Government’s substantial offer is extremely disappointing? Although the plant is in Fiona Hyslop’s constituency, it is a short distance from my constituency of Edinburgh Western, and I am concerned about potential job losses in the area. Would the Government be open to alternative bids if a company came forward and was willing to accept the Government’s offer?

I welcome the fact that the Government is pursuing talks with bidders, but will the cabinet secretary provide an assurance that everything will be done to stand by the employees in the event that a future operator cannot be found?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the impact on business and tourism of having only one carrier between Scottish airports and Heathrow. (S4F-00845)

I thank the First Minister for his answer. Does he agree that the devolution of air passenger duty, as proposed by the Calman commission, would also increase competition on Scottish routes and be beneficial to not only my constituents in Edinburgh Western, but Scotland as a whole?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what issues were discussed with the Prime Minister of Lower Saxony during his visit to the Parliament. (S4O-01192)

Thank you, Presiding Officer. What recent discussions have taken place with other German leaders, with a view to promoting Scotland’s economic interests in Germany?

As others mentioned earlier, the situation is obvious. The slashing of the Scottish budget means that if we are to maintain the high standard of police and fire and rescue services that we provide, the services must be run differently. We started this process from a position of strength in Scotland. Both the police and fire services—at management and at union level—accepted the need for change. It has been clear in the Justice Committee meetings that the engagement with everyone involved has been first class. Consider the difference between the situation down in England and the situation here in Scotland. In England they will be losing about 16,000 police officers and there is no confidence in the leadership of the Tories and the Liberal Democrats. Here in Scotland, the Government has a good relationship with the professionals, as represented by bodies such as the ASPS, whose contributions have been invaluable in this process. In Scotland we have record police numbers and the lowest crime figures in 37 years, as John Finnie pointed out. I know which side of the border I prefer to be on. Moving to a single police authority also provides an opportunity for improvement, despite the cuts. Many of the Justice Committee discussions centred on the composition of the national board of governance and on local accountability. I am glad that the Government took on board the concerns that were expressed and agreed to increase the number of members of the national board to somewhere between 11 and 15. Although I have some degree of sympathy for Graeme Pearson’s earlier comments about empowering a commission to oversee the two services, I am heartened by the cabinet secretary’s comments. A parliamentary process has been found that will easily take up that oversight function. I share the views of the Justice Committee convener on that subject. The larger number of board members will also allow for specialist management to evolve, which will be an asset given the nature of modern law enforcement. Of course the service must have a local dimension to it. This is where I disagree with Alison McInnes: sixteen local pathfinder schemes are being trialled and I believe that the Scottish Government is correct in not being too prescriptive about ensuring that the same local model is used across the country. I was rather astounded by Sarah Boyack’s outburst this morning—it was as though the sky was about to fall in and local democracy had died. No single model can fit all and the results of the trials will help local senior officers and partners to work out a system that works for their local authority area. Local democracy is not dead and it will not die under these proposals. Local authorities will have access to senior officers of both services and discussions can ensue. I cannot sit down without mentioning the VAT situation. It is astonishing that the UK Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition refuses to make changes to VAT rules in the same way that it has done for others. Scotland will have the only police force in the UK that is not VAT exempt. Even academy schools in England have had their VAT status changed. That shows the UK Government’s attitude to Scotland—Scotland cannot have what the UK Government gives to others, because of who is in government. The UK Government is not interested in making things better, only in telling us what we cannot have—does that ring any bells? Here in Scotland, however, we have a Government that is willing to do things for the better. I agree with the cabinet secretary that the sooner we are allowed to have the full range of powers that we want for this Parliament, the sooner the people of Scotland will see the benefits. This is a Government that can, not one that cannot or will not. I support the motion.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what social and economic impact the Scottish Futures Trust’s hub programme is having on local communities. (S4O-01126)

Since its opening four months ago, the Drumbrae library hub has attracted more than 55,000 visitors. Does the minister agree that the all-round success of the project is evidence that the hub model’s joint working and shared delivery approach is succeeding in delivering value-for-money public services for local communities?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the increase in air passenger duty is having on the delivery of its transport policy with regard to air travel. (S4O-01089)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that airlines have cited the high cost of air passenger duty as a factor in cutting routes from Edinburgh airport. Will he comment on whether the increase in APD is detracting potential investment from Scottish airports?

Today, the Parliament acknowledges and celebrates the Royal Highland Education Trust’s pioneering work and its vision of taking the classroom to the countryside. The trust was set up in 1999 as an education charity of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, which has its headquarters in my constituency, Edinburgh Western. Its aim is to furnish young people with an enhanced understanding of Scotland’s rural environment and the dynamic nature of farming and countryside activities, as well as farming’s vital contribution to sustaining and enhancing Scotland’s economy and way of life. Urbanisation in Scotland over recent decades has meant that many children have no direct link with the countryside or experience of environmental issues. The gap in young people’s education has been identified by the Scottish Government, which has allocated funding to the trust to educate children about the importance of safeguarding our environment and the role that food plays in their lives. The policy is implemented through farm visits, work with local companies and the introduction of topics about food in the school curriculum. The Scottish Government has pledged £2 million over three years, to help schoolchildren to understand more about food and how it impacts on their health and on the environment. Food education has a crucial role to play in improving Scotland’s health, by helping people to make healthier choices. It also makes people aware of the importance of sustainable agriculture. Educating people at a young age about food and the environment means that people have the facts at their disposal and are in a better position to make informed choices about their future. That is why every pupil in Scotland would benefit from the trust’s work. I am delighted that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, announced funding for the trust in March. Through its interaction with pupils, the trust also highlights the extensive career opportunities for young people in Scotland’s food and drink sector. The sector is increasingly successful in helping to boost the Scottish economy. The trust’s programme is delivered by approximately 500 volunteers, who are predominantly from farms and farming backgrounds. They facilitate farm visits and provide classroom talks for young people between three and 18 years old. Visits cover a range of topics, including forestry, horticulture and conservation. In the 2010-11 academic year, the trust reached more than 70,000 children and there was a 20 per cent rise in school farm visits in Scotland. Across the Lothians, the trust organises, on average, 50 farm visits and 150 classroom visits each year. For instance, pupils from Cramond primary school in my constituency were taken to Craigie’s farm in March to learn about harvesting vegetables, and many secondary pupils have been given talks by farm staff about the business side of farming, which included information on field-scale production and advice about the job opportunities that are created by the farming sector each year. The trust’s famous fibreglass milking cow, Mabel, has toured primary schools across the country, often as part of schools’ health weeks, when pupils learn about the benefits of drinking milk and how it gets from farm gate to plate. The involvement and active co-operation of farms and partners are crucial in making the farm visits possible. Craigie’s farm, which is in my constituency, has been providing schoolchildren with a real farming and agricultural experience. Indeed, it recently offered four allotments to schools in my constituency—Kirkliston primary school, Corstorphine primary school, Queensferry high school and St Augustine’s high school—which will give pupils practical training in how to grow their own fruit and vegetables. In the next fortnight, it will host around 240 pupils from schools across Edinburgh, including Davidson’s Mains primary school, over four visits. The pupils will benefit from a full farm tour, which will consist of lessons on fruit production, arable crops and livestock, and they will take part in a nature trail, which will teach them about how farming can work to the benefit of the environment, the significance of planting hedges and field margins, and why they are beneficial. The trust’s financial contribution towards the transport costs of farm visits through partners is important, as it allows many schools to take part in the initiative. The trust does not lack ambition. It aims to deliver its programme for farm and estate visits to 15,000 young people per year by 2015. That would not be possible without the co-operation of its partners and sponsors. Scottish Natural Heritage, for instance, contributes by teaching young people to appreciate the roles and diversity of natural habitats that are encountered on farm and estate visits. Eco-schools development officers focus on enhancing young people’s understanding of the relationship between food and the environment. The trust’s work undoubtedly reflects the aims and rationale of the curriculum for excellence. Outdoor education offers many opportunities for interdisciplinary working, and the trust offers in-service courses on farms and estates to encourage teachers to take their classes on visits. It also provides free educational resource materials and encourages school competitions. It is clear that the trust’s work is receiving recognition not only from the Scottish Government and many business organisations across Scotland; countries such as Australia and Italy are taking a keen interest in its development. I understand that the trust is on the point of liaising with the Scottish Government on how its work can be built on further. I look forward to the outcome of those discussions. I also look forward to this year’s Royal Highland Show, which will take place in Ingliston in a couple of weeks’ time. It is expected that around 25,000 children will participate in the children’s discovery centre there. Once again, I commend the trust and its staff, some of whom are in the gallery.

I am delighted to take part in the debate. My Justice Committee colleagues and I have heard from some of the country’s most eminent fire and rescue service and police officers. I thank my colleagues for the tone in which they discussed the issue and welcome the genuine support for the bill’s principles. The reforms of these two services are being made not because of any major structural deficiencies but because of the Westminster Government’s swingeing cuts to the Scottish budget. I agree with George Adam that the necessity for change gives the Parliament the chance to modernise both services and ensure that the services are suitable as we move further into the 21st century. I am sure that most people—even Alison McInnes—accept the principle of change. After all, as Christine Grahame and Graeme Pearson have pointed out, even the Bow Street runner and local fire brigade models of the past had to change to keep up with the times. As various speakers have made clear, the proposed changes centre on the governance of both services, how representative the national boards are and how accountable services are at a local level. There is also the matter of parliamentary scrutiny. I completely agree with those who have called for the chief constable, the chief fire officer and other members of the service to be appointed early. It is vital that the posts are filled as soon as possible and I am delighted that the recruitment process has been brought forward. On the composition of the national governance boards, I am content with the idea that a majority of positions should be held by those with professional expertise. I suspect that the number of board members should be more than the 11 that the committee has suggested should be the minimum. There should, of course, be councillor representation, but it is simply not practical to follow Reform Scotland’s suggestion and include a councillor from every authority. The board would end up looking like a soviet-style politburo, which I do not think would be terribly effective. It was suggested that the councillors should have some experience. However, as Chief Constable Kevin Smith of ACPOS pointed out to the Justice Committee, it is unlikely that current members of police boards across the country have been vetted to a degree that has allowed them to scrutinise sensitive aspects of policing. How much training will be required to ensure that elected members are not out of place on what will be a professional body? There is also the question of how much time a councillor will be expected to give to the governance board if the workload is as heavy as has been suggested. How will the amount of extra time spent dealing with board issues, particularly in the early days when training will be a major factor, impact on elected members’ responsibilities to their constituents and council? I believe that the bill’s proposals hold no dangers for local planning and accountability. As the cabinet secretary has said, the senior officers of both services will still be in dialogue with local authorities and communities through local commanders. Now that I have stood down as a member of the City of Edinburgh Council, I have to say that I have often wondered just how effective police boards, in particular, have been because of the lack of vetting that I mentioned earlier. I would not want any elected member from any chamber to be involved in any operational interference and believe that local accountability could be streamlined without any detrimental effect on policing and fire and rescue service provision. Community planning should be just what it says. I am glad that the committee decided not to recommend a uniform method of local accountability. Every area is different and one model might not fit all. We will need to take into consideration the results of the 16 pathfinder pilots once they are known. With regard to the fire and rescue service, I was struck during the committee’s evidence-taking sessions by the closeness of the views of senior officers and the FBU on many of the issues under discussion. There appears to be a desire for reform, particularly in the areas of operational clarity and expectations of the service. Given certain high-profile incidents relating to local decision making on rescue, that kind of clarity must be welcomed. In evidence, John Duffy of the FBU suggested that local fire boards had a problem similar to that which I highlighted earlier in relation to police boards. He said: “A councillor’s understanding of what they are expected to scrutinise the chief on has been derived from information given to them by that chief. That fails straight away.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 13 March 2012; c 1154.] I suggest that the present set-up for boards in both services needs to be reformed. During the Justice Committee’s deliberations, it was fascinating to listen to the different views of those who were good enough to give evidence. I was particularly taken by the evidence from Sir Hugh Orde on the problems of setting up the Police Service of Northern Ireland and how he was held to account by the local authority, as my colleague Humza Yousaf mentioned. Although I do not believe that model to be totally right for Scotland, his evidence shows that problems can be overcome if the will is there. I encourage the Scottish Government to continue to discuss with Westminster the problems in relation to VAT, which do not exist in Northern Ireland. After attending a conference some months ago at which representatives from many nations discussed the merits of a single national police service, I am convinced that the Scottish Government’s actions, which were introduced as a result of financial reality, are the right way forward, because they work in the real world. The desire to reform both services is strong. I am delighted to have been a member of the Justice Committee that produced the stage 1 report.

Over the past year, members of the Justice Committee have been faced with some complex material to digest in the course of their deliberations. As we have heard from previous speakers, some of whom are legally trained, part 1—which deals with the consequences of sentencing post the Petch and Foye judgement—has been one of the most difficult pieces of legislation to deal with in terms of explaining clearly what has happened and what is required to happen to end the anomaly whereby life prisoners may have parole hearings earlier than non-life prisoners who were convicted of similar offences. There are, of course, differences of opinion. The Scottish Government believes that the bill shows a clear way forward in calculating the punishment part for non-life sentences, while some witnesses believe that we are faced with an overly complicated system. However, I am sure that no one disagrees with the cabinet secretary that the public must have full confidence in the process of law. We must have a system that is understandable to everyone who is involved in proceedings in a court of law, and it is vital that those who are involved but not legally trained—such as the accused—are able to understand the sentence that is handed down. Therefore, I am delighted that, in his initial response to the committee report, the cabinet secretary gives a clear indication of routes that accused persons can take to get help with the process. Of course, the court must also be able to hand down a sentence that is appropriate to the crime that was committed. Judges must take into consideration comparative justice—or, indeed, comparative injustice—when handing down a sentence. That, on top of ECHR legislation, complicates matters. I am sure that members will be delighted to know that I do not intend to go through the arithmetical permutations that are described in the committee report. Christine Grahame’s tutorial on sentencing was probably enough for all members. However, the committee had some reservations about the provisions. As has been mentioned, perhaps a less prescriptive approach is required. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s earlier comments on that. Any effort to simplify the process appears to be worth while—a view that the Law Society and others share. In his written ruling on cutting the punishment part of Morris Petch’s sentence, Lord Osborne said that it might be “some comfort” to those concerned to note that Petch would not necessarily be released after completing eight years. However, the public are rightly outraged by any cut in a convicted sex offender’s sentence. That is even more the case when it is perceived—rightly or wrongly—that the decision is made on a technicality. Of course, if we can end early release, these issues will be so much easier to deal with in and out of court. I therefore commend the cabinet secretary on his efforts to find a speedy solution to this problem, although I believe that some work still needs to be done. I do not think that there will be anyone in the chamber who does not know that part 2, which deals with the disclosure of information obtained by the SCCRC, is based on the case of Abdelbaset aI-Megrahi. One might argue that, now that events have overtaken us, there is no point in proceeding with this part of the bill but, like the cabinet secretary and Mark McDonald, I have to wonder what would happen if a similar atrocity were to occur on Scottish territory. I certainly support the principle behind part 2, because the bill has cast light on areas hidden in the darkness of secrecy, personal interest and the national interest of various nations. Just in case another case similar to Megrahi’s arises in future, we need to look at the possible data protection issues that Malcolm Chisholm highlighted, which are reserved, and permission to allow the publication of information from individuals, outside agencies and nation states. Like my colleagues on the Justice Committee, I support the principle of openness whenever possible; indeed, in my opinion, the Megrahi case itself would have benefited from more of it. Of course, that leads us to ask, “What is the public interest?” but that is another question. I believe—and suspect that most people think—that the SCCRC should have been allowed to release the statement of reasons on this case years ago. I also agree with my Justice Committee colleagues that the SCCRC is the appropriate body to deal with the release of such information. It is ludicrous that a version of it was released by a Sunday newspaper and not through official channels; as far as the case of Megrahi is concerned, such a move cannot serve the public interest. However, we are where we are and I believe that, in an effort to discover a clear direction for the process, the bill should proceed. I suspect that the bill has caused every member of the Justice Committee much frustration, but I agree with the principles behind both parts of it. I have to say that I found witnesses’ written and oral evidence fascinating and, as we have gone through stage 1, it has been amazing to hear the different sides of the argument from both the legal profession and groups such as Justice for Megrahi. I fully support the principles of the bill and the Justice Committee’s report.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the sale of BMI to International Airlines Group would have on Scottish air links, competition and consumer services. (S4O-00852)

Giving IAG a monopoly position in Edinburgh would inevitably lead to higher prices, lower frequencies, reduced services and reduced consumer choice for onward connecting travel. Has the minister made any representations, as I have done, to the European Commission, which is reviewing the case?

I think that we should give a vote of thanks to Mr Kelly for managing to speak for eight minutes. I welcome the broad agreement across the chamber on this issue. The way in which we have managed to find various routes into the debate has been fascinating—and the debate has been an awful lot more interesting than some of us might have expected. For example, we had Mr Pearson with his gladiatorial approach to saying nice things to Mr McLetchie, which is always very nice to see. I have decided that the best name for Mr McLetchie these days is Grand Tribune, which I think sounds very statesmanlike. I welcome the Scottish Government’s consultation. We have heard of the importance of the tribunal system and its place in the legal system. Any new legislation that proposes to make the tribunal system—which at times looks unwieldy and difficult to understand and is in some cases intimidating to those taking part—more streamlined and easier to understand should be welcomed. The key issue is clarity. Over the years, the different tribunals’ differences of approach have led to some confusion. It would be logical to bring the tribunals together with a common structure under the leadership of the Lord President of the Court of Session—although he will be able to delegate responsibilities—and to create a new position of president of the Scottish tribunals. The Scottish ministers appoint most tribunal members and set the rules and regulations for tribunals, so it could be thought that tribunals are not as independent as they could be. Statutory provision for a devolved Scottish tribunal system with scope for integration with the reserved UK tribunals that operate in Scotland could make the administration and law of tribunals more understandable. I hope that the continuing discussions between the Scottish Government and Westminster on that are fruitful, and I encourage the minister in that regard. Service users must be at the heart of any changes to the system. Jenny Marra, who is not in the chamber at the moment, mentioned that important point. A man or woman who embarks on dispute resolution must have confidence in the impartiality of the particular tribunal that they use. Christine Grahame also mentioned that. I have never served on anything that was called a tribunal. My closest personal experience of something akin to the tribunal system was when I was the convener of the City of Edinburgh Council regulatory committee—a quasi-judicial committee that heard objections to licence applications from the police and others before coming to a determination. I chaired many of that committee’s meetings, and it was clear that applicants did not always understand the process, which usually required them to engage a legally qualified person for advice. Just as important, they did not fully understand the appeal process, which entailed an extremely expensive journey to the sheriff court. The proposed new two-tier tribunal system would help people who require a determination through a tribunal. Most disputes would be settled at stage 1—I agree with those who called for better early intervention—and the upper tier would deal with any subsequent appeals, so the system would be set up to avoid any visits to court. We have heard a lot about the process, and I will now give a practical example of why we require a simplified system. Citizens advice bureaux provide significant support to and representation of clients in relation to many legal issues, including representation at benefits tribunals and employment tribunals and in small claims cases and repossession proceedings. The number of tribunals at which CABx provided representation increased to 4,000 in 2010-11—an increase of 87 per cent on the 2009-10 figures. The number of court or tribunal documents that the CABx prepared more than doubled to 16,000 in 2010-11. Members may be interested to know that the increase in representation was mainly driven by a 58 per cent increase in the number of welfare tribunals at which an adviser provided representation. That volume of activity represents a huge draw on the limited resources and time of the CABx and places a great strain on a service that helps every client who requires assistance. The figures strongly indicate that the number of benefits cases in which representation is required is likely to continue to increase as the welfare system continues to undergo change. Appeals are becoming an increasing part of the workload for CAB welfare advisers. Although tribunal appeals make up only 10 per cent of benefits cases, they take up a significant amount of adviser time and resources. Therefore, more efficiency in the tribunal system would assist not only the system’s secretariat but those who help others.

There is every possibility that I will agree with that statement. The tribunal system in Scotland requires to be changed. As we have heard, there have been various reports from eminent people over the years, as well as various debates in the chamber, and I believe that now is the time to deal with the issue. If we seek to give the system a 21st century makeover, we must make it understandable to all involved and ensure that it has a clear chain of command and that the process is clear. Finally, I note that the system is going to be under extreme pressure over the coming period. I support the motion.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what the environmental impact on the Forth estuary was of the leak of contaminated water near South Queensferry on 14 November 2011 and what action has been taken to mitigate it. (S4O-00836)

Will the minister clarify what remedial measures are being taken by BP and what steps are being taken to ensure that improvements to testing regimes are implemented and that any learning points are acted on?

I commend the cabinet secretary for her actions. Can she assure patients in Lothian that they will continue to receive their waiting time guarantee in an identical way to every other health board in Scotland?

Following the Royal Bank of Scotland’s announcement that 120 jobs are to be cut in my constituency, what action is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that employees who are made redundant are supported into new employment? Does the First Minister agree that, at a time when RBS requires solid political leadership, Vince Cable’s recent statements demonstrate why Scotland should be in charge of its own banking regulations?

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge the University of Edinburgh’s pioneering research, which recently led to the discovery of fjords in Antarctica? The discovery not only sheds light on ice formations and the impact on sea levels, but demonstrates that Scotland continues to be at the forefront of world-leading science projects.

Will the member take an intervention?

You have just mentioned Edinburgh, and somebody said earlier that local authorities differed in their abilities to get to where we want to be with a living wage. You have criticised City of Edinburgh Council—and I should mention that we are both members of the council. The Green group in the council did not present a budget, so perhaps the member could explain to the people who are in the chamber now how the Green group in Edinburgh would propose to pay for the living wage, given the difficulties that Edinburgh faces.

I beg your pardon.

Can the Scottish Government require the SCCRC to publish a statement of reasons in circumstances in which an appeal has been abandoned?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate, which, as we have heard, unites this chamber, business, financial institutions, agencies, universities and councils across the country. Scotland must establish itself as the undisputed energy powerhouse of Europe; with our unrivalled wind, wave and tidal resources, we certainly have the potential, and the ambition, to do so. Since 2007, our Government has made world-leading progress, placing Scotland at the forefront of the green energy revolution. The offshore valuation study of 2010 estimated Scotland’s total practical offshore wind, wave and tidal resource at 206GW. Harnessing just a third of that clean energy would position Scotland as a major net exporter of renewable energy. The socioeconomic impact of green investment resonates with the economic growth of rural areas, skills development, construction sector growth and, of course, jobs. The improvement of storage capabilities, the strengthening of grid connections and the delivery of a North Sea grid all demonstrate the degree to which Scotland and this Government are committed to investing in renewables technologies. That commitment alone is one reason why the green investment bank is best placed in Scotland. The bank’s mission is to accelerate private sector capital investment in the UK’s transition to a green economy, in response to the rapidly increasing worldwide investment in renewables technologies. As the Grant Thornton report argues, locating the bank in Edinburgh would bring it to the heart of the clean energy sector without losing the benefits of being in a major financial centre. As we have heard this afternoon, there is no other place in the United Kingdom that meets the description. The UK Government’s policy of spreading business opportunities more evenly across these islands is sensible, and I hope that it is acted on. There is a real danger that a London-based green investment bank would be lost among numerous institutions, meaning that its presence would not be felt so strongly. In Edinburgh, it would be a focus, a driving force and a transparent institution. As Gavin Brown and Marco Biagi said, Edinburgh comfortably meets the location criteria for the green investment bank. Scotland is where the UK’s clean energy sector is concentrated, and it is home to companies—including Scottish and Southern Energy and ScottishPower Renewables—that are responsible for some of the UK’s most innovative green infrastructure projects. A real international clean energy network is taking shape, with firms implementing a wide range of projects. Offshore wind is a leading example of a sector in which developers are locating in Edinburgh, increasing Scotland’s attractiveness to other supply chain companies. In 2010, Mitsubishi Power Systems chose Edinburgh for the creation of a centre for advanced technology worth around £100 million; and the Doosan Power Systems £170 million investment in Scotland has the potential to create 1,700 jobs. Global clean energy companies from Germany, Italy, Norway, the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal and beyond have already created bases here. Scotland’s financial sector employs just over 86,000 people, and just under half of them are based in the capital. Some of the UK’s largest private and public sector organisations, and around 15,000 small and medium-sized businesses, are at the very heart of the city’s economy. We have the most extensive UK financial services centre outside London, with world-class expertise in banking, insurance, pensions and investment management, as well as strong links to the global markets. The deep pool of talent that exists in Edinburgh would ensure that the bank had the skills required to deliver its key functions. The benefit of having a high concentration of world-leading universities and other research establishments gives Edinburgh a competitive advantage. Close links between the green investment industry and universities already exist, and locating the bank in Edinburgh would continue to foster that relationship. Another key factor in this debate is connectivity. A green investment bank would need to be well linked to other parts of the UK, Europe and beyond. As the MSP for Edinburgh Western, I take pride in representing an increasingly expanding international airport, while the construction of the new Forth crossing will be absolutely pivotal in connecting the capital with Fife and the north-east of Scotland—where many of the green investment projects are being located. Make no mistake: if there were no Forth crossing, the chances of the green investment bank coming to Scotland would be diminished. Finally, on cost effectiveness—whether in relation to office, transaction or workforce costs—an Edinburgh-based green investment bank would be considerably more attractive and affordable than one that was based in London. Regardless of whether Scotland becomes an independent nation, there is one word that will determine the success of the green investment bank in the UK: location. The virtuous circle of technology, finance and supply tells us that Edinburgh not only ticks all the boxes but is the prime candidate. I am delighted that the Parliament is unanimous in its support, and I hope that the UK Government recognises the huge potential that Edinburgh and Scotland have to offer. I support the motion.

Yesterday was a fantastic day: it was the culmination of 40 years of campaigning in Drumbrae, Clermiston and Parkgrove. During that time, the people in those areas were promised a library; it had been in a number of manifestos, but for whatever reason the plan had never come to fruition. It is a community project that so many people have fought for, and some did not live to see the day when the library opened. The building was opened as a hub, not just a library. The council officers who were in attendance tell me that on the opening day, from when the hub opened at 10 o’clock to when it closed, more than 1,000 people visited it. When I was there between 10 o’clock and 12 o’clock, there were children, mums and dads with prams, and pensioners, all going into the building that they had been promised. The building represents a fantastic achievement by many people who have campaigned for a number of years, and I will mention a few of them. There have been few campaigners more vociferous in their actions than Reg Kingman, the chair of Drumbrae community council. I should mention with regard to my entry in the register of interests that I am still a member of the City of Edinburgh Council. My Liberal Democrat colleague on the council, Councillor Robert Aldridge, is a long-term campaigner for the project, and a number of other people—there are too many to mention—have also been involved. The Drumbrae library hub cost £5.7 million. It is the first hub to be delivered by the Scottish Futures Trust hub scheme, and we are delighted that, in opening to the public yesterday, it came in on time and on budget. The hub was commissioned following a discussion between the administration partners on the City of Edinburgh Council in 2007. Since then, the planning took place and the parties agreed on where they wanted to go. I was delighted to see that, because of all the interest, so many people came on board through the consultation and eventually got the project off the ground. More than 700 members of the public took part in the consultation on the hub, which is a superb advertisement for community engagement. After looking at the faces of the children yesterday, I can tell you that it was a huge success, and there is a fantastic opportunity for those who use the library to make it work. The hub is designed as a one-stop shop: it offers a variety of services under the same roof. Having council services available in the community will ensure that they become more efficient. It is not just a library: on going through the building, we find the children’s section at the bottom, the cafeteria and the community rooms. Moving upstairs, there are more community rooms and the computer workshops, and on the top floor there are the City of Edinburgh Council offices that hold the west neighbourhood management team, which is led by Natalie Hoy. I commend her for leading her team through the process of commissioning and getting the library and hub ready for use yesterday. Not only will the council officers be there to provide a full range of council services, but the police will be in attendance, too. The local community safety team has been a fantastic success in the area for a number of years, and moving the team from Chesser House to the hub office at Drumbrae has enabled it to work more efficiently in the area to which it is committed. A community care centre, which is part of the hub, will bring better facilities to those who are presently in Clermiston House and the Tower nursing homes. The facilities will mean that those people are not kept apart from the rest of the community. There are large window screens so that people can safely see how things are progressing outside without fearing for their safety. They might be a little bit nervous about mixing with youngsters, but they can see what is happening and they will have a wonderful garden outside too. The on-going communication project has been first rate—it has been fantastic. The community has been involved from start to finish and, as I said earlier, 700 local residents took the time to make the consultation work. Information has been distributed through the community council, and local children drew a mural depicting the services that the hub will provide. It is a fantastic building and a fantastic achievement. Even local colleges that are looking to undertake outreach programmes have been in contact to use the hub. It will be a major success. Back in the dark days of the 1970s, when I was but a 10-year-old—people out there may remember that—

I was 10 once and I even had some hair, like Mr McLetchie. I remember running across the road from Drum Brae Terrace, where I grew up, running 300yd down the road, across the park and then across the street to the mobile library, where I put my book down. The man behind the counter said, “You won’t have to do that for much longer, son, because they’re talking about building a library.” I blame the Tories, who were in power at the time. I look forward to Mr McLetchie answering that. I will not go into the details of the finance—I am sure that the minister will be able to enlighten us on that—or into the technicalities. All that I will say is that there is real partnership working between the council, the Scottish Futures Trust and other partners. We have made a huge success with £5.7 million in difficult economic circumstances, and we now have what is probably the best hub or centre in the city of Edinburgh. I would have liked to address a number of other issues, but the best thing for me to do at this point is sit down with a smile on my face and thank members for attending and taking part in the debate.

As a large proportion of the phase 1 homes will be built in Edinburgh, how many construction jobs will the phase 1 initiative support in that city and across Scotland?

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it is helping small businesses to ensure that they remain at the heart of local communities in the current economic climate. (S4O-00497)

In my constituency, the Edinburgh 21st century homes regeneration project has given way to the demolition of more than 900 homes in Muirhouse. The previous Labour administration’s decision to demolish those homes en masse has resulted in businesses struggling and many of them closing. Will the minister look into the matter to see how the businesses can be assisted throughout the regeneration phase?

Throughout the debate, speakers from all parties have said how much they want to end the blight of offensive behaviour and particularly sectarianism at football matches. Problems that are not associated with football can and should be targeted in other ways. Football is rightly being dealt with in the bill, because it provides the context for the most visible examples of offensive behaviour, not just at stadiums but as people go to and from matches. The offensive behaviour is seen on television. Of course there must be a wider societal approach, as Siobhan McMahon said. The catalyst for the bill was the infamous game of shame between Celtic and Rangers last season, but offensive behaviour has been commonplace in football grounds throughout Scotland for decades, so it is particularly disappointing that the Opposition parties appear not to be willing to support the bill, especially given that there was a great deal of agreement on various issues during the bill’s committee stages. I say to David McLetchie that I would like to think that the test will be not how the number of prosecutions rises but how it falls because of the bill. As others have pointed out, the police, the Lord Advocate and others see the bill as an important step in strengthening the law, particularly as breach of the peace appears not to be as effective as it used to be. The provisions in the bill, taken with football banning orders, will mean that the toolkit that is available to the police and prosecution authorities is substantially enhanced. I welcome the freedom of expression provision, as well as John Finnie’s comments.

I ask the member to let me make some progress. I have to ask, as others have done today, how much thought was put into the 11-point plan that the Labour Party has proposed. Just about all the suggestions in what Graeme Pearson called a fleshed-out plan, including education and work with community groups, have already been started over a period of time. I do not believe that Labour has put in enough research, because its plan looks like it was written on the back of a cigarette packet on a Friday night.

I think that my comment is appropriate. Even Jack McConnell knows that he did not do anything like enough. In 2009, he stated that, if he had one regret, it was that he failed to introduce a bill to tackle sectarianism. As the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs said, the Government has committed £9 million over three years for community and grass-roots projects to combat sectarianism. I welcome the joint action group’s proposals on the actions to be taken if fans of clubs are found to be behaving in an offensive manner. As I said in the debate on the Justice Committee’s report at stage 2 and in committee, I would prefer the Scottish Football Association to take over from the Scottish Premier League full responsibility for points deduction, as the SFA is the national association, but I know that the Parliament cannot legislate for that as it would breach FIFA’s laws on Government interference. I therefore encourage the SFA and the SPL to ensure that action on any disciplinary matters that relate to the behaviour of supporters is open and transparent, particularly given the recent decisions against Celtic as well as those in the past against Rangers. I fear that UEFA and/or FIFA will start to take a more serious set of actions against our clubs if the SFA and the SPL do not act on offensive behaviour. The bill takes on the problems that are faced at football grounds today. Tomorrow can be dealt with through community initiatives and work with youngsters and faith groups; such work is already being done and it will be enhanced in the coming years. The bill is certainly not an attack on anyone apart from the mindless people who shame our national game and our country. Perhaps the Opposition parties will reflect on what the option of doing nothing would mean. I support the motion.

4. To ask the Deputy First Minister how Scotland’s trade links with China will be improved as a result of the First Minister’s visit. (S4F-00328) [Interruption.]

What impact will the arrival of the giant pandas have on Edinburgh zoo’s visitor numbers and what effect will they have on tourism in and the economy of western Edinburgh?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in introducing the 1+2 modern languages model. (S4O-00463)

In my constituency, Kirkliston primary starts teaching French at primary 5, while pupils at Hillwood and Fox Covert primary schools learn basic Italian as early as primary 3. How will the new structure ensure that schools teach languages as early as possible?

I will say right at the outset that I empathise with my colleague Humza Yousaf, as I am also a lay person as regards the law. I welcome the chance to speak on the report. As we are all aware, the Cadder judgment sent a large shudder through the legal and political establishment in Scotland. There is no doubt that it sent a clear message that there must be change in a legal system that we have cherished and which has been developed over hundreds of years. I disagree with Alison McInnes’s idea of a royal commission. I have yet to see something come out of a royal commission relatively quickly and there is some urgency with this problem. As Lord Carloway pointed out when giving evidence on Tuesday, we live in the 21st century. The legal establishment today is a highly trained professional group, unlike, he suggested, many of those who practised several hundred years ago. Unlike their predecessors, 21st century lawyers work in an interdependent legal system that must take account of international law, which includes, of course, the European convention on human rights and the United Kingdom Supreme Court. We have heard from a number of contributors about corroboration. It has been the main issue picked up in the media over the past weeks and there is no doubt that it is the point that has raised most comment. Many see corroboration as a cornerstone of Scots law, but do we really require it in a 21st century legal system? Lord Carloway is certainly very strong in his criticism of corroboration. His now famous declaration that it is “an archaic rule that has no place in a modern legal system” springs to mind and should be taken on board, but our discussions over the coming weeks will determine whether we agree with his description or whether we support the views of other bodies, such as the Law Society of Scotland, which is not totally convinced. I agree with Stewart Maxwell that the use of corroboration is not likely to disappear off a cliff edge—if it is available, I am sure that it will be used. Will the removal of corroboration lead to more cases going to court? Possibly. Will it result in more miscarriages of justice? As the cabinet secretary and Lord Carloway have pointed out, other legal systems do not seem to have a problem without corroboration. In fact, as has been mentioned, Scotland appears to be one of the few legal systems that still demands corroboration of evidence. I welcome the broad support of the Scottish Human Rights Commission and Victim Support Scotland for the proposal. If corroboration is sent to the history books, we will have to ensure that the checks and balances that we replace it with are accepted by all and that justice is seen to be done, and I believe that the Carloway review will ensure that. Lord Carloway’s recommendations on the length of time for which a suspect can be detained are to be welcomed. The fact that there is to be a maximum detention period of 12 hours, with a review being carried out at six hours, will make the idea of holding Saturday court sessions more appealing. James Kelly mentioned the 28-day extension that will liberate suspects from detention, if necessary. I welcome that, and I welcome the report’s identification of the problems of dealing with children and vulnerable adults, whom I suggest are the members of our society who are most likely to feel aggrieved by the system due to a lack of understanding of the new process. I believe that Lord Carloway’s report sets out a clear path of understanding in insisting that a responsible adult or lawyer should take decisions on the vulnerable adult or child’s behalf. Like Rod Campbell, I agree with Lord Carloway that children under the age of 16 should not be able to waive their right to have access to a lawyer, and I agree with Stewart Maxwell that vulnerable adults should be dealt with in the same way. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, Lord Carloway seeks to reform rights of appeal by creating a general right and removing archaic concepts such as bills of advocation. Christine Grahame talked about the role of the SCCRC and the High Court in the new process, which is a subject that is worthy of more consideration before we make a final decision. In addition, I ask that when he considers the review, the cabinet secretary should also consider the availability of three verdicts in our courts, which David McLetchie mentioned when he discussed various aspects of our jury system. I believe that there may well be a case for re-examining the availability of three verdicts. In my opinion, now is an appropriate time to look at an issue that has caused so much discussion over the years. There is much to commend in the review, but there is also much to consider on technical issues. I broadly welcome the review, and I found some of Lord Carloway’s evidence to the Justice Committee quite fascinating, particularly his description of corroboration, which was an enlightenment for some of us on the committee. Many others have alluded to the fact that, as I said at the beginning, Lord Carloway’s report is an historic document. If we accept it and parts of our law are changed, that will be seen as a pivotal moment in our history, but before we change our law there will be much discussion, in which some will pull historical heart strings, while others will be more positive. Whatever happens, laws change and we carry on. I hope that one of the more satisfying moments will come towards the end of the session, when we tidy up the law after winning an independence referendum. I support the motion.

It has been fascinating to be a part of the debate from within the Justice Committee. Listening and reading differing views has shown just how passionate people are about the subject. Ninety-one per cent of the public agree that stronger action needs to be taken to tackle sectarianism and offensive behaviour associated with football in Scotland.

Not at the moment. I am heartened that so many people within the game of football support the Government’s drive to stamp out the offensive behaviour that has blighted our national game for so long. During evidence sessions in the Justice Committee, I found it odd that some representatives of football supporters trusts believe that there is no problem. One said: “Nothing that happened last season—or, indeed, in any recent times—justifies separate legislation that is aimed solely at football supporters.” At the same meeting, another said that “the debate on the bill has been conducted in an air of slight unreality”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 6 September 2011; c 157.] Given the actions taken against some of the senior management of Celtic Football Club and a former member of the Scottish Parliament, as well as recent comments by club officials, I find those statements strange to say the least.

I would like some alternatives to be put forward before I can accept that. Graham Spiers, a journalist from The Times, said in evidence to the committee: “There has been some denial and supporters groups have had to be dragged to the table kicking and screaming to get certain songs banned.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 6 September 2011; c 181.] The issue of self-regulation, and who is ultimately responsible for the behaviour of supporters, is brought up. All football clubs have been involved in various initiatives over the years, and they should be commended for that. There are problems, however. UEFA has disciplined Rangers Football Club on more than one occasion because of the actions of its supporters. Why, then, has the SFA not used its powers as a national association to do more and to discipline Scottish clubs for similar offences? After all, offensive behaviour at football matches has been around for decades. In his evidence, Graeme Spiers condemned the football authorities: “The Scottish football authorities have been cowardly about this issue. They have been scared to act. Nothing would make supporters stop being bigoted in the arena more than the thought that their clubs might be docked points.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 6 September 2011; c 196.] The reason, of course, is that the SFA does not have the power to do that. It gave the power of discipline away to the Scottish Premier League, which is a private group of businesses that will never hand out severe discipline because it would only hurt them. I am heartened by comments from officials of the SFA and SPL that they are fully signed up to the eradication of the offensive behaviour that is seen around football and that they support the new legislation. Perhaps a new dawn awaits. However, I hope that the issue of who really runs our national game is discussed at a future meeting of the football joint action group. Some witnesses were concerned about free speech and the effects of the European convention on human rights. I agree that those issues are vital in any discussion, and they will be addressed as the bill progresses. However, passion for our national game has been replaced by the offensive actions of a minority of supporters that should not be tolerated. There is no doubt in my mind that the views of the Lord Advocate and the police are correct. There is pressure on breach of the peace law, and obtaining convictions is becoming more difficult. As the minister said, the bill would give the police the power to prosecute fans who have shamed Scotland abroad, which they are currently unable to do. At present, there is no incitement to religious hatred offence in Scotland. The bill will change that, and we will be able to name and shame the perpetrators who shame our national sport and country. It should be remembered that the actions that are taken must be in the context of the situations that police officers face. The police and law officers believe that that can be done, and I agree with them. Every political party that is represented in the Parliament has said that it is committed to ending the scourge of offensive behaviour at football matches. Indeed, much of the discussion in the Justice Committee has shown that there is a huge amount of agreement on many issues. It is therefore disappointing that Labour lodged the amendment. The bill is the first step in an on-going process that will bring an end to the shame that we should have addressed many years ago. I urge those who oppose it to ask themselves what their alternative is. It is clear that their view is a minority one, not only in the chamber but throughout the country.

We all have the right to adequate, warm and secure housing. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights says: “Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family”. Housing is central to that. A person’s home is one of the most important factors that affects their life, from the home of a child’s early years to the home that has been adapted for an older person, whether people seek to rent or aspire to move up the property ladder. The Government is successfully moving in the right direction in making housing a top priority for the next five years, and we should make no apology for our ambitions. As we have heard, Scotland needs more housing. We need modern, affordable, and—this is crucial—high-quality 21st century homes. We can all agree on that. Population projections suggest that the number of households in Scotland will increase by more than 200,000 during the next 10 years. If we are to accommodate housing growth in the next decade we will have to invest significantly in the private and social sectors, as well as in emerging areas such as intermediate rent. The Scottish Government’s response to the challenge has been encouraging. There is a solid commitment to build 6,000 affordable homes during each year of this parliamentary session. Indeed, the Government has not only identified the urgency of Scotland’s housing needs but taken steps to address the issue. Record investment is supporting the delivery of almost 28,000 affordable new-builds and there have been almost 25,000 completions during the past three years. Most crucial, a new generation of council homes is being built, after decades of Labour neglect. The previous Labour-Liberal Administration did not build a single council house in Edinburgh or indeed in mainland Scotland. The myth that Labour is the party of social housing has been fully exposed. The abolition of the right to buy for new tenants was one of the Government’s most responsible decisions and will alleviate pressure on councils and benefit people who have been stuck on waiting lists for years. In my constituency, just after I was elected as a councillor in 2007, a council house was available for which there were more than 1,000 applicants, which is a damning indictment of the former Labour Administration in Edinburgh. During the past two years there has been a 50 per cent reduction in sales of local authority homes in Scotland under the right-to-buy scheme. Graeme Brown, director of Shelter Scotland, said that the Scottish Government “was right to reform the system to secure the supply of social housing.” I very much welcome the establishment of a Scottish social housing charter, which will look after the interests of tenants, homeless people and others who use the services that social landlords provide, and which focuses on issues such as quality of housing and environment. The scars of the economic downturn could not be any more visible in the private sector, stalling its ability to invest in new development. The restricted availability of mortgage finance has exacerbated that, which is why the SNP’s commitment to housing could not have come at a better time, as it boosts the construction sector and safeguards jobs across the country. The challenge for the next few years will be how to increase the housing supply right across the spectrum in the current economic climate. It is clear that our housing system will continue to face challenges and, as a result of Westminster cuts to the Scottish budget, we must find new ways of investing and building homes, using Government funding to lever in maximum investment from other sources. The Scottish Government’s national housing trust and the innovation and investment fund are part of the answer, as we have heard. Indeed, just a few weeks ago through the latter scheme, the City of Edinburgh Council was allocated funding to deliver more than 600 new affordable homes. Edinburgh will see substantial progress in housing over the coming years. It is no secret to anyone that the capital has been struggling with social housing supply for many years. The 21st century homes project will facilitate the regeneration of areas in my constituency, such as Muirhouse and Pennywell, where around 470 quality homes will be built. The long-awaited regeneration in the Muirhouse community is an exciting prospect that is expected to attract new business and investment to the area. The scale of regeneration in the capital is probably best illustrated by the demolition of the infamous Sighthill tower blocks, some of Edinburgh’s biggest eyesores, which were turned to dust less than two weeks ago. I want to conclude by saying a few words on fuel poverty. Price hikes by energy companies are scandalous and many people will be suffering the consequences this winter. Through numerous schemes, the Scottish Government is working to lift people out of fuel poverty, but those irresponsible price hikes undermine that progress. We will not get people out of fuel poverty unless the UK Government takes decisive action on energy companies and their out-of-control prices. However, to end on a positive note, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment’s recent announcement to extend the energy assistance package to carers is a clear commitment to addressing the needs of vulnerable citizens in our society. Housing is crucial for the economic, health and social wellbeing of our people. There are undoubtedly challenges ahead, but I am proud of this Government’s record on housing and confident of the actions that we are taking.

6. To ask the First Minister what the impact will be on the Scottish Government’s budget of the reported £1 billion per annum to be paid to private firms for PFI projects. (S4F-00178)

PFI projects in Edinburgh will incur more than £3.5 billion in payments over time—five times the total value. Does the First Minister agree that PFI is a shameful drain on our public finances, taking away money from local services? Does he agree—

12. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made with the building of the new Royal Victoria hospital in Edinburgh. (S4O-00259)

The new hospital is publicly funded with no financial burden to the taxpayer, which is to be welcomed. Does the cabinet secretary agree that providing patients with their own individual rooms will provide a higher-quality environment and more privacy, particularly for older people, and will help to reduce the chances of hospital-acquired infections?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure that the Forth replacement crossing will be built on time and on budget. (S4O-00128)

The minister will be aware that communities in my constituency, such as South Queensferry, will be affected by the construction process. Will he outline what steps will be taken to alleviate disruption for communities during the construction phase?

What response has the cabinet secretary had on enhancing Scotland’s influence in the European Council?

Structures are fundamental in the debate but, ultimately, people want to be assured that service delivery is at the heart of any reform. How will communities throughout Scotland benefit from the reforms that the cabinet secretary outlined?

For Margo MacDonald’s benefit, as a pretty well-known Jambo around the place who has done missionary work in Easter Road on numerous occasions I do not take offence at many of the things that she mentions. I welcome the fact that members on all sides of the chamber recognise the need to clamp down on sectarian crime, and hate crime in general. Such crimes shame this country. We undoubtedly have one of the most awkward sectarian problems in Europe, which damages this country and its international reputation as a multicultural, friendly and tolerant society. My colleagues and the minister have outlined the bill’s aims and the importance of ensuring that it comes into force before the start of the football season. Earlier this week, the Justice Committee took evidence from a number of people representing different stakeholder groups with an interest in the proposed legislation. Like members in the chamber today, everyone wants an end to this cancer, and we should not allow it to take any more of a grip than it already has. The bill is generally supported by the police. Assistant Chief Constable Corrigan and Les Gray of the Scottish Police Federation both view the bill as a useful tool for enforcement, mainly because the Scottish courts are now defining breach of the peace in a more restrictive way, which makes convictions more difficult to obtain. The minister gave a good example of that in her opening statement. We have heard from the SPL, the SFA, Celtic and Rangers, all of which desire to see the end of sectarianism because it does their clubs no good nationally or in the international arena. I grant that they did, like many people, have concerns about the speed of the bill’s progress. It was interesting to hear the Lord Advocate’s views. He was quite clear that the sensationalist headlines in many of yesterday morning’s newspapers were not accurate. Humza Yousaf pointed out earlier that the guidance will make clear that, as with breach of the peace, everything is determined on fact, circumstances and, most important, context. As the Lord Advocate stated, the guidance makes clear that the bill “is not intended to criminalise the singing of national anthems in the absence of any other aggravating behaviour. It is not intended to criminalise the making of religious gestures while national anthems are being sung in the absence of any aggravating behaviour”. It is “not intended to cover peaceful preaching or to restrict freedom of speech, including the right to criticise or comment on religious or non-religious beliefs, even in harsh or derogatory terms. It is not intended to criminalise jokes or satire about religious or non-religious beliefs.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 22 June 2011; c 101.] Those concerns have been addressed, which deals with some of the issues that objectors have raised. I will move my focus to the wider aspects surrounding sectarianism, such as education, although I will not necessarily make the same point that John Lamont made earlier. It would be short-sighted to suggest that sectarianism flares up only during football matches or sport in general. Although it is often manifested during certain football games, we must acknowledge that we need to look beyond enforcement to tackle the root of the problem, as Assistant Chief Constable Corrigan mentioned in his evidence. The Labour Party has on several occasions suggested that the SNP did little to fight sectarianism during its first term in government, but that is misleading. Over the past three years, the SNP has developed an online educational resource that has delivered workshops in schools to nearly 3,000 pupils, who have now gone on to deliver a wide range of anti-sectarian work.

It might be a better idea if the member asked the minister that question. We took advantage of the role-model status of footballers to educate young people about the wrongs and dangers of Islamophobia, which should have no place in multicultural Scotland. In 2009-10, the Scottish Government provided £415,000 to projects aimed at tackling sectarianism, including in schools, and additional resources were made available to Learning and Teaching Scotland. I see that I am running out of time. I know that there are concerns about the speed with which the legislation is going through the Parliament. One bill on its own will not change our society; it takes every citizen to acknowledge that there is a problem and to show willingness to solve it. As I have said, there are concerns about the speed with which the legislation is being passed, but the problem is not of our making—it goes back many years and it needs to be looked at now. I would like our generation to be the one that relegates sectarianism and hate crime in Scotland to the history books. That might not be possible in the short term, but I believe that the bill could be a good starting point for on-going work.

The safety of our communities affects us all and is a concern that is raised time and again by neighbourhood and community partnerships, as well as individuals and local organisations. The facts certainly speak for themselves. Our extra 1,000 police officers have helped to drive our national crime rate to a record 32-year low. Youth crime has reduced, and the number of offence referrals to the children’s reporter fell by 15 per cent between 2008-09 and 2010-11. That is a continuing trend, under which offence referrals have fallen by almost 40 per cent since the Scottish National Party came to power. The risk of being a victim of crime is lower in Scotland than in England and Wales. Even more important, the fear of crime is reducing for the first time since devolution. I think that members will agree that people losing their fear of crime speaks volumes for the state of affairs. However, more can always be done. The national figures paint a picture, but the reality is that many communities have become victims of crime. Far too many communities across Scotland continue to be blighted by antisocial behaviour. While I was campaigning in parts of my constituency of Edinburgh Western, many residents raised that issue. Most of them believe that alcohol, drugs and a lack of respect, values and opportunities are the root causes of antisocial behaviour. The lack of respect and—often—the lack of understanding between people of different age groups and generations are also worrying. Acts of generosity and responsibility by young people—such as giving their seat to a frail elderly person on the bus or helping a disabled person across the road—still undoubtedly go on, but it is unfortunate that we do not see them as often as we used to. Equally, however, the community should be in a position to take responsibility for its young people and their future. Of course, such issues raise wider questions about the kind of society we live in, but the fact is that, unless we bridge the gaps, the breakdown between the different groups in our society will continue. The only way we can effectively address the problem of antisocial behaviour and encourage people to change their habits is to identify its underlying causes. For example, from helping to improve parenting skills to running classes in domestic budgeting, many local family support projects and partnerships have been central to supporting people with all sorts of difficulties. Indeed, the Scottish Government’s framework for tackling antisocial behaviour makes it clear that the focus should be on prevention, on encouraging agencies to work together more effectively and on involving communities in developing local solutions. It places education and support at the heart of its recommendations, alongside enforcement. If any long-term success is to be achieved, prohibitive enforcement measures must be accompanied by support to change the underlying causes of antisocial behaviour. For a large number of people, antisocial behaviour arises from a lack of opportunities. One of the Scottish Government’s answers to that problem has been the cashback for communities scheme, which is financed by money recovered from serious organised crime. The scheme, which is undoubtedly one of the Government’s greatest achievements, has brought in a wide range of partnerships with Scottish sports, arts and youth associations to provide activities for young people and develop their interests and skills. The Scottish Government has committed more than £40 million of investment in the programme, which has benefited more than 500,000 people. I should also point out that the resources have been concentrated in areas with the highest levels of crime and antisocial behaviour. Indeed, the former chief executive of the Scottish Football Association described cashback as “fantastic”. One group that is taking advantage of the funds is Muirhouse Youth Development Group in my constituency. With few activities to engage in, little to do in the evenings and no voice to be heard with, many young people in the area inevitably turned to crime. The group’s simple aim was to increase youngsters’ self-esteem and aspirations, place them at the heart of the community, and develop their sense of self, of others and of the community to which they belonged. However, what is admirable about the organisation is that it was formed by the people in the community who believed that their youngsters were entitled to a much brighter future. To begin with, it was unstructured and peer and volunteer-led, with a strong community commitment, and to this day it continues to play a part in the growth and development of the young people in Muirhouse and other parts of western and northern Edinburgh. I firmly believe that action in the community by the community, with the support of organisations such as Muirhouse Youth Development Group, is the way forward. We must not marginalise our youth; instead, we must integrate them. Antisocial behaviour is complex, but if we can begin to understand its symptoms and prevent the scars in the first place, we can improve safety and quality of life for all.

It is an honour for me to address the Parliament for the first time, representing the people of Edinburgh Western. The debate is about taking Scotland forward. I am sure that every member in the chamber shares the same goal and aspiration of taking Scotland that step further towards becoming a more equal and prosperous nation. What we may disagree on is how that can be achieved. Before I dwell on the politics of the debate, I pay tribute to the work of my predecessor, Margaret Smith. I say that not merely in the spirit of maiden speech tradition but in the knowledge that she served the constituency well for 12 consecutive years in the Parliament. Despite our political differences we were able to work together on different issues and, on a personal level, we have always had an amicable relationship. Margaret is respected among the communities of Edinburgh Western and I am sure that members will join me in wishing her well in all her future endeavours. [Applause.] My colleagues have touched on the progress that has been made in the Government’s health and wellbeing portfolio; my speech will focus predominantly on the Government’s cities strategy, which is closely linked. Edinburgh Western could not be any more relevant to a debate on city development. Its prime location as an internationally competitive business location makes the area an indispensable component of the city’s economy. It contains Edinburgh airport, the Royal Highland showground, Edinburgh Park, the Forth bridges, the Gyle shopping centre, Edinburgh zoo and more than 1,000 other businesses, many of which are supported by the Edinburgh business gateway. Further, the tourism that is generated by areas such as Cramond and South Queensferry makes western Edinburgh a hub of economic growth and potential. Edinburgh Western is also a diverse constituency, comprising suburban areas such as Corstorphine and Blackhall and the rural villages such as Dalmeny. It would be too easy for me to spend my six minutes acknowledging Edinburgh's successes, Edinburgh as the tourism and festival city and Edinburgh’s ability to drive economic growth. Although all that is true, as in every other city there are fields that deserve particular attention. One of them is housing. For decades, areas such as Muirhouse and Drylaw in my constituency have had to cope with inadequate housing that has often contributed to the cycle of poverty, crime and poor health. To that end, I welcome the Scottish Government’s priority for urban regeneration. The City of Edinburgh Council is leading a major investment project in social housing that is worth up to £150 million. The 21st century homes project will include Muirhouse and Pennywell. The redevelopment of those areas will contribute to Edinburgh delivering 12,000 new affordable homes over the next 10 years. For the first time in a generation, after decades of neglect, council homes will be built in Edinburgh. More important, regeneration will give the residents of those communities an opportunity to look to the future. We all aspire to live in prosperous, safe and healthy communities, and it is our duty as parliamentarians to fight for the equality of place and people, creating new opportunities and horizons for all. The argument for developing a coherent cities strategy has a driving economic focus, but the social elements of the strategy should never be neglected. There is an unequivocal correlation between poor health, drugs, crime, low educational attainment, poverty, unemployment and poor housing. The rate of hospital admission that is related to alcohol misuse is around three times higher in the most deprived areas. That is why any cities strategy cannot fail to address the social inequalities that are present in our society. The fact that the Scottish Government has made the cities strategy a priority and has integrated it into the Deputy First Minister’s portfolio, along with health and wellbeing, reassures me that the link between growth and tackling inequalities has truly been made. Indeed, the Scottish Government has already taken action to address some of those inequalities and has supported the idea of community empowerment. The climate challenge fund has allowed 261 communities to benefit from 331 awards and, in 2011-12, the scheme will be extended. Cashback for communities has invested more than £20 million in a range of youth and sport projects, benefitting more than 300,000 young people. The town centre regeneration fund has also invested in community-led projects. Undoubtedly, some work still needs to be done to tackle deep-rooted social problems in our most disadvantaged areas. To that effect, policies such as those on minimum pricing, to reduce excessive drinking, and on short-term prison sentences, to reverse reoffending, will be pivotal. Edinburgh is in a good position in comparison with most of its UK counterparts. I am confident that the actions that the Government is taking will prove effective in redressing the imbalances that exist. Cities act as hubs. They are unquestionably the drivers of our national and regional economies. Regenerating many of our communities and redressing the inequalities that exist will be essential to achieving our cities’ long-term success.