I am not sure whether I can live up to those blessings and all that esteem. Nevertheless, I will proceed. The debate on the implementation of CAP reform comes at an important time for rural Scotland, as we explore and expose, particularly through the two consultations, the preferred options on issues where choices are to be made. After today, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny will be key to ensuring that what is proposed works for farmers and the wider rural community. Subject to deciding our work programme on 5 February, we will hold evidence sessions with stakeholders after the close of the two consultations, and with the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the cabinet secretary. I speak in support of the Labour amendment. It raises issues that were not addressed in the Scottish Government’s motion. For example, although we agree that UK Government budget decisions limit the decisions that the Scottish Government can take, it is still responsible for making those decisions, which is a matter that the motion does not recognise fully. I ask the cabinet secretary to tell us in his closing remarks something about the contribution of the future CAP stakeholder group and how that is developing. The consultation on pillar 1 ends on 17 March. How the future basic payments should be made, including the 30 per cent for greening and the national reserve, is a fundamental issue; the range of other issues that members raised are also fundamental. The Scottish Government has, according to its website, “lobbied hard to ensure Scotland’s diverse farming needs were well represented in the reformed policy”. It went on to say that it was “involved in helping to shape solutions which will deliver for Scotland’s farmers. Work is continuing on the fine detail of the system”. The Scottish Government also stated that “The consultation seeks views on the 4 optional types of future direct support: voluntary coupled support, redistributive payments, Pillar 1 ANC payments and the Small Farmer Scheme.” I will focus briefly on the small farmer scheme, which would protect many farm businesses from cuts in support. It may also protect many ancillary businesses in the Lanarkshire, Ayrshire and Dumfriesshire communities in my region, according to Tom French, who is a Crawfordjohn farmer and a regional NUFS rep. I understand that more than 70 per cent of Scottish farm holdings are smaller than 50 hectares, although many farm businesses hold more than one holding. I make a plea for small farmers and for support for the proposal that the higher rate of subsidy be applied to the first 50 hectares. Small family farms can—and do—play an important part in the local economy and social fabric, and that additional financial support may make the difference between keeping going and giving up. As the Nourish Scotland briefing highlighted, such a move would be supported by a number of things. For example, value is created by direct selling and shorter supply chains, and research shows that higher biodiversity can be combined with higher productivity. The responses to the consultation on redistributive payments must be carefully analysed, as farms on rough grazing land could lose out. Rhoda Grant mentioned the capping of basic payments. Scottish Labour believes that it is right that there should be a cap. In spite of the argument sometimes made by large farm businesses about the employment benefit that they provide to the local economy, we do not agree that there should be a public subsidy beyond a cap. There are other, more direct, ways to support the rural economy through pillar 2, and I understand that capping the amount could release funds.

I do not know the exact amount of money that would be transferred to pillar 2, but I understand that it would be substantial. That money could be used to help agri-environment schemes; indeed, it could be used to help farmers in other ways as well as being used to help the local economy. Rhoda Grant made a plea for a careful assessment of her Highlands and Islands region. I ask the cabinet secretary to refer to the new crofting scheme and to comment on what will happen with the important issue of support for transport costs, which Angus MacDonald mentioned. Will the cabinet secretary also tell us whether the ready reckoner that is included in the consultation has been used and about the degree to which it has been found to be helpful? It seems to be a good option for helping farmers to assess their future. There seems to be no dissent from the view that slipper farmers must be excluded. I asked the cabinet secretary whether the measures are robust enough yet, and his explanation—that there will be a meeting next week—was positive. Nigel Miller stressed: “We need the Government to look at a suite of measures to lock out the misuse of money”, and Rob Gibson expressed concern about buying and selling, which must be stopped. The pillar 2 consultation ends at the end of February and it is encouraging to see that the Scottish Government is committed to a simpler process, which should make grants more accessible. The new SRDP needs to be simple, straightforward, effective, customer focused and accessible. It must not be created as a package that only fits computer and audit systems; some members have highlighted that as a risk. It must be simple and, along with any new advisory service, it must be people centred. Cara Hilton highlighted the disappointment of a range of environment groups that the Scottish Government has not followed the Welsh example and transferred the full 15 per cent from pillar 1 to pillar 2. We support that transfer, but acknowledge that there is a strong tension pulling in different directions. The cabinet secretary has to decide. Graeme Dey covered the range of vital services that are supported by pillar 2. I will highlight a few sections of the SRDP consultation in more detail. The agri-environment climate scheme is essential for our way forward in rural Scotland, and it is right that 27 per cent of the future budget should be allocated to that, with an increasing number of studies confirming “the effectiveness” of such measures “in addressing public objectives for water quality, climate change & biodiversity.” However, I ask the cabinet secretary to reassess access to that option. It has been highlighted to me that some small farmers believe that it is inaccessible to them, partly because of the challenges posed by the paperwork. There is also to be a focus on co-operative action to secure landscape-scale improvements to the natural environment. That could be an opportunity for farmers to work in partnership with the wider rural community to strengthen rural resilience. As a Scottish Co-operative Party MSP, I think that it is a good step to put in a new section with £10 million of support. The minister will know about the Eddleston water project, which was led by the Tweed Forum and is a timely example. The SRDP consultation said: “This project co-ordinated a number of partners to develop a restoration strategy to both restore natural habitats and help reduce the risk of flooding”. On the basis of the evidence that was taken at the committee, I am also pleased to see that agroforestry has gained support. The consultation refers to “an integrated approach to land management where trees and domestic livestock can co-exist”. That can bring multiple benefits, which we must always look for. I repeat a plea in the Archaeology Scotland briefing that, as they are part of our heritage, sites should be enhanced and protected in the CAP process. Elaine Murray talked about devolution and, in particular, the benefits of further localism within Scotland rather than between the countries of the UK. That would allow more specific solutions to local rural issues, and I agree that there is value in adopting that approach. Finally, the inclusive measures for new entrants are welcome. However, in the words of Clydesdale farmer Tom French, “The biggest obstacle to new entrants gaining a start in the industry is the availability of land. Without some measures to encourage letting and deter in-hand farming and land grabbers, any new entrant scheme will be doomed to failure.” How starkly that reminds us all that getting the details of CAP reform right is only part of the puzzle for rural Scotland. If we are to have vibrant rural communities in which we produce more of our own food while caring for our land for future generations, the cabinet secretary is right to say that it is fairness, not history, that will count. We must all work together on that.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to protect bus routes in South Scotland. (S4O-02833)

I thank the minister for that answer about the financial aspects. I have a particular concern about rural bus routes in my region. During the Christmas recess, Stuarts of Carluke pulled a bus service between Law and Wishaw, leaving a rural community with very poor transport links for constituents who need to get to work and to health appointments and leaving many people socially isolated. I am sorry to say that that appears to be a continuing pattern. In view of that, what plans does the minister have to support Iain Gray’s proposed bus bill, which would bring real sustainable protection to Law and many other communities throughout South Scotland?

What discussions has the minister or the Scottish Government had with the United Kingdom Government regarding flood insurance, given that the statement of principles has come to an end, although an interim arrangement has been made?

This committee debate is extremely important and timely as it comes in the immediate aftermath of the recent severe weather and flooding. They focused all our minds on emergency arrangements and resilience but, equally important, on the longer-term climate change adaptation process. The overarching aim of the draft programme is: “To increase the resilience of Scotland's people, environment, and economy to the impacts of a changing climate.” Scottish Labour is solidly behind the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s motion, and I thank the convener and the Minister for Environment and Climate Change for their opening speeches in what I hope will be a positive debate. Our committee took a wide range of evidence, as has already been said. The evidence was broad and deep in its range. We wrote to the minister and we received a detailed response, which has been helpful. There has also been a Scottish Government public consultation, the result of which was out recently. That scrutiny has helped to hone the draft programme into a more focused way forward. We now have the opportunity to engage with one another and the minister and take into account everything in the final programme. In his foreword to the draft programme, the minister states: “Our climate affects people’s health, our road and rail services, water supplies, energy demands, tourism – the list is ... endless.” It is indeed endless. I was very relieved to hear the minister reassure us today about speaking with different departments: that on-going dialogue is essential to tackle climate change. It is impossible for any single speaker to touch on all the issues, but between us we have a chance to get it right. We should acknowledge that, importantly, “The Programme ... sets out the arrangements for wider engagement in meeting those objectives.” As the minister just said, it is a collective endeavour. Governance arrangements are at the heart of the way forward. In this rapidly changing world, it is essential that the climate change delivery board is a robust and effective body as it oversees delivery. In the draft programme we see that the board will have a new reporting role for the programme, which relates to the meeting of annual emissions targets, which we all know have been missed in successive years. We have future challenges on that. I turn to monitoring and assessment of the programme. The minister stated in his response to the committee: “It is important for the evaluation of the Programme to be an on-going process to ensure the right measures are in place to address the effects of climate change. We are currently considering options for monitoring and reporting ... and the views of the Committee and stakeholders will be taken into account”. I note that perhaps the minister will explain in his closing speech more about how that will work in practice, which would be helpful. In its briefing for the committee, Scottish Environment LINK recommends that “All wider policies which will make Scotland resilient and adaptable to a changing climate in the long-term” should be addressed not just in terms of “addressing risks in the next 5 years”, but beyond. I hope that the minister will take that into account. In our letter to the minister, the committee said: “The Committee will also consider climate change issues as part of its own scrutiny of the National Performance Framework 3,” or NPF3. We will also consider climate change issues in relation to the national planning framework 3, which has the same acronym. The national planning framework has a fundamental role to play in this context. It had a fundamental role for the previous Administration and will have a role beyond this Administration, into the future. I hope that the minister agrees with me on that. The responses to the Scottish Government consultation show the range and depth of understanding of and commitment to climate adaptation across Scotland. Although there was “broad support for the Programme’s overarching framework, and its objectives, policies and proposals ... it was common for respondents to request more detail about certain aspects of the Programme and to suggest that there should be a greater emphasis on ‘taking action’.” That is important for the final draft. Significantly, “there were requests for clarification about how” the programme “would be delivered, who was responsible / accountable for delivery, priorities and timescales, funding, and arrangements for reporting and monitoring.” The committee’s view is that a lot of that is in the draft programme, but there are ways in which perhaps it could be sharpened.

That chimes with some of the committee’s recommendations. I ask the minister to take forward those fundamental governance issues in the final adaptation programme.

I stress that a thread running through the adaptation programme is the value of interconnections and partnerships, showing the need for clear paths of communication. Making the programme mechanisms clearer will surely help to make that thread stronger. Multiple benefits are also a win-win. In the agriculture and forestry section of our letter to the minister we state: “The Committee recommends that the Minister undertakes an evaluation of the extent to which the SRDP has delivered multiple benefits, for example for biodiversity and for climate change adaptation.” Alex Fergusson stressed that evidence showed that farmers are struggling to keep pace. In his letter to the committee, in relation to farming for a better climate and future proofing Scotland’s farming, the minister states: “One of the key objectives of these programmes is to raise awareness”. I argue that it is important to raise awareness across all the sectors with regard climate adaption. The committee heard interesting evidence on agroforestry, and I am pleased that the minister acknowledges in his letter that that will play a part in the future of SRDP. I was very pleased to hear both Rob Gibson and Alex Fergusson mention marine issues. Indeed, the committee welcomed “clarification from the Minister that the assessment of the risk of coastal erosion is an area that is actively being considered by the Scottish Government”. It would be helpful to hear more about that as soon as possible. A lot of research into marine climate change issues is at its early stages, as has been emphasised on other occasions at our committee. It is essential in relation to the rapidly developing aquaculture industry and sustainable fisheries that climate change research is well funded for Marine Scotland, which works with other partners such as the marine alliance for science and technology for Scotland. Research funding will be essential in and across all sectors, building on new partnerships, if we are to use science-based evidence in our approach to climate change adaptation. Angus MacDonald emphasised the need for leadership. The public sector climate leaders forum, on which I serve for the committee, will be essential in that regard, but we are all leaders, in the Scottish Parliament and in our communities. Sarah Boyack explored the importance of local government engagement and the implications for the planning system. According to the analysis of the consultation responses, “Local authorities ... thought that their role in the delivery of the Programme was missing or understated.” Will the minister look again at the issue? Cara Hilton drew our attention to the necessity of businesses adopting the programme and considered food issues. The committee heard from Nourish Scotland about the need for shorter and regionally integrated food supply chains. Will the minister say today how work in that regard might be taken forward on a Scotland-wide basis? Many of the recommendations highlight how essential the localisation of resilience is. Communities are at the heart of the way forward, although Patrick Harvie was right to say that further analysis of global changes is essential and is missing from the programme. We need robust structures, and perhaps most important is the social justice dimension, which Rob Gibson mentioned. The committee heard stark evidence about the concerns of vulnerable island communities, challenged urban communities and households on low incomes. Jim Hume asked about relevance: how relevant can the issues be to people who are struggling from day to day? How will the Scottish ministers ensure that the adaptation Scotland and climate challenge funds—and other bodies—engage with the communities that are most in need of support, in the context of flooding emergencies and longer-term resilience? Our committee welcomes the minister’s comment in his letter that the Government is considering how it can better understand the equalities impact of climate change, but we are keen for him to give information on equalities issues in his closing speech.

14. To ask the Scottish Government how its education policy supports children with additional support needs. (S4O-02760)

I thank the minister for that answer but considering the fact that there has, I understand, been an 89 per cent increase in the number of children with additional support needs, will the minister explain how the Scottish Government intends to address the issue, particularly when fewer teachers are fulfilling the ASN statutory requirements and the umbrella group Scottish Children’s Services Coalition fears that “teachers and other education staff do not have the time and resources to give all ASN children the help they need”? Indeed, from my experience of working with children on the autism and dyslexia spectrums and from discussion with others, I would agree with that view. What can the minister do to address those concerns in relation to initial and on-going teacher training and support staff training?

I thank the minister for early sight of the statement. As the minister acknowledged, the holiday period is a time when we should all be able to relax. However, due to the severe weather, it has been a very challenging time for many households and communities. It is essential that the Scottish Government gives all possible support to those affected as they come to terms with their situation after the initial clear-up. The statement is a welcome step in that regard. Will the minister clarify how the budget for the Bellwin scheme will be distributed, what the application process is and what the budget is? I have concerns about the floodline warning systems for the future. I highlight to the minister that it was not possible to get detailed advice in Clydesdale by Friday 3 January, despite the area having been severely flooded earlier in the week. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee argued in the budget recommendations that it is essential “to ensure greater consistency across Scotland.” Will the minister guarantee that the position will be reviewed urgently? Will he give us an update on flood insurance issues? Partnership working is imperative and it would be helpful if the minister could clarify what assessment has been made of whether any alteration should be made to the present arrangements for communication between partners, including local authorities. Will there be a report from next week’s welcome summit? Sadly, it has now been proven that there is an even more urgent need for robust funding for coastal and river flood defences. The response was rapid and we cannot prevent floods everywhere, as the minister said, but will he urgently review the budget in view of severe weather patterns? Alongside those funding imperatives lie the Scottish Government’s commitments to climate change mitigation. Will the minister clarify what arrangements are in place for the related research budget and whether that could be increased due severe weather developments?

I wish everyone a happy new year. I, too, declare an interest: I work with Christine Grahame as deputy convener of the cross-party group on animal welfare. The cabinet secretary referred to modern techniques. Will he say what arrangements are in place to monitor the use of the internet by groups who are involved in wildlife crime such as badger baiting? For instance, what happens if people set up a Facebook page devoted to organising fox baiting or dog fighting? As the cabinet secretary said, what we are talking about can be an urban crime as well as a rural one.

Does the member agree that in relation to longer-term issues such as climate change the NPF is extremely important, as the convener of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee highlighted, and that the indicators with regard to what we have to achieve go beyond each Government?

The review team found that there is considerable variation in the quality and system of care that is being delivered within all three hospitals. NHS Lanarkshire needs to take further action to develop a culture in which every opportunity is taken to learn from mistakes with the aim of improving patient care. An example of that is in the passing on of information between shifts. Can the cabinet secretary explain how that learning process will be undertaken and give us some reassurance about how it will be assessed?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what action it takes to provide carers with information and advice on accessing practical support and technology. (S4O-02700)

I thank the minister for that detailed answer. As he will know, the United Kingdom carers rights day was held at the end of November. Recent research by Carers UK and YouGov has found that fewer than 30 per cent of carers use technology to support health and care issues, whereas 70 per cent use it for other aspects of their life such as going shopping. Will the Scottish Government introduce statutory provision? The minister mentioned that in his answer, but perhaps he could give more detail on whether it would be possible to introduce practical support for carers and to give advice on the matter in the forthcoming carers bill, and tell us how he will ensure that there will be equal access throughout Scotland in different local authority areas.

This time last year I stood in the chamber to debate the annual EU fisheries negotiations, and I expressed concerns about the state of our shared European fisheries. At that stage, reform of the common fisheries policy was being debated. In February this year, the European Parliament finally and belatedly reached an overdue arrangement. We are now all grappling with the final details. As has been discussed by my colleagues, the CFP reforms have signalled an end to the widely discredited practice of discarding, which is certainly to be welcomed. We on this side of the chamber have again reiterated the importance of following sound scientific advice in developing European fisheries policy, which has not always been the case in the past. As we have heard in the debate, the SFF, the RSPB and WWF are not that far from each other on the way forward for cod fisheries. In the words of my North East Scotland colleague, Jenny Marra, “It is therefore clear that industry and environmental experts are prepared to unite when the scientific evidence is there.” She urges the Scottish Government to “build on our scientific data and to collaborate with our neighbours on the collection and production of that data”. Angus MacDonald, too, has highlighted how essential the science is as a basis for moving forward in this complex area. Unfortunately, however, bilateral discussions between the EU and Norway have again fallen through. I wish the cabinet secretary every success in January in trying to resolve that very important issue. As Tavish Scott highlighted, the issue relating to the Faroes and Iceland must also be resolved if we are to have a fair way forward. In our view, one of the most important developments that came out of the past year’s negotiations is in regionalisation. It is now the mainstream opinion in Europe that regional groups such as the Scheveningen group or the Baltic Sea fisheries forum—BALTFISH—are the preferred model for regional co-operation. However, more formalisation will of course need to take place. As Claire Baker highlighted earlier, the SFF today expressed concerns about “exclusive competence” being held in Brussels and “enshrined in the Treaties.” However, it is hoped that the cabinet secretary and others in the negotiations will be able to resolve that so that some sense of power and decision making is felt to be held at a regional level. I wish the cabinet secretary well with that. On today’s announcement by the cabinet secretary about the European maritime and fisheries fund, the fund is sometimes forgotten in the debate but it is an important issue in terms of diversification and support for our coastal communities, such as Eyemouth, which is in my region and that of the Minister for Environment and Climate Change. I am sure that members will agree with me that the fund is really important for the future of our coastal communities. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary can indicate what types of projects will be proposed in this round. As my colleague Claire Baker has highlighted, and as we have suggested in our amendment to the Government’s motion, our fishing industry must be supported to comply with the ban on discards, which will soon come into effect. With the challenge of a mixed fishery, our fishermen must be able to adapt gradually to the incoming discard regulations and, as such, they must concentrate on discard minimisation and maximum selectivity. We cannot be left still adapting to the new regulations when the legislation comes into force. I wish to say something about fashions in fish—perhaps in an attempt to be slightly light-hearted in this Christmas period. I recall my Aberdonian grandmother telling me that she heard in her childhood, “Fresh herrin—two a penny,” in Aberdeen. Once, mackerel was frowned on by some; then, smoked mackerel became good pub fare. Cod and haddock are the staples of fish suppers, but let us not shun other species in the bid for sustainability. The BBC website tells us: “Coley is one of the least expensive fish in the cod family and is a great sustainable substitute for cod or haddock in many recipes.” With his delicious cooking, my Thai son-in-law has proved that monkfish is great in a Thai curry, as it holds together well. One of the other ways to be adventurous is to order a fish box, which can come out of Aberdeen. What is in it depends on what the weekly catch is. My partner is getting one of those for Christmas. What is the cabinet secretary doing further to promote the spread of species and to encourage sustainable catches? I said to my son last night—just to carry on the family theme—“I hope you’re going to eat well the night before your exam.” He is taking the exam as we speak. He said, “Yes, of course. I’m eating fish, because it will make me clever.” We all need to be extremely clever in the support that we must give to the cabinet secretary for what are very complex negotiations, so that we ensure that sustainable development is at the heart of the way forward for Scottish fisheries in sustainable Scottish seas. I ask the cabinet secretary whether he might be minded to support our amendment, which we have lodged in a positive spirit. We wish the cabinet secretary well in this year’s end-of-year fisheries negotiations.

Could the minister give us more details of the range of interventions to support and protect red squirrels, particularly in the south of Scotland, in light of the concerns about the situation on the Paxton house estate, where there are no longer any red squirrels, and the corridors of concern that go up into the northern parts of Scotland?

3. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason it has not undertaken a public consultation on, or discussed with relevant organisations, the criminalisation of forced marriage. (S4O-02669)

I thank the cabinet secretary for explaining the situation in relation to the LCM. However, he will know that Scottish Women’s Aid, Hemat Gryffe Women’s Aid and Shakti Women’s Aid have concerns about proceeding to criminalise forced marriage. Scottish Women’s Aid speaks of evidence from Europe and says that it is difficult for people at risk of forced marriage to report their parents and families to the police or even to pursue civil protection. The people at risk often need to be reassured that the protection that they seek can be obtained in the family courts, and thus that their families will not be prosecuted, before they agree to make a formal statement. Is the cabinet secretary in a position to reconsider the present process? If not, I encourage him to take careful account of those highlighted concerns about criminalisation.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what account the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth takes of sustainable development in his policy framework for sustainable growth. (S4O-02624)

In view of the aim of the national performance framework to have “a flourishing and prosperous Scotland” for all, can the cabinet secretary explain why the preferred term in the Scottish Government’s finance policy is “sustainable economic growth” when the term “sustainable development”, which encompasses social, economic and environmental strands and, in the view of many people, is a clearer definition that has a more robust legal status, better encapsulates our future direction and, indeed, the dynamic agenda that Scottish Labour is working towards?

It is acknowledged that air pollution shortens lives, and transport is a major contributor to air pollution. In the context of climate change and air pollution, what is the Scottish Government doing to encourage local authorities to set up low-emission zones? I apologise if you were intending to raise the issue in your speech, minister.

I am glad to be here to welcome the publication of the national parks strategy for Scotland. I thank my colleague Claire Baker for securing the debate, which seems timely, and support the remarks by Sarah Boyack and Alex Fergusson, who were members of Parliament at the start of the process and have reflected on that in their speeches. The words “Unfinished Business” in the report’s title are apt. The report points to the vast network of natural landscapes that should be ideal settings for a number of national parks, although there are currently only two of them out of a designation of 15 across the UK, I understand. The time has come for us to add to those two. Labour introduced the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, and things have moved on since then. According to the report, the expert recommendation is that the Scottish landscape should be able to support four or five national parks, or perhaps more. It points out that neither of the existing national parks has marine or coastal features, as my colleague Claire Baker stated. I certainly agree with the argument that at least one additional national park should include a suitable area of the Scottish coastline, considering that Scotland has such a rich coastal environment. I would say this as a South Scotland MSP, but perhaps the Solway Firth might be an option. A marine national park was mooted at stakeholder meetings in Dumfries—one of which I attended—in the third session of the Scottish Parliament. That one meeting demonstrated to me how clearly the model will allow stakeholders including the local authority, inshore fishermen, tourism providers and non-governmental organisations to come together to allow an early resolution of any potential conflicts and to support a sustainable way forward for the precious marine environment and marine biodiversity. The benefits of increasing the number of national parks cannot be understated. The protection that is granted to such spaces ensures that the natural environment is handled with greater care, which allows biodiversity to develop and provides essential green carbon sinks, which will help to tackle climate change. Partnership working involving local communities is a fine model of sustainable development in action, and it supports the rural economy in a sustainable way. In the Loch Lomond and Trossachs national park, for example, great efforts have been made to preserve the water vole population, and plans are under way to create the largest native woodland in Scotland. With regard to climate change, the Cairngorms national park has been running an initiative to encourage local residents to switch to wood as a carbon-neutral fuel source. As my colleague Claire Baker highlighted, there is the potential for new national parks in the eastern part of my region. I have been made aware by constituents of an interesting proposal relating to the area. The national park strategy was discussed at a public meeting in Yetholm at which John Mayhew, from the Scottish Campaign for National Parks, and the Association for the Preservation of Rural Scotland raised the idea of a Scottish Cheviots park. Significantly, it was suggested that such a project could be linked, as Claire Baker stressed, to the existing Northumberland national park, which reaches right up to the Scottish border. The proposal makes not only geographic sense but economic sense, as it would create more tourism opportunities in the Borders, provide environmental drivers for biodiversity and make social sense for rural communities. In addition, the proposal would provide the opportunity for good cross-border working. Again, I congratulate Claire Baker on taking the issue forward, and I hope to hear from the minister about a possible review.

I reiterate that we share the cabinet secretary’s frustration with the UK Government’s decision. We also appreciate that he does not have confidence in Owen Paterson’s review. However, in view of the continuing importance of modelling for the shift from historic to area-based payments, which has not yet been completed, can the cabinet secretary reassure us on the timescale for finalising the work to allow the review to proceed?

In view of those remarks, why does the minister not see it as appropriate to include the term “sustainable development” on the face of the bill?

As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I identify myself with many of the remarks that my colleague Graeme Dey made. I want to speak about the term “sustainable development”. I ask ministers to consider including that in the bill and, further, I ask them not to include the term “sustainable economic growth” without a clear statutory definition. I do not believe that this is just semantics. As others have said, the term “sustainable economic growth” lacks legal clarity, and in my view it does not represent a sufficiently holistic approach, so it is more likely to founder. There is already a term whose legal meaning is clear and which is holistic by definition, and that is “sustainable development”. For those reasons, and others that colleagues have raised, we will not be able to support the bill at this stage.

Very briefly. I want to develop my point.

I will go on to develop arguments about the rationale for adopting the five pillars of sustainable development, so I will proceed on that basis. As we all know, sustainable development takes into account the social, environmental and economic, which in my view fuses them into one and provides a way forward. Sustainable economic growth, though, is wrong-footed in that way. Further, the word “sustainable” has had too many meanings attached to it when it is the precursor to “economic growth”. Does the phrase refer to growth that is sustainable or to an environmental or social brake on growth? Further, sustainable economic growth can entail irredeemable degradation of the planet, increasing inequality and even arms production, and a poor diet leading to obesity. Those are bad factors, but they are still defined in that way. Sustainable economic growth can also entail debt, which can be sustained for decades, as we have seen. Significantly, there appears to be confusion about what sustainable economic growth really means. There is concern about the lack of clarity in policy definition itself, which could cause confusion in the development of regulation as the Government and successive Governments act in a range of areas. Even worse, in the draft marine plan, which is out to consultation, we read: “The ... High Level Marine Objectives ... reflect and incorporate the five guiding principles of sustainable development, which the Scottish Government acknowledges as an important element of increasing sustainable economic growth.” So sustainable development now becomes a subset of sustainable economic growth in Scottish Government policy. As we have heard, there are concerns that confusion may lead us to the courts. In written evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, Professor Colin Reid of the University of Dundee stated: “It is unsatisfactory for legislation to impose a legal duty where there is so little clarity as to its meaning”. I think that we can all agree that legislation must be robust and clear. The recent Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2013 is a salutary reminder of what can happen to people if it is not. In the words of the Law Society of Scotland’s written submission to our committee, “Effective legislation is best made with precise terms.” The term “sustainable economic growth” is not clear and precise enough. We are more likely to get it right with the term “sustainable development”, as it reflects a more holistic approach, and a range of stakeholders argue for it to be used in the bill. Scottish Environment LINK is concerned about the economic growth duty on regulators. It states: “We know of no legal definition of sustainable economic growth and, therefore, have no assurance that it aligns with the sustainable development definition and principles” The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations highlights in its briefing that the importance of sustainable development was recognised in the passage of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, which was amended at stage 2 in response to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s recommendation to give equal emphasis to all three pillars of sustainability rather than just the economic aspects. The national performance framework aims for a flourishing and prosperous Scotland through the balance of 50 indicators including biodiversity, carbon and equality issues and, as members know, much work is being done on the appropriateness of gross domestic product being Scotland’s only top-line measure of progress. Strangely, the two committees that were involved in the passage of the bill were unable to agree on that issue at stage 1.

I am sorry, but I cannot do so now.

The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which is the lead committee, noted the “conflicting views” of stakeholders, but asked only that “sustainable economic growth” be “explicitly stated and explained in subsequent guidance”, but not on the face of the bill. That is not good enough. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, which is the secondary committee and my committee, expressed concerns in its report to the lead committee. It said: “The Committee agrees with stakeholders that if a duty to contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth is to be included in the Bill then, to ensure clarity and to safeguard against any reinterpretation of its intended meaning at a later date, a definition of the term should be included on the face of the Bill.” Finally, that committee said: “The Committee remains unclear as to why the term sustainable economic growth has been used in the Bill rather than sustainable development on the grounds that while neither has a statutory definition sustainable development has international recognition and is understood legally across a number of regimes and jurisdictions. The Committee recommends that the Scottish Government bring forward amendments to the Bill at Stage 2 to include a definition of sustainable development in section 38 of the Bill.” I whole-heartedly support that approach.

I, too, am glad to speak in the debate and to congratulate Glasgow Women’s Aid on its 40th anniversary. I thank Sandra White for holding the debate. As we have heard, Glasgow Women’s Aid has done groundbreaking work over the past 40 years in tackling an extremely sensitive issue with great care and diligence. I was especially interested to hear about the early history from Sandra White. Although a great deal of work has been done in recent years to address domestic abuse, unfortunately, there is still a long way to go, as we have heard. It is simply unacceptable in this day and age for people, especially women and children, to be subjected to such disgraceful treatment in their homes. It is a human rights issue and an abuse of power, usually by males. It is vital that organisations such as Glasgow Women’s Aid exist to support women through their ordeals. It is crucial that we continue to raise awareness of zero tolerance of domestic abuse in Scotland. For many years, the issue was not even talked about and, frankly, in some cases, it was accepted as part of life for women. Given that, I am encouraged that Glasgow Women’s Aid has taken a number of initiatives to raise awareness. Domestic violence is not confined to our cities—it is also a rural issue. As Jackie Baillie stressed, it is an abuse of power by men, and I emphasise that it is a gender issue. It knows no boundaries. I worry about the isolation that victims in rural Scotland might feel, so I was heartened when I was recently asked by Police Scotland to open an awareness-raising event in my local town of Lanark. The event was an interagency morning that took the form of stalls from a wide range of relevant support agencies and was held on a wide walkway between the entrance, cafe and changing rooms of the South Lanarkshire Lifestyles Lanark leisure centre. Many people came through—men, women and children—just in that morning. The message was clear: nobody needs to suffer in silence. Having looked at Glasgow Women’s Aid’s excellent website and through recent contact with its staff, I am clear that awareness raising is an integral part of its work. It uses avenues such as social media and preventative work in schools, about which we have heard from other members. Internet and phone access is important in rural Scotland, including in the South Scotland region, which I represent. Through its child exploitation and online protection team, Glasgow Women’s Aid has been able to hold support sessions. Its children’s outreach team has been doing fantastic work teaching primaries 5, 6 and 7—the stage at which domestic abuse should be talked about. Stewart Maxwell stressed the importance of education. In an ideal world, Glasgow Women’s Aid would like to expand its work to include the training of teachers but, unfortunately, it has not received adequate funding from the Scottish Government to support that. Might the minister comment on that at the end of the debate? Concerns have been raised at the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children—of which I am a deputy convener—about teenage perceptions of domestic abuse. Studies such as the recent one by the University of Manchester suggest that young girls can often have a skewed view of what is acceptable behaviour with regard to domestic abuse and that it is not treated with the seriousness that it demands. White Ribbon Scotland highlights the point that one teenage girl in three who is in a relationship suffers an unwanted sexual act. There is also evidence to show that some girls think that a slap does not matter, but it jolly well does. At the CPG, we heard from young people who were working with Police Scotland’s violence reduction unit on peer mentoring in Portobello high school—apologies to Glasgow—and the wider community. I was most impressed by hearing from the young people themselves about peer group work that they are doing to help other young people to analyse and come to terms with their behaviour themselves and agree on what is, and is not, acceptable. I hope that similar mentoring initiatives, which are also happening in Glasgow, can be introduced throughout Scotland, including rural Scotland. Let us be sure that we provide Scottish Women’s Aid and groups throughout Scotland with enough funding to support the work with the next generation so that we really can remove domestic abuse from our shores.

Household waste in Scotland reached 2.77 million tonnes in 2010, so what is the Scottish Government doing to raise awareness of the environmental problems that are caused by household waste? What measures is the Scottish Government taking to encourage a culture change?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. Not being a member of the Finance Committee, I want to take a step back to say something about zero waste and climate change to help set the context of the bill, building on the cabinet secretary’s broader remarks, and how the bill fits in with other policies. My starting point is, of course, where we want to get to—zero waste. In the interim, landfill sites must be excellently managed for the sake of the communities near them, and it is right that affected communities receive some benefit for the disruption and inconvenience that is caused. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee spent a lot of time taking evidence on new zero waste regulations, which are now in force. A wide range of Scottish society, from public bodies, local authorities, communities, households and individuals are now expected to contribute, with clear timescales and guidelines. A range of measures will come in incrementally over the next few years. For instance, there will be a ban on any metal, glass, paper, card or food that is collected separately for recycling going to incineration or landfill from January of the coming year. There is also a range of support through Zero Waste Scotland and others to match the policies, including the resource efficient Scotland newspaper campaign to highlight changes for businesses. Food waste is, in my view—as well as in the view of my colleague Hanzala Malik and others—a particular challenge, not just for businesses but for supermarkets, public bodies and, indeed, for us, too, in our families. How we change is also a learning process for politicians and policymakers. The RACCE Committee heard from Professor Walter Stahel earlier this month about the circular economy, in which the responsibility of the manufacturers is no longer cradle to grave, but cradle to cradle. Zero Waste Scotland is—and I quote—actively encouraging and supporting investment in “innovative resource management technologies”. All that must be seen in the context of the climate change targets, to which an altered waste culture can make a significant difference. The Institute for European Environmental Policy report, which was recently commissioned by Scottish non-governmental environment organisations, is reported as having concluded that “on climate the Scottish government had relied heavily on policies which did not put pressure on voters to change their lifestyles. That weakness made it more likely that it would fail to hit the 2020 target.” The robustness of the new climate change behaviours framework will be of fundamental importance in changing our culture. However, although we have come a long way in changing cultural attitudes since 2002-03, when we had a deplorable recycling rate of under 6 per cent—the rate in Scotland is now 42 per cent—there is still a need to decrease landfill, and the landfill tax is an appropriate lever. I understand that the cabinet secretary has reassured the Finance Committee that the bill will be in keeping with the Scottish Government’s zero waste strategy and carbon emissions targets. On the administration arrangements for the landfill communities fund, I hope that providing a local perspective from South Scotland region might make a useful contribution to how the tax is to be distributed under the new devolved arrangements. As a rural primary teacher and eco-schools co-ordinator, I was over several years involved in the Levenseat Trust acorn awards for local schools. The projects included a local food production research project for primary school children and a three-dimensional mural made out of recycled materials. The impact was practical and positive. The trust has asked me to highlight on its behalf a few points, which I also support. Levenseat Trust’s administrators suggest that the new fund should still be distributed very much at local level and that local people should have more say in its guidelines than they have had in the past. They also ask for the criteria to be reviewed, as “restrictions make it difficult to apply for funding” for school projects, for instance. They highlight that, due to the restrictions, it is, frankly, sometimes difficult to distribute funds. They ask that any residue of distributable funds, such as the trust has had, should not go back to the Scottish Government at changeover time, but should instead be distributed by appropriate local distributors. Finally, the trust requests that the administration of the funding should not become more challenging; the cabinet secretary has given an assurance that things will be simplified. I also stress how valuable the landfill communities fund is in supporting biodiversity projects. During the debate I have—unusually—somewhat changed my view on the 10-mile radius. The Scottish Wildlife Trust has highlighted wide-ranging projects, including a peat bog habitat improvement project and a project for saving Scotland’s red squirrels—to cite just two of many—and Rob Gibson made an important point about the needs of wider remote rural areas. However, Malcolm Chisholm is right that the issue is about environmental justice, and Michael McMahon’s clear description of communities that are affected by landfill must be respected. Some members may have followed BBC Radio 4’s excellent programme earlier this month “Costing the Earth”, which focused on an interesting development in Belgium, where old landfill sites are being “mined”—for want of a better word—for valuable materials that have been dumped in earlier decades. I raise that point to ask whether, given that there are 5,000 million tonnes of landfill buried in Europe spread across 0.5 million sites, the cabinet secretary has considered looking at that idea from a Scottish Government point of view. The Scottish Government’s low carbon behaviours framework highlights 10 key behaviour areas and the Government states: “The most sustainable option is to prevent waste being produced in the first place”. In my view, that is the most important behaviour. In the meantime, I welcome the principles of the bill.

As the deputy convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on cycling, and as one who attempts to cycle in Edinburgh—not as much as I should, but I try—I welcome this members’ business debate, which has been brought to the Parliament by Alison Johnstone. One of the valuable things that a members’ business debate does is get us asking questions in the lead-up to it. It focuses our minds as briefings come in, and it forces us to prioritise an issue among many others in our busy schedules. Over time, we have had an interest in the issue that we are discussing today. I hope that we will also learn from the debate, as I am doing. When a change of the law is mooted, as in this case, a members’ business debate perhaps forces us and our parties to work towards a position on the issue. For all those reasons, I thank Alison Johnstone. Before I come to the issue of presumed or strict liability, I want to make some remarks about active travel and cycling more broadly in the context of climate change targets, congestion and tourism. If we are to meet our climate change targets under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, we should do so in ways that benefit people on all incomes and in all parts of Scotland. As I am sure all members will agree, modal shift to public transport such as trains and to active travel is essential. Alison Johnstone’s motion stresses that “a stricter liability rule could have positive benefits for the safety of more vulnerable road users as part of a package of measures”. I recently met a constituent who cycles to work in Dumfries. Because of that, theirs is a one-car family. However, roads really need to be safer for cyclists—and, indeed, pedestrians—as vulnerable users, if we are seriously to implement the active travel plans that the Scottish Government has. Rural links are also important. There are many parts of South Scotland where people could not possibly cycle, even between towns and villages. That is an important issue and we are working on it on the old Wishaw road between two villages in my constituency. Further, as a former primary school teacher, I am keenly aware of the opportunities for pupils to cycle to school. However, poor maintenance and difficulties with sections of road around schools make that pretty scary for pupils and mean that parents and families do not want to commit to it. Some people would not like to make short journeys to shops or evening classes just down the road on a bike, either. In the cross-party group on cycling, Alison Johnstone, Jim Eadie and I have raised the possibility of an award for different models of infrastructure and segregated cycle lanes, which we have highlighted to the minister. That is important, but as one constituent highlighted to me in the lead-up to the debate, segregated cycle lanes are—of course—not possible on all roads. In the lead-up to the debate, some people have also said to me that some cyclists are casual about maintaining equipment and have suggested MOTs for cyclists. Others—all motorists, with the exception of one—have said that they saw this or that pushy cyclist doing something casual or dangerous but, as I replied to them, there are, for sure, also many dangerous motorists on our roads. Lighting is an issue. On leaving the last CPG on cycling and going back to my flat, I saw two cyclists without lights wearing dark clothing; it was lucky that I saw them. Last summer, I was pleased to be asked by Cycle Law Scotland to give out cycle helmets at a primary school in Galashiels. Many a beaming child came up to receive their helmet, but I wondered for how long they would be wearing them. There are many issues around cycling that need to be addressed, but none of them negates the necessity for us to have, at least, a real assessment of stricter liability. Last week, I was on holiday in France. Before that, I had thought that stricter liability was okay for Copenhagen in Denmark or for Holland, but although France does not have massive infrastructure for cycling, there has been a stricter liability law there since 1986 and I understand that, since its introduction, fatalities and injuries have decreased greatly. Cyclists have a right to be there—their right is equal to that of other road users. They are vulnerable. Responsible cyclists deserve the protection that stricter liability might provide. I hope that my party will consider that as a possibility, although there is a lot more assessment to be done.

Members are in broad agreement that any measures that we can take to mitigate the effects of climate change by reducing carbon emissions are to be welcomed. That goes almost without saying in this chamber, although there still seem to be some climate change deniers, not least a small smattering in the Tory party. I see that the only Tory left in the debate is leaving the chamber, but never mind. It is an unfortunate fact of life that, as things stand, a high proportion of our energy needs must be met by the burning of a variety of fossil fuels, meaning that CO2 production is inevitable for now. As members have stressed, as we make the just transition to a low-carbon economy, it makes sense to prevent the release of CO2 as best we can. The recent debate on opencast mining showed that the shift will be a slow, incremental process, with whole communities to consider as we progress. Storing the CO2 released from the utilisation of coal and gas seems like a viable short-term solution, especially considering that the most common fossil fuel used for industry in Scotland—coal—is obtained through opencast mines and is one of the dirtiest sources of energy available. Reports indicate that pre-combustion carbon capture through the treatment of coal can reduce emissions by over 90 per cent, which I am sure members will agree is very encouraging. However, those benefits are tempered by the fact that carbon capture at a power plant requires 10 to 40 per cent more power to run, which raises questions over the efficiency of the technology. Greenpeace, among others, has raised concerns about that. I was interested to hear today about methods of carbon capture that have been widely used in the oil and gas industries for many years, although primarily for the purpose of enhancing oil and gas recovery. Perhaps even my colleague Patrick Harvie would agree that their use might prevent us from going into further reserves, by extracting more from present reserves. The use of existing technology, which can be used to retrofit existing power plants and allow companies to filter their emissions through post-combustion, is one option, as we have heard. However, I am more encouraged by the possibility of the pre-combustion option, as that is a closed system. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency raised concerns about air quality and post-combustion in respect of the failed Hunterston application, as the process results in the release of amines, as I understand—chemicals that could be harmful.

I absolutely agree that there are always pluses and minuses. I am not an engineer or a scientist, but I believe that in the production of hydrogen oxygen is produced as well, which is an issue to be discussed. That highlights the importance of research and careful monitoring of the first preferred bid, which I hope will be Peterhead. According to the captain clean energy project, Scotland is ideally placed geologically to take advantage of CCS. As we have heard from others, the existing pipeline network in the North Sea can serve as ready-made infrastructure, although I stress the need to assess the risks of piping such a large amount of CO2 through the sea—again, that is a research issue. Although in theory I welcome the move towards CCS, I emphasise that any research into its widespread use should not to be at the expense of developing sustainable renewable energy production and the transferable skills that are essential for renewables and CCS. At this point, we should also recognise the support of the UK Government in the development of CCS and renewables. The climate justice conference, which I attended yesterday, highlighted concerns about fossil fuels. Worldwide there will be opportunities to export our technology and expertise to countries in which fossil fuels are still a substantial part of the energy mix. To follow that note of optimism, although I completely agree with the remarks of Joan McAlpine and others about their concerns about fossil fuels in China, there are also substantial renewables developments in China, which are perhaps also cause for optimism. The long-term effects of climate change are indeed very real; we must not be lulled into a false sense of security by measures such as CCS. The fact remains that continued use of fossil fuels is unsustainable in the long term and that a focus on capture-ready stations might be a step in the wrong direction, which is a view that RSPB echoed. I was interested to hear of the CCS guidelines from the minister. I would argue that before carbon capture is fully embraced, a number of questions need to be answered. Perhaps the minister can provide some clarity on developments. The captain clean energy project has assured us that storage in rock formation would be safe, as there are many naturally occurring accumulations of CO2 in rock, but I wonder how much research has been done on that. Secondly, could pumping into the sea bed have any detrimental impact on marine wildlife? Of course, we must not forget that there are other forms of recapturing carbon from the atmosphere and research must go into those, too. Green and blue carbon sinks are an essential part of carbon capture and I know that the Minister for Environment and Climate Change has plans to look into their benefits. I am concerned and stress a note of caution about the reliance on carbon capture in relation to clean energy in the RPP. I wonder whether the potential gains of the technology have informed the Government’s predictions for emissions in the coming years.

Although carbon capture certainly has the potential to allow us to hit our emissions targets, I would not like to think that it will be afforded undue significance in the transition to a low-carbon economy, which, in the long term, it could delay.

Will the minister clarify whether that point about the pipelines relates to what we are talking about now or to oil pipelines? My concern was the same concern as that raised by the RSPB about the possibilities of leakage of CO2 into the marine environment.

I am taken aback by how much I agree with what my Conservative colleague has just said. What a surprise—but we are better together as well as Labour united, so there we go. However complex the intricacies of CAP reform, we owe it to rural Scotland to grapple with them, and the debate has shown our determination to get it right. We need to find the right way forward for farmers of all types, with a sustainable approach that takes account of climate change, biodiversity and land stewardship. We need to find the right way forward, as Claire Baker said, in relation to the significant current debates about food, which range from local accessibility of affordable food to our proud record on exporting our produce. We need to get it right for our rural communities and businesses, and we need to get it right for urban Scotland, with rural dwellers ensuring that everyone is made welcome. As David Stewart said, the wait for EU agreement on CAP has been frustrating, but agreement has at last arrived. In a broad-ranging historical and geographical analysis, he put forward an argument for public support for agriculture that I commend to members. Mike MacKenzie talked about how farmers have been custodians of the landscape for thousands of years. In recent months, much time has been spent on securing the best possible interim arrangements. That time could have been spent elsewhere. However, we are where we are, and the interim arrangements that we have been debating are essential. The Scottish Government’s funding for support during the transition period is welcome. Will the cabinet secretary say whether any groups are still at risk during the transition? After I had taken on the environment brief, I spoke in the debate on CAP reform in January 2012. I had taken soundings from friends who are Clydesdale farmers, in my region, about the modelling of the basic payment options. The matter was a cause for concern then for farmers on the Clyde valley floor, just a field away from hill farmers in the shadow of Tinto hill, Scotland’s highest hill. As Alex Fergusson said, there will be winners and losers. The stakeholder group and on-going consultations have moved the arguments on a long way, and we must achieve a coherent way forward. Whether the final choice is a model with two or three land types, it is essential that the budget is shared as fairly as possible. Jayne Baxter acknowledged the positive move to include deer farmers, who have been sidelined in the past. She also highlighted the concerns of the National Sheep Association Scotland. Members talked about other sectors, and the arrangements must be fair to all. As Angus MacDonald said, we must also avoid a retreat from the hills. The fact that even Alison Johnstone, who is a Lothian MSP, talked about crofting, demonstrates the issue’s significance for all members. The comments from Nigel Miller, the president of NFUS, must be listened to with care as the modelling moves forward. In The Scottish Farmer, he said that “Fine mapping will be vital”, and he went on to say, of the integrated administration and control system, that “the IACS land use approach may be more robust and more finely tuned at farm level.” What happens at farm level will be essential. Decisions on CAP spending should bring benefits to not just the farmers who receive funding in pillar 1, but the public in general. That could be achieved if we follow England’s example, where the maximum modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2 has been agreed. Benefits could be realised through measures to increase biodiversity, such as planting for bees, or through funding for landscape and heritage projects. Alex Fergusson and Tavish Scott argued for less modulation. We disagree with them, although we agree that the process should be slow and carefully monitored. There will be further discussions before the significant decision is made. I hope that the cabinet secretary ensures that everyone is part of those discussions. I think that the cabinet secretary said that the pillar 2 arrangements represent evolution more than they do revolution. Pillar 2 funding agreement at EU level enables us to move forward on the organisation of relevant schemes and enables support to be directed at strengthening development, not only in the agriculture sector but in the rural economy more generally, so that communities can flourish. David Stewart put forward compelling evidence from academia and the voluntary sector, who have called on Government to tailor policies to the wider realities of rural Scotland. Graeme Dey, too, stressed the importance of such an approach. Elaine Murray talked about COSLA’s call for up to a third of EU funds to be allocated to local authorities. That might seem to be an odd request, but the point was well made about the need for help with skills and training in our diverse rural and coastal communities throughout Scotland. I hope that the cabinet secretary will comment on the issue. There are many calls for support from rural Scotland, and I wish the cabinet secretary well with the decisions to streamline and simplify the application process for the SRDP. I offer our help, where it would be useful, to ensure that the process embraces the aspirations for the future of rural Scotland. That said, it is slightly disappointing that the press release that the cabinet secretary issued today through the Scottish Government focuses almost exclusively on the agriculture sector, although I appreciate that the timescale is a factor. I hope that, in his closing speech, he will make some remarks about the SRDP as well. On the issue of SRDP funding, I have been made aware of a number of applicants who are experiencing difficulties in applying for funding, with many having to seek professional help with filling out the forms, which are indeed complex. Will the cabinet secretary update us on how the application process will be simplified? Nigel Don stressed the importance of tourism. Lee Musson, who is the centre director of Rock UK in Newcastleton in my region, has highlighted how inflexible he found the application process. It may be that the system was designed for farmers and agriculture-type projects, but it is not well suited to rural development programmes for tourism in remote areas. The applicant whom I mentioned was applying for tracks and a bridge, and the application had to be done field by field, which was extremely difficult. That is just one example from my region; no doubt there are others. I move on to environmental concerns and the broader aspects of the CAP in that regard. The decision to reform the CAP provides a great opportunity to move towards a more sustainable form of agriculture. Scottish Environment LINK, among others, contacted me to highlight the issues that I will raise. My contention is that there is not so much conflict as some see between the priorities and the future of Scottish farming. The blunt instrument of the greening of pillar 1 presented challenges for Scotland, but they have been resolved to some degree. We have worked together on them, through our committee and in other ways, to find a resolution relative to our climate and our farmland. The Scottish Wildlife Trust has called for meaningful equivalence of greening measures that deliver environmental benefit and, as the cabinet secretary has stressed to Scottish Environment LINK, see “all of Scotland’s farmers behaving in a greener way.” There are many examples of good practice in Scottish farming. In the committee’s recent round-table discussion about behaviour change and climate change, we heard about the focus farms such as the organic Torr Farm in my region, which is owned by Ross Paton. That is one example, and there are many others. It is vital that such good practice is widely shared. I add that I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary raise the issue of climate change. Scottish Environment LINK has strongly advised that funding be put towards supporting an improved advisory service on environmental issues that covers pillar 1 cross-compliance as well as encouraging actions in pillar 2. Requests for support have also been made by farmers in relation to a range of aspects of farming, not least the form filling. Will the cabinet secretary tell us whether there will be further advice and support under the new arrangements? The mature dialogue that our amendment calls for between the Scottish and UK Governments has, to be frank, been somewhat hampered by the disappointment that we will not see Owen Paterson again until next year. It would have been helpful if he could have come before our committee before then.

I will if I have time.

I certainly acknowledge that that is a step in the right direction, but at this important time, dialogue with our committee would have been helpful as well. I hope that he is visiting some of the crofting communities on his journey.

I will, Presiding Officer. There is a strong case for the uplift to come here, and we in Scottish Labour will work with the cabinet secretary and other parties to try to achieve that. Within Scotland, it is vital that we all work together to ensure that we get the best deal for our farmers and our rural communities.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I seek assurances from the minister today that, if the order is passed, the range of community and environmental concerns, as well as the concern that the EIA has not yet been completed, will be monitored and acted on if necessary.

1. I feel that I need some time for reflection on today’s time for reflection, Presiding Officer, but I will proceed with my question. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the publication of the report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, what action it is taking to ensure that all relevant policies and proposals are properly costed and acted on to ensure that annual emissions targets are met. (S4T-00464)

I thank the minister for his response and am pleased to hear about the recognition that Scotland has received in the IPCC report. However, I note that the national performance framework indicator for reducing carbon emissions has worsened. Does the minister acknowledge the huge gap between what is needed to meet our climate change and fuel poverty targets and current funding for energy efficiency in the Scottish budget?

I thank the minister for his detailed answer, but I understand that the situation with regard to consumption-based emissions from housing has worsened. I have heard what the minister has had to say, but is he able to give further reassurance to the Parliament that this year’s budget will fully fund the climate action plan and the second report on proposals and policies? If he is unable to provide that reassurance, will he, even at this late stage, come forward with additional funding for energy efficiency and travel measures to give us confidence that we can meet our future climate change targets?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how the national indicators used in the national performance framework feed into decisions relating to its investment commitments. (S4O-02422)

Given that one of the indicators in the national performance framework is “to improve access to suitable housing options for those in housing need”, can the cabinet secretary give details of the Scottish Government measures that are in place or are planned to ensure that new-build housing is suitably energy efficient to enable new owners and residents to live comfortably and to enable the Scottish Government to tackle fuel poverty?

This is an important debate for many communities across Scotland. I want to focus on how opencast mining impacts on communities, on jobs and the economic future for families and communities who are affected, and on the challenges—past and present—of restoration. Scottish Labour’s amendment welcomes the moves towards identification of improvements in the regulatory regime for the industry, including appropriate protection for communities and the environment. I hope that the minister will take that into account in the forthcoming consultation. It is a relief to many people that the Scottish Government will shortly hold a consultation on more effective regulation. As we all know, mining communities across the Scottish coalfield were devastated by the closure of deep mines, and then were subjected to the environmental effects of a new form of coal gaining—opencast. That was and still is an environmental justice issue. The issue has come back into public awareness because of the collapse of major companies. Practices that are far from perfect still take place. As founding convener of the Scottish opencast action group in the early 1990s, I fought, along with others, to get the guidelines changed to protect communities better. In those days, perimeter fences came close to people’s gardens, but that changed because a 200m buffer zone was negotiated. Is that enough? We argued that dust does not stop at the perimeter fence, and that has not changed. We worked with the Scottish Wildlife Trust and others to identify how to protect precious local environments such as Ponfeigh Burn in South Lanarkshire, where local residents played as children, courted, pushed buggies and then walked with a stick in later years. Noise was a concern in the early 1990s, and it still is. Only last week, a constituent told me that the noise from the Broken Cross site is manageable for his family by day, but not by night. Back then, road safety was also an issue, with coal lorries on roads such as the A70 in Clydesdale. Talk of taking the coal off the roads and on to rail has rarely become a reality. The cumulative effect of sites was a matter that was addressed, but should it be revisited? The SOAG and other groups also broached the issue of restoration bonds. The Scottish Government consultation, along with the task force sub-group, will be the focus of a hard look. In the days of the Opencast Executive, before privatisation, some people argued that bonds worked. Others believed that, somewhat like bus deregulation, the legislation at the time was suspect, with all the strength on the side of the operators. The court direction on whether administrators can “abandon or disclaim the sites and former sites, thereby transferring ownership”—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That direction was deeply disappointing, as I said at the time, and the appeal by SEPA, South Lanarkshire Council, East Ayrshire Council and others is anxiously awaited by councils and communities alike. If the appeal fails, those communities cannot be left amid a broken industry. Whatever the mistakes of councils as regulators in allowing work to proceed with insufficient funds, communities cannot be expected to languish in such circumstances. Councils cannot be expected to solve the problem alone. Obviously, the costs would be prohibitive, and the effect on other services would be dangerous for already deprived communities. It is necessary to get together people who have valuable experience to advise on the issue. However, as the minister said, the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust is a facilitator, not a funder. Is that right, given the enormousness of the task? Further Scottish Government support is needed. Since the times of deep mining, mining communities’ contribution has been at the core of UK prosperity. In the spirit of the United Kingdom, which is best represented by the pooling of resources to help the challenges of those who are in need, those communities and that broken industry must go to the mender of last resort. The UK Government might have to play its part in funding restoration and, in the end, not just in relation to the Coal Authority. If that happens, consideration should be given to the benefit to communities and local environments as restoration proceeds.

Thank you for your advice, Presiding Officer, but my understanding is that I was talking about the possibility of the UK Government helping with funds. The Scottish Government should recognise that that is one of the strengths of being in the United Kingdom. In the words of Gordon Brown, “we have a partnership where we pool and share resources so that when there are areas of great need, we intervene to help them.” Looking to the future of restoration, although there has been much bad practice over the years, there have also been good models, as members have highlighted.

I certainly do and I disassociate myself from anything to do with that because I was not part of that Government. In fact, I was fundraising and supporting the miners. As the hole got deeper, the bonds got higher in some places, such as West Lothian. In the case of the Heartlands development, worked by Ecosse Regeneration, work was signed off by the compliance officer and reports were made to the compliance liaison officer. It would also be useful for the task force to examine in more detail—I know that it has already started—the operations of Kier Minerals and H J Banks. I understand that, in those cases, no outstanding sites have been left unrestored. The combination of progressive restoration and sufficient bonds must be the way forward. Midlothian Council is currently considering phased restoration as an option. East Ayrshire Council’s independent inquiry has been welcomed by RSPB Scotland. I am aware of calls for a moratorium, but I am absolutely clear—although this is not Scottish Labour’s position at the moment—that whatever the application criteria may be in the future, no site in Scotland should be consented unless there is a sufficient bond for outstanding work on any previous site being worked by the same company. Scottish Coal employed 350 people directly in South Lanarkshire. I am sure that the whole Parliament recognises the challenges that are faced by those who have been made redundant. I am aware of the support that PACE has offered and I welcome the driver training centre at Broken Cross. Some of those who have been made redundant have taken the opportunity to open businesses, and to diversify, but there is still a pressing need for support. In the longer term, for recovery, there is a need to broaden the business base. There must also be a clear strategy for a just transition to a low-carbon economy, as my colleague Claire Baker highlighted in her opening speech. The targets that have been agreed by Parliament will help to address climate change and fuel poverty at once, as our industries in the energy sector adapt. In the longer term, we have an obligation to ensure that people who are in jobs in the exploitation of fossil fuels are offered training in transferable skills, and to ensure that some of the opportunities for manufacturing and installing the range of new technologies for energy and energy efficiency come to the beleaguered communities that are in need of our support.

The member missed my point, which was that the need for jobs in the coal industry for beleaguered communities must be recognised now, but for the future, the range of options has to be looked at in relation to the shift from fossil fuels to a low-carbon economy, and people need support in that shift to be trained or retrained.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what provisions for bicycle access and storage on trains and at stations will be included in the contract for rail passenger services to be issued in 2014. (S4O-02372)

I thank the minister for that answer, in particular for the information about the pop-up workshops. In line with the as yet unfulfilled ScotRail franchise plans to include “secure cycle parking facilities at every station”, can the minister confirm that those facilities will indeed be part of the new franchise and will be extended to stations in more remote rural areas? Also, can he confirm whether consideration has been given to developing separate cycle carriages for trains, as used in Denmark for tourism, leisure and work, such as the carriage that is shown in the picture that I am holding up?

Can the cabinet secretary explain why activities that have been identified to have a negative impact on the protected features of an MPA can still be allowed to happen within some parts of that same area? How will that facilitate recovery of our seas? The proposed Clyde sea sill MPA is one such example, as demersal fishing may continue in some parts of the site.

Although there is some additional funding for peatland and active travel, what assurances can the cabinet secretary give that all the proposals and policies in the second report on proposals and policies that are relevant to this budget are fully costed, so that we can move forward incrementally, and that he has secured further funding for the carbon assessment tool, so that a more effective carbon assessment of the budget can be conducted to include second-round emissions?

Will the minister take a brief intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take in relation to the 4 per cent increase in Scotland’s carbon footprint between 2009 and 2010, as noted in its report, “Scotland’s Carbon Footprint 1998-2010”. (S4T-00433)

I thank the minister for his detailed response. Time will tell whether the 4 per cent increase is a blip or the beginning of a trend in the wrong direction. Given that this is a Scotland-wide and global climate justice issue, as was highlighted in time for reflection today, and given that production levels have fallen continually since 1990 while consumption has risen, what is the Scottish Government doing to increase domestic production, especially in new technologies that will help to drive forward our low-carbon economy?

Can the minister give a bit more detail on the issue that I raised in my previous question about the increase in domestic production in relation to the manufacturing of new technologies that will help us with the low-carbon economy? I am aware of the issues that have been highlighted about waste and support to business, but my specific focus is the manufacturing of goods in this country rather than the importing of goods—although I am of course aware that we still have to import to some degree.

As a regular attendee of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on fair trade and a member of the Scottish Co-operative Party parliamentary group, I, too, thank Graeme Dey for bringing this members’ business debate to the chamber. Along with many other people, I am delighted that, this February, Scotland became one of the first Fairtrade nations. Scotland is now considered to be at the forefront of the ethical fair trade movement, which we must seek to foster and further. The Scottish Government initially set a target that 50 per cent of the population should know about fair trade, with the ultimate goal of reaching 75 per cent. However, the target has been exceeded, with an incredible 81 per cent, which should encourage policymakers and local communities to raise their expectations further. Individuals, communities, schools, churches and local businesses across Scotland will help to take the movement forward. As a quick aside, I mention that, at the fair trade fashion show in Selkirk, there was an MSP on the catwalk. I am not at liberty to say who it was, although I can say that it was not me. Another success is the South Lanarkshire Fairtrade zone. The award of that status acknowledges that 81 retailers and catering outlets sell a minimum of two fair trade products, as well as the fact that there is an active steering group. That should be recognised. Individuals, too, have demonstrated their ability to catalyse change. At Abington primary school, where I used to work, a primary 4 pupil felt so compelled by the fair trade principles that he convinced the school to host a fair trade event and, off his own bat, asked his local shop to stock fair trade goods. Scotland’s dedication to ensuring that developing countries get a fair deal for their goods has exceeded expectations, but we must continue to move forward. My contention is that the environmental standards that are required of fair trade producers are such that we do not have to worry so much about the carbon footprint and food miles as we perhaps would with other products and standards. So I particularly welcome the import of such goods, and I have less concern for the food miles that are involved. Earlier this year, I attended a fair trade event, which was supported by the Dumfries and Galloway fair trade group, at the Cream o’ Galloway visitor centre near Castle Douglas in my region. For me, the visit drew into sharp focus the synergies between local and global ethical working. As many members will know, Cream o’ Galloway is an organic farm that sells local produce, including delicious ice cream, and which now has a vibrant visitor centre. At the event, I met Justine Watalunga, a fair trade coffee farmer from Uganda who was touring the United Kingdom as part of Fairtrade fortnight. She is part of the Gumutindo coffee co-operative, which brings together more than 3,000 coffee farmers. She highlighted how involvement in fair trade has brought additional income and allowed women in her community to come together to start a nursery and primary school for local children. That inspirational model of democratic local decision making is also part of the fair trade movement. For me, the local-global synergy was symbolised by a very good cup of coffee from Justine’s farm with cream from right where we were at Cream o’ Galloway. There are issues for us to address as we look to the future of fair trade. I believe that, as parliamentarians, we should do everything possible to promote fair trade. In a recent answer to my colleague Kezia Dugdale’s question about the forthcoming procurement reform bill, Nicola Sturgeon stated: “the Scottish Fair Trade Forum has agreed to work with the Scottish Government to progress the uptake of fair and ethically traded goods and services through public procurement.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 18 June 2013; S4W-15613.] Can the minister highlight any ways in which that has been taken forward? The cross-party group has discussed concerns about product description when only some of the ingredients are fair trade. We have also discussed the arrangements by which supermarkets promote and sell fair trade products, and issues to do with mark-up. Those are difficult issues, but they should not be ducked. I want to end by posing a question that, in my view, the global community, especially more developed countries such as ours, should address. Although fair trade is a laudable model that is to be supported, how do we contribute to addressing the imbalance in global trade structures and in global economic and financial institutions? What about the Ugandan coffee farmer in the farm next to Justine’s who does not benefit from fair trade?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the issues associated with underemployment. (S4O-02323)

As the cabinet secretary will know, statistics from 2011-12 have shown that more women are underemployed than men. What is the Scottish Government doing to tackle underemployment in the whole population, and to ensure that the gender gap is not further widened in terms of pay and education?

I thank John Wilson for bringing to the chamber this members’ debate on Oxfam’s report “Our Economy: Towards a new prosperity” and for his analysis. Leading to the report, Oxfam ran a series of seminars asking the question, “Whose economy?” Whose economy is it indeed, and whose Scotland? It certainly does not belong to those who work for less than the living wage, those who look out on an urban wasteland to which they have no access and that they cannot change or those who grapple with depression, which is often exacerbated by a lack of hope. Oxfam also asks the question, “Whose regeneration?” and reminds us: “Scotland’s post-industrial decline has led to large pockets of deprivation. Yet often the response to this—a consumerist model of regeneration premised on the trickle-down economics—hasn’t worked.” Yesterday, I was delighted to attend part of an inspiring Nourish (Scotland) conference, which continues today, focusing on community involvement in the growing of, and access to, affordable, local, safe, organic food and the changes and infrastructure that are needed to help that to happen. That model stands in stark contrast to the dreadful present necessity of food banks in many of our communities. Oxfam tells us: “Across Scotland, only 22% of people feel they can influence decisions made in their local areas.” As a long-term community activist and, now, a member of the Co-operative group of MSPs, my contention is that one of the most important conclusions of the report is the need for our economy to move towards a more community-based, co-operative model. I recently visited the Mull of Galloway on the southernmost tip of Scotland, which stands as an example of what a community can achieve. There are many more examples of collective action and community ownership, but there are also many examples of communities, families and individuals that are excluded, are left behind and justifiably feel abandoned. That must change, and I suggest that we must be the catalyst for that change. The change must be measured in a way that the people of Scotland understand. The national performance framework is becoming recognised as a valuable tool to identify key indicators to allow us to measure how well we are doing on issues that really matter to the people of Scotland. John Swinney has hosted a series of round-table meetings with MSPs from across the parties, of whom I am one, and a range of stakeholders. However, the NPF will not become a mainstream means of judging how we are doing unless it involves communities and is seen to drive policy. The Scottish futures forum should be congratulated on hosting a series of seminars on rethinking wellbeing. We must have a Scotland-wide measure of wellbeing that is reported in parallel with GDP. The complexities of how that measure should be modelled are a challenge that must not allow any more prevarication. It is significant that the Scottish universities insight institute, in partnership with the forum, the Carnegie UK Trust, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Government, is “inviting expressions of interest to take part in a multidisciplinary, knowledge sharing enquiry to better understand, measure and promote the well being of individuals and society as a whole.” The debate highlights the existence of a critical mass of determination to act. It comes from communities, a wide range of NGOs, economists, academics and across the political parties in the Parliament. There is determination to work towards a Scotland that is prosperous and flourishing for all. In this context, Scotland can perhaps be seen as a plant. Every gardener knows that, for a plant to flourish, it is not possible to nurture part of it and ignore the rest.

The minister has acknowledged the criticism of the draft report’s three “technical potential” proposals in relation to housing, transport and rural land use that might provide emissions abatement in the 2020s. In view of the uncertainties, can he clarify what modelling and assumptions inform the further analysis in the final document? Will he acknowledge the need to ensure that current policies are robust enough to ensure that we do not miss any more targets? Does he acknowledge how essential funding is for research into blue carbon and other developing issues?

Scottish Labour is optimistic that, in spite of the complexities that are involved, the bill will be passed at stage 3 with the cross-party support that has been shown in the chamber. The bill will address the problem that is faced by those who have been affected by the flaw in the 2010 act relating to owner-occupied crofters and the decrofting of land. In the stage 1 debate, I highlighted Scottish Labour’s concerns about the need for all possible amendments to be lodged at stage 2 to enable committee and parliamentary scrutiny. In an expedited process, the pressures are much greater, with little time between stages. I therefore thank all those who were involved in moving things forward quickly. As it turns out, there were no amendments at stages 2 and 3. I also thank the minister for the clarification that he provided at stage 2. The minister’s explanation in his opening remarks to the committee reassured us that the Scottish Government’s legal team had considered the alternative suggested wordings. He said: “The Scottish Government considered the detailed drafting issues that were raised; I can promise the committee that we have gone over them in some detail. However, as it is drafted, the bill achieves its purpose. A number of key witnesses to the committee ... all agreed that the bill delivers on the purpose that the Government has set out of giving owner-occupiers the ability to decroft.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2410.] That reassurance was given and there has not been any comeback on that. In Scottish Labour’s view, it is right to have had a truncated process to enable those in limbo due to the Crofting Commission putting 44 applications on hold to proceed and to allow those who were unable to apply to decroft to be reconsidered. If the bill is passed, it will be important that the process is speedy. I therefore seek reassurance from the minister, in his closing remarks, that that will be the case. Other issues relating to decrofting were raised with the committee when we took evidence on the bill, including house building, diversification and renewable energy development. Foremost among other issues were the definition of what constitutes an owner-occupier crofter and the issues faced by multiple owners of distinct parts of the same croft. However, Scottish Labour is of the view that it is right to consider those and other decrofting issues after the bill has been passed, to ensure that the appropriate consultation process takes place, as the minister has highlighted. The minister has already given us the timeframe for that. Perhaps the only thing that we all seem to be clear about is the opaqueness of crofting law. The stage 1 debate produced a number of interesting points from members, not least of which was Alex Fergusson’s metaphor of crofting legislation as the mythical Hydra—as soon as we think that one aspect of the legislation is sorted out, another two problems arise. If Alex Fergusson wants to continue with his classical references, his answer to the problem of crofting law might be Alexander the Great’s creative solution to untangling the Gordian knot. Rather than repeatedly trying to untangle the knot, the best solution might be simply to cut through it with a single stand-alone piece of legislation. That may or may not be the way forward; it is for us all to work together as best we can to find what is best for crofters in the future. Before closing, I add some new thoughts relating to crofting. Nourish Scotland is a non-profit organisation that has been “set up to develop and promote a fairer and more sustainable food system in Scotland” at a time when an increasing number of our citizens are becoming dependent on food banks, as I witnessed on Saturday when I attended the official opening of the Clydesdale food bank. Nourish argues: “Access to suitable land is one of the most significant barriers to developing vibrant local food economies in most parts of Scotland.” It is argued that there is a demand for small productive units and that the Crofting Commission currently holds a waiting list of 150 in existing crofting areas. Nourish therefore calls for a target of 10,000 new crofts throughout Scotland by 2020. In addition, the Scottish Crofting Federation sees “the development of crofting as the most appropriate model of land tenure for Scotland to achieve a food system that is environmentally sustainable, socially beneficial and a source of healthy, tasty food for the long term.” Whatever members think of that suggestion, it is certainly food for thought. Many of the issues that have been raised during the bill’s passage pose questions about the structure of land ownership and tenure in Scotland. Those debates and decisions are for another day, and Scottish Labour is committed to addressing them along with others. Today, we support the passing of the bill and wish all those crofters who are affected a speedy and satisfactory solution.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving from its international development fund for people in the occupied Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank. (S4O-02272)

As part of the Council for European Palestinian Relations, I, along with my colleague John Finnie, visited Gaza as part of a parliamentary delegation just six days after the ceasefire last November. Has there been a Disasters and Emergency Committee appeal and has the Scottish Government contributed to it? Has any additional funding been made available to the people in the occupied Palestinian territories through other schemes such as the climate challenge fund? Might it be possible to do that when the fund is reviewed?

As members will be keenly aware at this stage in the debate, hydroelectric power is firmly rooted in Scotland’s post-war history and, indeed, as many members have said, in our future. Johnston is now widely regarded as one of the most influential of Scottish politicians, not just for championing large-scale hydro power, but for vigorously promoting Scotland and Scottish interests in Cabinet. However, it was his vision of diversifying electricity production in Scotland by taking advantage of the vast, untapped potential of hydro power that cemented his place in history, part of which we are celebrating today. Johnston believed that hydro power would be instrumental in developing the economy of the Highlands, and he was correct. As a long-term student of history, I have enjoyed and found fascinating today’s history lecture, although it was somewhat fragmented, ranging from Egypt, ancient Greece and the hanging gardens of Babylon to the present day.

I thank Rob Gibson for that further historical analysis, and I do agree with him about that. I am sure that he agrees with me about the abolition of the hunt, which is a debate for another day. Although Johnston’s vision did not initially gain the traction that it needed to bring hydro power centre stage, he would be pleased to know that we now produce between 10 and 12 per cent of our electricity from that power source. Naturally, when he was laying the foundations of hydro power in the 1940s, he was, like everyone at the time, blissfully unaware of the effect of carbon emissions on our climate. As I have already suggested, Johnston’s main motivation for championing hydro power was the economic prosperity of the Highlands, but his early foray into the world of renewables was particularly fortuitous as it has become invaluable in the fight against climate change. I am sure that members will not need reminding of our commitment to reducing our carbon emissions. As we all know, the Scottish Government has missed the first two targets, which makes the likelihood of achieving the first main target by 2020 increasingly challenging. We all agree that much needs to be done if we are to catch up with our targets and be on course for 2020. Of course, there are a number of other means of achieving the required reduction in emissions through measures such as energy efficiency in homes and increased use of public transport. However, as the Scottish Government has repeatedly asserted, renewable energy is the way forward. The Scottish Government’s goal of 100 per cent of gross electricity generation being done by renewables by 2020 is a challenge indeed. If that challenge is to be met, hydro power has an important role, which perhaps has been underplayed in spite of recent project announcements. I argue that we should be further developing hydro power as part of the spectrum of renewable energy. Although wind and tidal power have a part to play, traditional hydro power should not be neglected, and today’s debate has reinforced that view. It is a tried and tested technology that fits extremely well with our natural resources. It is also relatively cheap when compared with some other sources of energy, including fossil fuels and nuclear energy. I am told that the hydro technology that was developed 70 years ago—with its simplicity and its commercial feasibility—has, in the main, not changed. In my region of South Scotland, there are a number of examples of the benefits of hydro power. The Falls of Clyde in South Lanarkshire host a hydroelectric power station that is a prime example of a large-scale power plant. The Lanark hydroelectric scheme was, in fact, the first one in Scotland. Built in 1927, it predates by a number of years Thomas Johnston’s hydro campaign. It consists of a pair of similar power stations—Bonnington and Stonebyres—on the River Clyde, which many people visit. Now run by Scottish Power, the station generates enough megawatts to power 11,000 households. Pumped-storage hydro has been highlighted by Malcolm Chisholm and others. It is effective and proven, as shown over many years at Lanark and other places. Scottish Renewables stresses a number of benefits including “balancing services, flexible and fast response times, and the ability to limit the incidence of elevated electricity prices.” However, Scottish Renewables calls on DECC to clarify “whether support for pumped storage will be part of the EMR process”. Malcolm Chisholm has also highlighted that issue and the possibility of longer run times, which I hope the minister will comment on in his closing remarks. At the other end of the scale, of course, is micro-hydro power. Small-scale projects are part of the range of renewables opportunities and sharing information among communities is essential. The Fintry Trust is going forward with a micro-hydro project that I looked at when I visited recently and members of the trust came to Clydesdale to share community energy insights. That could be a model to follow elsewhere. Along with my colleague Claire Baker, I am pleased that the land reform review group has highlighted in its interim report that renewable energy is one of its work streams going forward to phase 2. Shared co-operative consultation services, funded by the Government, would help to kick-start a lot of community action, because some of the communities that I and my colleagues have come across are flailing rather over where to go to get support. I want to briefly highlight concerns about the skills gap—

I have concerns about the skills gap in relation to micro-hydro energy and wonder about the possibility of apprenticeships. Will the minister tell members what steps Scottish Water is taking to facilitate micro-hydro power within its remit? We in Scotland have a shared vision for the future of hydro projects, large and small—let us ensure that it happens.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the health and wellbeing benefits of community transport for older people across rural South Scotland and the rest of the country as noted in Age Scotland’s report on still waiting. (S4O-02234)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his very full answer. It is most encouraging and I take it that he has had a good look at the summary at least of the still waiting report. I went to Peebles last week to support the launch of Age Scotland’s local campaign about community transport. I was astounded at how few older people are able to get to where they want to go. The difficulties in getting from their door to their group are partly due to accessibility and disability issues. In rural areas, it is often the case that older people can get to a group on statutory transport but cannot get back.

Will the cabinet secretary and the Minister for Transport and Veterans take a cross-cutting look at the research and address the points other than affordability that are of concern?

Twenty years ago, I helped to set up Loudon pond community nature reserve in Clydesdale. That was the result of site regeneration, and it is now regarded as a community asset for biodiversity. On the policies on brownfield sites, will the minister reflect on the importance of some brownfield sites for biodiversity and public green spaces, as highlighted by Buglife and others?

Will the member take an intervention?

I beg to differ from the minister about a dearth of policies from Scottish Labour. We have made a range of proposals on transport and energy efficiency in housing.

If we are to meet our future targets, transport is a key area but, with a reduction of only 0.2 per cent between 2010 and 2011, we are not seeing the necessary progress. At the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny stage, concerns were raised over the wishful thinking of the abatement measures. How will that be addressed in the redraft?

I understand from the statement that we expect agreement on a new European maritime and fisheries fund before the end of this year. Will the cabinet secretary give details of discussions on the fund, particularly to take account of the need of fragile coastal fishing communities to achieve social and economic sustainability, including sustainability through diversification when appropriate?

Scottish Labour will support the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. To be honest, I am one of those people who did not know a great deal about crofting before the bill’s introduction, unlike, I am glad to say, many of the committee’s members. I have since discovered that there are about 17,700 crofts in Scotland, mainly in the Highlands and Islands, and that around 33,000 people live in crofting households. The Scottish Government website reminds us: “Crofting plays a vital role in maintaining the population in remote rural areas, it provides a secure base for the development of small businesses and maintains and supports a range of unique habitats.” In 2010, the Scottish Government issued a press release that stated: “The Scottish Parliament has passed the Government’s Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill which aims to tackle absenteeism, neglect and speculation and protect crofting for future generations.” I found that an interesting quote. Our committee is optimistic, in spite of the complexities involved, that the bill, if passed, will rectify the problem that is faced by those who have been affected by the flaw in the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 in relation to owner-occupier crofters and the decrofting of land. I add my voice to the comments that have already been made about the bill by our convener, Rob Gibson, and by the minister. It is important that the bill goes through an expedited process in order to end the state of limbo that has been imposed. The minister highlighted many of the reasons why that is very important for the people who are affected. However, that means that the challenge for the committee in analysing a complex range of legal views in evidence on potential amendments to the bill will be time-truncated. It was helpful for the minister to have outlined a response to our report already. I thank him for that—I am sure that the pressure is on the minister, too. I will highlight two of the committee’s recommendations, which, together, indicate the committee’s agreed position clearly and inform the Parliament where we think we are in the determination to get things right in relation to what happens next—especially in view of Rob Gibson’s remarks about thickets and brambles. The stage 1 report states: “The Committee notes the criticism of the drafting of the Bill, particularly by those who will be left to interpret and advise on the law. The Committee is not expert in the legal detail and potential inconsistencies within crofting law and it is therefore difficult for the Committee to give a definitive view at this stage on the validity of some of the concerns raised.” I identify myself strongly with that paragraph of our recommendations. The report continues: “It is clear to the Committee that there are concerns which require to be considered. The Committee strongly recommends that the Scottish Government give appropriate consideration to the evidence submitted to the Committee with a view to determining whether any of the issues raised require to be addressed by amending the Bill at Stage 2” or stage 3. As the minister acknowledged, there are specific concerns about the drafting of section 1 in relation to the definition of “decrofting direction”. Our committee recommends “that the Scottish Government gives careful consideration to these specific issues ahead of Stage 2.” I appreciate the challenges that that involves, but I would hope that it is possible. As the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill progressed, there was a lack of opportunity for robust parliamentary scrutiny of evidence from stakeholders on Scottish Government amendments at stage 3. That put Scottish Labour and some other parties in the somewhat difficult position of feeling obliged to abstain on those amendments at stage 3. That was in spite of there being agreement in principle with the amendments. Scottish Labour is clear that, in the case of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, it is even more vital for the Scottish Government amendments to be available for consideration at stage 2 if possible. I appreciate that there are pressures of time on the minister, but it would be extremely helpful. The issue of retrospection has been raised by both the minister and our convener. As a clear-cut group of people have been affected since the current provisions came into force in October 2011, it is very important that they are allowed to decroft, just as owner-occupier crofters must be in the future. The committee calls for swift processing of the 44 cases that have been put on hold and of any that are not put into the system by the Crofting Commission, if the bill becomes an act. The minister has committed to that today, which is very helpful. I will make some remarks about the future. That is perhaps presumptuous, as I am an outsider to the crofting counties and a newcomer to the complexities of crofting law, but as an MSP who, along with other members from throughout the chamber, is committed to ensuring a vibrant future for crofting, I hope that the perceptions of an outsider—albeit a rural dweller—might be of some use. From my experience, living in South Scotland and supporting my constituents in facing their challenges, I am keenly aware of the difficulties that rural dwelling can bring and of the isolation that can come with it. That includes difficulties with access to work, services, education and leisure. The Scottish Government’s website tells us: “Crofters may benefit from conventional agricultural and environmental schemes and from EC funded programmes. The Scottish Government provides specific support to crofting counties worth around ... £7 million” a year through schemes such as the crofting cattle improvement scheme. The website says that that scheme “is open to groups of at least 2 crofters ... and provides good quality, high health bulls in areas where it is impractical to keep bulls and over winter them and where no alternative hiring facility exists.” Scottish Labour is clear that it is right for a range of support to be specifically targeted at groups of crofters and, indeed, individual crofters. There are enough challenges for crofters without their being unnecessarily pressurised by the complexities of crofting law. That can occur when legal changes need to be made, for example so that people can build another house for the next generation, develop small-scale renewable energy facilities or diversify in some other way. There is an obligation on members across the chamber to grapple with how best to proceed. If we look at decrofting alone, we will see that there are other issues of significance that will not be dealt with in the bill. As we said in our report, the committee believes that that is right in view of the lack of time for consultation, among other things. It is important that there is an opportunity for consultation on issues, foremost among which are “The definition of what legally constitutes an owner-occupier crofter, and issues facing multiple owners of distinct parts of the same croft”. The minister’s agreement to the committee’s recommendations that “the Scottish Government reviews all of the issues raised with the Committee” and “the Scottish Government identifies a clear timeframe for the review and provides the Committee with progress updates on this work once it is underway”— the convener of the committee, Rob Gibson, highlighted that issue— is welcome. The committee’s discussion about how best to move forward on the complexities and the opaque and—to use the minister’s word—sometimes “impenetrable” nature of crofting law more generally led to our comment that “Consolidation would place all of the law in one place, to make it easier to access, but not necessarily to understand. What may also require consideration is codification of the law, i.e. restating the policy in revised, simplified, terms.” We discussed that in the committee. It is a major challenge for all of us in the Parliament, particularly those of us who have not yet experienced the complexities of crofting law but perhaps also for those who have. We owe it to the future of the crofting communities to meet that challenge. The committee of inquiry on crofting reported in 2008, and the Scottish Government set out five key principles that are central to securing the future of crofting. Those were: “Maintaining and increasing the amount of land held in crofting tenure”; “Ensuring that land in crofting tenure is put to productive use”; “Ensuring that housing in the crofting counties makes a full contribution to the local economy”; “Giving more power to local people to determine their own futures”; and “Assisting young people and new entrants into crofting.” Ensuring that crofting law is better law will help to progress many of those principles more easily, although there are many other ways in which they can be progressed. We must rise to the challenge as parliamentarians.

To what extent will it be possible to identify streams of work that need to be done in research in order to implement policies for the future that are related to the challenges that we face from climate change?

The Scottish Labour Party motion highlights Scottish Labour’s belief that “ownership of land is an economic and social issue”. There are a number of recommendations in the land reform review group’s phase 1 report that, if carried forward, will help to shape a fairer future for land settlement in Scotland. Those include recommendations on a possible land agency, the development of community energy and the exploration of minimum engagement standards between landowners and communities, and possible sanctions. However, as the debate and some of the initial comment on the report have shown, there has also been disappointment and some marginalisation. I acknowledge the widening of the membership of the group, which the minister highlighted. Scottish Labour believes that it is right that communities should have more of a stake in the land on which they live and work. The status quo in land ownership is not necessarily the situation that suits communities best in rural and urban Scotland in the 21st century. Colleagues have highlighted the statistics on land ownership. Does the Scottish Government agree that the pattern of land ownership is inequitable? The issue is in part about business, as some have said to me, but it is also a matter of ethics and fairness and it is about empowerment in a democratic Scotland. Some say that community buyout is the way forward only in the Highlands and Islands, so I was pleased to hear the remarks of the minister and Alex Fergusson in relation to other regions such as the south of Scotland. Let us take a little time to analyse the issue further. Frankly, from what we heard on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, Gigha residents initially were not confident about community ownership. In fact, some residents shied away from the prospect of such responsibility. However, those who visited Eigg returned inspired with confidence and full of ideas for what the future could hold. They and others who have developed land buyouts had support with their bids from Highlands and Islands Enterprise. I was pleased to hear about the membership increase in that regard. As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I have seen for myself that the island is now a resilient community with young families, increased numbers in the primary school, a rolling programme to make tenant houses sustainable, and new employment coming to the island. That is not to say that there are not management challenges, but they are the community’s challenges and the future is theirs. In Scottish Labour’s view, communities elsewhere need the same support and contact if they are to move forward towards ownership of their assets. Scottish Labour hopes that the LRRG will consider the options Scotland-wide; indeed, it has been confirmed that it will do so. Although actual ownership is not the only answer, it should not be said that that is not a possibility in parts of Scotland where communities lack knowledge—that is an issue that has been raised with me. We should at least be daring to ask whether there are indeed outmoded patterns of land ownership in Scotland, as Rhoda Grant and others have today suggested there are. In asking that question, I am not implying that there are not many good large landowners—I have visited some in the south of Scotland in the company of Scottish Land & Estates. Leasing land is a way forward, as shown by the Forestry Commission’s action on the Innerleithen mechanical uplift—AIMUp—project. However, I believe that it is right to ask whether the minister sees a connection between land ownership patterns and the promotion of a more socially just Scotland. Scottish Labour is of the view, as stated by our leader Johann Lamont, that “Community ownership of assets is a powerful vehicle to tackle not just social injustice and inequality but it also delivers economic growth. It gives power to the people and allows them to transform their communities.” At our recent conference, Johann Lamont said: “If it is in the public interest, communities will have the right to purchase land, even when the land owner is not a willing seller.” From what Rob Gibson says, I am not sure whether he agrees with that or not. Scottish Labour believes that there should be a strong right to buy, which will come only with legislation. We are debating reconnecting people with the land, not simply a romantic notion. Interestingly, Nourish Scotland, a non-profit organisation that was set up to develop and promote a fairer and more sustainable food system in Scotland, submitted a briefing to the review group that said that land ownership patterns in Scotland contrasted with the fact that “an increasing number of our citizens are coming to depend on food banks to feed their families.” Nourish Scotland argues for “redefining the rights and responsibilities of public benefit from all land”.

I assure the member that Labour is committed to environmental ownership for a sustainable future. I think that my line of questioning in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, even this morning, stands as a testament to that. There is certainly a strong, renewed interest in urban and rural Scotland in growing our own food, and in community spaces. In order to encourage such use of the land, our view is that land ownership must change. It is somewhat disappointing that, in today’s debate, there has not been a great deal of focus on urban perspectives. All of us in the chamber should think about that. Although the community empowerment and renewal bill has been mentioned, and we have been assured that the views of consultees will be taken on board by the review group, ownership as an economic driver for marginalised communities, which Malcolm Chisholm talked about, is important and should be a strong part of the review. Another issue of concern, as highlighted by Claire Baker and others, is the marginalisation of the tenanted sector in phase 2 of the group’s work. Although I understand what the minister said, if phase 2 is to better encourage communities in both rural and urban Scotland to take more of a stake in land management and land use, why was such a significant sector hived off in the review? I stress that tenant farmers have taken time to attend meetings, such as the one that I attended in Dumfries, and to make submissions in the middle of a challenging winter, only to discover that their perspective and needs are excluded from the main debate. That is surely not right.

I am sorry; I am almost in my last minute. An East Lothian tenant farmer constituent of mine recently sent me “The Destruction of Scottish Agriculture”, which was written by the Rev George Brooks in 1885. The first chapter, entitled “To the Tenant Farmers of Scotland”, tells of inequality in the relationship between tenants and landowners. Some would say that, although the situation has changed in many ways, there is still a need to consider it carefully. I acknowledge that the Scottish Government is doing that, but I believe that it should be done also by the land reform review group, and that tenant farmers should not be marginalised. That leads me to a definition of “consensus”. I understand that its origins are in the Latin word “consentio”, which means “feeling together”. Perhaps because of the skewed power relationship between landlords and tenants, the tenant farmers forum does not have that feeling of working together. However, I hope that, in the interests of land reform in Scotland, everyone in this chamber and beyond will share a consensus on working together for our future.

I will focus on rail developments in South Scotland and I hope to draw some Scotland-wide conclusions. The developing success story of Carstairs station is testament to the tenacity of the Clydesdale rail action group and many others who fought for the station for many years. Now there are trains every two hours throughout the day, and the station is being used again to such an extent that a car park feasibility study is being undertaken. There are, of course, other successes that have gone beyond expectations, such as new ventures, new stations and lines that have been opened. However, at a recent Office of Rail Regulation presentation, I was concerned to identify a gap or a lack of balance in priorities from the Scottish Government in relation to people connectivity. Under the heading of “Journey Times” the ORR stressed that “Scottish Ministers have made it clear to us that fast and efficient rail services across Scotland, between Scotland and the rest of the UK and beyond are vital to opening up new markets and business opportunities, driving up competitiveness and increasing access to employment and education.” Thus, the ORR states: “we will be asking Network Rail to develop a process to identify opportunities for journey time improvement”. Speed is, of course, necessary, not least because rail has to compete with road, as highlighted by Transform Scotland. However, the ORR presentation failed to mention another ministerial priority, which has been highlighted today and which is in the Scottish ministers’ high-level output specification. One of the commitments is to delivering rail services “which support our businesses and communities by connecting towns, cities and rural areas”, and I emphasise the phrase “rural areas”. Fast journey times are good only for those who are already on the train. How can the potential conflict between those two ministerial priorities be evaluated if one of them is not highlighted in the periodic review for control period 5? Will the minister reassure members about my concern in his closing remarks?

I understand what the minister says, but my point is that, if the priority of people connectivity is not in the CP5 review, there is cause for concern. The work of the Co-operative Party, SERA—Labour’s environment campaign and the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen in Wales for a people’s railway for Wales—I commend the document “Rail Cymru: A People’s Railway for Wales” to everyone in the chamber—is really significant. Although I have listened to the arguments and concerns about the new franchising process, I hope that the minister will press forward with that approach as a consideration. The approach could lead to what is described in the document as “a new kind of railway company, whose main commitment would be to the people ... not to a group of shareholders. Its values would reflect this wider social mission and it would aim to set new standards of outstanding customer service and community benefit. To succeed in being regarded as an outstanding social enterprise, full involvement of its employees would be essential ... Close and positive relationships with local authorities and their regional consortia are equally essential.” The document goes on to say that rail Cymru “would also build on the outstanding work of the Welsh community rail partnerships”— I understand that the minister is interested in such partnerships for Scotland— “and station friends groups to ensure that Rail Cymru would be strongly focussed on working with the local communities it serves.” I commend the document to members. It is very interesting indeed. A debate that is entitled “Transforming Scotland’s Railways” would not be complete without a reference to the long-awaited Borders rail project. I am pleased that Network Rail has arranged a number of community drop-in sessions, so that it can hear local people’s views. That is the way forward. Tomorrow, the Scottish Borders tourism partnership will host a conference at the Tweed horizons centre, to explore tourism opportunities from the Borders railway. I acknowledge the minister’s sensible adjustment to the Borders rail spec in relation to charter trains, and I hope that he will look again at Saturday trains, which are a big concern. The Campaign for Borders Rail has asked me to raise the issue of the line going to Hawick and perhaps, in the distant future, to Carlisle. A regeneration issue that is intimately connected with rail relates to Stranraer station. There are concerns about busing people from Cairnryan to Glasgow, and the station’s dilapidated state is a worry. The local community rail partnership is keen to meet the minister, and I hope that he will respond to requests to meet the partnership and the Stranraer to Ayr Line Support Association. On a more general point, will the minister say whether more provision will be made for taking bikes on trains? On behalf of my colleague Dr Simpson, I ask about the health impact of night freight trains in the minister’s constituency. I know that the minister is looking into the issue, but surely he can ask the chief medical officer at least to study the effect on households and consider mitigation measures. In the context of climate change, I praise ScotRail’s encouraging steps to reduce our impact on the environment. However, there is much more to do if we are to enable people to get on the train and off the roads whenever possible.

In view of the SMRT not directly funding restoration and given the perceived—at least—varying robustness of local authority arrangements for restoration bonds, can the minister assure the Parliament that the matter will be looked at on a Scotland-wide basis so that communities are properly protected?

During stage 1 evidence, the UK Environmental Law Association made a number of comments relating to the effectiveness of farm management agreements and said that it is important to state the intended purpose of farm management agreements and statements “so that operators are aware of the scope of this obligation.” Amendment 10 would insert a provision in new section 4A of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 to say: “for certain purposes including the improved prevention, control and reduction of parasites, pathogens and diseases”. That reflects the words used in sections 3(2)(a) and 6(2)(a) of the 2007 act. Without stating the purpose of FMAs, it would be possible for an FMA to set out arrangements for sea-lice management that did not satisfy the policy intention of the bill and yet comply with the provision as drafted. The purpose of my amendment is to state the purpose and scope of farm management agreements and statements in the new section. Why do we need amendments 11, 12 and 13? In its stage 1 evidence, the UK Environmental Law Association stated that the “improved control of sea-lice etc. will best be achieved by the cooperation of all the operators in a farm management area, so the Bill should establish a hierarchy”— between farm management agreements and farm management statements— “making FMAs the default”. That was the basis of amendment 49 at stage 2. As the bill stands, rather than seeking to ensure that current good practice is promoted throughout the sector, it does no more than to maintain the status quo. According to the Scottish Salmon Producers’ Organisation, the basis for area management is that sites operating within defined farm management areas should “adopt similar and joined up farming practices, for example stocking the same year class of fish and synchronised fallowing of sites at the end of the production cycle.” My amendments are therefore designed to ensure that FMAs and FMSs contain provisions about the co-ordination of parasite management, harvesting of fish and fallowing of farms after harvest. The intention is to ensure that new section 4A includes specific reference to the co-ordination of activities. I believe that Alex Ferguson’s amendment 3 on the publication of FMAs and FMSs would provide transparency in the development of strategies with interested parties, particularly local community interests.

That seemed to cause a bit of a stir, Presiding Officer, but I will just continue. During stage 1, there was a great deal of discussion about the appropriate resolution of the publication of sea lice data. In the stage 1 report, the committee stated that publication of sea lice data should be at a farm management area level, which is a step further than what is proposed by the SSPO. Publication of such data would allow the industry to demonstrate its management response and performance in relation to sea lice at a resolution that is relevant to the management unit of co-ordinated sea lice treatment: the farm management area. Under the Fish Farming Businesses (Record Keeping) (Scotland) Order 2008, fish farms are already required to maintain a record of the number of parasites that are counted in the course of the weekly parasite counts. However, there is no current requirement to publish such data. The Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 should therefore be amended to require the publication of parasite counts on a week-to-week basis, averaged over the farm management area. The data should be consistent with the requirements of paragraph (2) of schedule 1 to the record keeping order. The publication should occur within a month, as is the case in Ireland, and the data should remain for inspection and should not be removed at the next reporting period. That latter point relates to a major failing, in my view, in the current system that the SSPO operates, under which data is available for only three months and then cannot be accessed, even on request. The text of amendment 14 is slightly different from that of the amendment that was lodged at stage 2. The original wording included the word “compiling” but did not set out how long it should take to compile the data. The fact that the data had not been compiled could have been used to delay publication. I ask the minister to consider amendment 14, even at this late stage, in the interest of the development of good relations among the relevant sectors. It is quite clear to me that transparency must be the overriding principle. Nothing that I have heard in evidence over the months has come any way to convincing me that there are counterarguments to invalidate that strong and important principle. There should be a requirement on the face of the bill for openness and transparency. It is not acceptable to play a game of wait and see. My amendment proposes a compromise. I am asking for publication to be at farm management area level, not farm level, and I am not asking for immediate publication. The proposed delay in publication recognises the industry concern that there should be time to put right any difficulties before publication. Surely that should enhance rather than threaten consumer confidence. In my view, publication is in the public interest. Any arguments about commercial confidentiality simply do not make sense, if the fact that my amendment acknowledges the need for a time delay is taken into account.

I understand what the minister says, but there are very few places where there is only a single farm. It is extremely important that I have incorporated a month’s delay. That will enable a farm or a firm to sort out any problems and present its recommendations for management of the fishery, and to give people confidence, when the data is published, that something is being done about the issue. What other industry is allowed to hide successfully behind commercial confidentiality when the transparent development of scientific research and the public interest are on the other side of the scales? Neither farming nor waste management nor other industries that involve processes that cause air pollution are allowed to do so. Perhaps the minister can name such an industry, even at this late stage. Of course there is good practice in sea lice management in the aquaculture industry, and it should be possible for that to be publicly shared. Science should be shared, too—not just within Marine Scotland but across academia—as that would enable good practice to be made even better. How can that happen if secrecy is at the heart of the sea lice data challenge? In my view, amendment 14 will help to build trust in relationships between the relevant sectors, which is essential if we are to have sustainable jobs and sustainable seas here in Scotland. I move amendment 14.

I have listened with care to the comments that have been made by members from across the chamber. In response to Graeme Dey’s concern that such a granular level of transparency has contributed to the contraction of the industry in Ireland, I note that that was not stated as the reason in any of the written or oral evidence that the committee received or during any of the visits that we undertook. Graeme Dey says that it might have been a contributory factor, but I am not convinced, having seen no evidence on that. In relation to the science, it still perplexes me how research, in its broadest sense, can be shared across academia if the information is not made public. Marine Scotland might have the information, but the discussions that we have heard in the chamber today between Alex Fergusson and the minister about whether that information would be accessible through a freedom of information request seem to have highlighted some concerns. It is extraordinary that such information will not be available openly, especially in view of the delay. I acknowledge that the SSPO offer is a step in the right direction and I am in no way seeking to knock an industry in which there is very good practice. However, the SSPO offer does not go far enough.

I appreciate the minister’s commitment and I have listened carefully to what he has said. However, I still do not believe that it goes far enough and I would like to see amendment 14 made to the bill. The delay will also help with the argument that information that is published could be used selectively and out of context. I cannot think of any other industry in which—as I understand it, and perhaps the minister will correct me if I am mistaken—the suggestion is that the information could be used inappropriately in any campaigns that might come up. I do not believe that that is a reason not to be open and transparent. An industry that uses good practice has nothing to hide, and I think that the amendment should be passed. I have two final points. The planning permission issue is important and we need to be aware that the publication of data on sea lice might inform future planning permission in particular estuaries. Also, the issue of the consumer’s right to know came up during the recent horsemeat scandal. We need to pursue as much transparency as possible around our food, albeit that the industry mainly has an excellent record. I press amendment 14.

I highlight that there is much good practice in the aquaculture industry, not least that which the committee saw on its visits to fish farms. I support Jim Hume’s amendments, which relate not only to human error but to the health and safety of employees on fish farms in what are often dangerous situations, as Nigel Don highlighted.

I align myself with Tavish Scott’s remarks. We support the policy intention, but it is very serious that Parliament has not been able to scrutinise the amendments previously. The committee and stakeholders have not seen any evidence; there might have been questions about funding implications in relation to marine enforcement officers. The issue did not come up during the pre-consultation and consultation stages. I appreciate that it is likely that the minister is trying to ensure that the bill is as robust as possible, but I am seriously concerned about the scrutiny issue.

In relation to amendment 4, I find it quite odd to contemplate such a scheme without numbers. Although I respect the need for stakeholder consultation—which has not happened here—I would still be looking for a commitment from the minister today to consideration of numbered tags. As I understand it, by inserting the word “buys” amendment 5 simply brings consistency with previous legislation. If someone cannot sell, why should they be allowed to buy?

Scottish Labour recognises the significance and importance of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, and of regulation and the wild fisheries review, to present and future employment in what are often fragile rural and coastal communities. There are jobs in wild fisheries, scientific research, aquaculture and—of course—fish processing, retailing and exporting. An excellent example of how the whole production chain can be vertically integrated is that of the co-operative Scottish Shellfish Marketing Group. It gives the customer reassurance about provenance, which is important in the wake of the horsemeat scandal, from which lessons must be learned. The Scottish Parliament information centre tells us that Scotland is already the largest salmon producer in the European Union and the third largest in the world, after Norway and Chile. I have looked with interest at the cabinet secretary’s drive to promote exports of Scottish salmon and shellfish. Salmon is Scotland’s largest food export, accounting for a third of the value of all food exports. Scottish salmon is exported to more than 50 countries, with the EU and US markets being particularly important. As the minister and cabinet secretary will know, after agreement with the Chinese Government was reached in 2011, a new market opened up in China. Figures show that exports of salmon to the far east went up from 682 tonnes in 2010 to 8,675 tonnes in 2012. Although there is little doubt about the highly lucrative nature of the exports for Scotland in the short-term, I ask the minister to clarify how that drive in exports can be reconciled with the Scottish Government’s commitment to sustainable seas. The cabinet secretary stated: “The Scottish salmon industry is committed to nurturing a responsible, sustainable and environmentally aware future based on strong fishing heritage and traditions.” As the minister has said, our clean waters are “pristine”—or, to use my word, quintessential. That drives us towards the environmental imperative. The biodiversity of our seas, sea lochs, rivers and burns is fundamental to our very future and to the future of the species and habitats for which we have responsibility. Sustainable development is the key. I seek further assurances from the minister that, if the bill is passed today in spite of the failure of the bill’s policy memorandum to fulfil its potential in that regard, there will be a continuing assessment of sustainable development. Scotland’s national marine plan, which has been delayed, is fundamental in underpinning the way forward. This summer’s consultations concern sustainable development not just in relation to the employment opportunities that I have highlighted, but in relation to how other industries in the marine sectors—which I do not have time to list—can fit together and be developed sustainably. At stage 1, I stressed that: “All potential development in our seas ... must be judged in the context of marine carrying capacity.”—[Official Report, 28 February 2013; c 17200.] The Scottish Government must always remember that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 gives us a legally binding obligation to enhance our seas. That sets us a responsibility to recover damaged species, as well as maintaining the status quo. At stage 1, I highlighted the significance of climate change, so I ask the minister, in his closing speech, to give Parliament and all interested groups reassurance that the bill and the ensuing regulations will be climate change proofed, and reassurance about how that will be monitored. The review of marine protected areas in 2018 will be significant as the science develops. The health of our rivers and burns is also in need of protection, for the same reasons as our seas are. Can the minister tell Parliament how funding will be made available in the future for the range of initiatives that are needed, such as the Dee tree-planting scheme, which the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee visited. On wild fisheries, I note that: “The recent increase in rod catch, coupled with the high levels of catch and release, is regarded as evidence of increases in the number of fish entering fresh waters.” There is still a concern about spring salmon, however. As a sea trout champion, I have concerns about the decline in numbers that Marine Scotland has identified. If we are to move forward sustainably, science is essential and must be shared. How can science be shared if it is not fully and publicly available to share among Marine Scotland, academia and the range of industries concerned? An honest and full assessment of the industry is needed if we are to achieve our shared aquaculture and shellfish targets. Scottish Labour is disappointed and perplexed by the final position in the bill on publication of sea lice data. I note the minister’s comments, which are in some sense reassuring, but there should still be an overriding principle of transparency. Our seas are not private property. Moreover, whatever waste comes from fish farms does not stop at the barrier of the cage, any more than diffuse farm pollution stops at a fence near a burn. The development of effective regulation accompanying the eventual act, the wild fisheries review and the work of the ministerial group on aquaculture will be the make or break of future sustainable activity. The minister’s words today are reassuring on that. Furthermore, there is agreement about the RACCE Committee’s important recommendation at stage 1 that, if there are breakdowns in relationships, a “fully accessible and fit for purpose ... mediation service” should be available.

I will do so, Presiding Officer. The building of good relationships is perhaps more important than anything else, and it is an absolute imperative for the future. Scottish Labour supports the bill, and I ask the minister for reassurance that support for nurturing those relationships will be a priority in the future.

I am happy to be here this afternoon, although it has been a long afternoon for many of us. However, this is an important debate and I am delighted to lend my support to the Mull of Galloway community buyout. I congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing the debate and I compliment her on her inspiring description. Members who are familiar with my views on co-operative working and community engagement will not be surprised to hear that I am very positive about this project as well as similar projects throughout Scotland. Of course, the fact that this community project is in South Scotland, my own region, is an added bonus. All too often, visitors to Scotland are led to believe that the areas of natural beauty begin north of the Forth and the Clyde. Nothing could be further from the truth. The Mull of Galloway has been described to me as Scotland’s best-kept secret. I hope that in the coming months and years, we will see that secret being shared among many more people now that the community buyout is happening. I join other members in congratulating the Mull of Galloway Trust on securing the grant from the Scottish land fund. I am absolutely delighted that the funding has been made available, as it will allow the community buyout project to purchase the Mull of Galloway estate from the Northern Lighthouse Board as well as securing—as Aileen McLeod has already pointed out—20 jobs and creating opportunities for others. Although there is still a little further to go, I understand that the trust is confident that the group will make up the remaining shortfall. Members who have a connection with the South Scotland region—Dumfries and Galloway in particular—will, however, be aware that visitor numbers are down on previous years. That may be a result of the financial difficulties that many people find themselves in or it may be down to the awful weather that we are experiencing—although not tonight. Whatever the case, we must all do what we can to publicise projects such as this one to ensure a higher number of visitors to the region. Indeed, Dumfries and Galloway is in need of a serious refocus by the Scottish Government. We have already witnessed the closure of the costume museum, despite cross-party efforts to prevent it. As we are all aware, tourist attractions and facilities help to support each other, so I ask the Scottish Government to do all that it can to support the region. When looking at the Mull of Galloway project, I was struck by how many different aspects have been put together, as Aileen McLeod highlighted earlier. Since 2000, there has been an RSPB visitor centre located near a fantastic viewing point and nature trails. From there you can see guillemots, as highlighted by Alex Fergusson, and puffins—my colleague Claire Baker being the species champion for them—and even, in the winter, peregrines. I am pleased to hear that the RSPB has been heavily involved with the Mull of Galloway Trust and will soon be an official partner of the group. Of course, the main attraction is the lighthouse itself, and I am glad that the trust is able to take ownership of it and save it from potential ruin. I have been told that the view on a clear day is quite spectacular: as other members have highlighted, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man are perfectly visible. I look forward to taking up the trust’s invitation to go and see it for myself, and to visiting the lighthouse exhibition, which is already open. I understand that now that funding has been made available through the Scottish land fund, it may be possible for the lighthouse keepers’ cottages to be purchased and rented out, so I would even have somewhere to stay. I first heard of the trust community buyout during an evidence session with the land reform review group in Dumfries earlier this year, at which I was invited to visit the project in the summer. For those who are not familiar with the group—I know that members in the chamber will be, but others further afield might look at the debate with interest—it has been tasked with helping communities to have a say in the ownership, management and use of land throughout Scotland and with empowering communities to make the best of the natural resources that are available. At the evidence session, we heard about a range of community buyout models, and I was particularly impressed by the presentation from the Mull of Galloway Trust. Of course, there is no one-size-fits-all model that is suitable for every potential project, but I am convinced that, in this case, the trust has got it spot on. Community buyout projects have always been associated with the Highlands, so the Mull of Galloway project is an ideal example of how that community-based, co-operative way of working can be utilised throughout the country, and I am keen to support the type of capacity building that will be needed for community buyouts where appropriate. I wish the Mull of Galloway project every success as an inspiration not only in its own right, but for those who feel able and are empowered to take on the running of their own land and facilities and make those assets work for them and for the future.

Will the minister confirm whether the Scottish Government has had and intends to have any discussions with the UK Government about the EU proposal to ban three types of neonicotinoid pesticides? As Graeme Dey’s supplementary question noted, those neonicotinoids are dangerous to bees when used on flowering plants. That was stated in January by the European Food Safety Authority.

I thank the minister for sight of his statement. It has been highlighted that more than 170 people whose land has been decrofted will no longer have title to their property and may not be able to secure lending in the interim. Indeed, they may have to wait in order to sell. What is the Scottish Government doing to help them financially and legally?

Although one can look back to cold winters, does the member agree that, for the future, we need to be factoring the possibility of cold winters into RPP2?

Our meeting our climate change targets is a domestic imperative here in Scotland, and it is a climate justice issue here and globally. I am convinced that mainstreaming of deliberations across four committees, leading to today’s debate, is particularly valuable in focusing on necessary changes to the final RPP, and I thank all the witnesses who took part. A step change is necessary in many sectors, not least housing and transport, as was highlighted by Maureen Watt, who stressed the enormousness of the challenge. Elaine Murray, Malcolm Chisholm, and Jim Eadie in particular explored those issues. Perhaps it is equally challenging for all political parties to see how we can get from where we are now to where we need to be. Transport is the hardest issue, in my view. We have road-building commitments, rural public transport which is, to be frank, a joke in some areas, and pretty much non-existent urban segregated on-road cycle routes—although the award that Jim Eadie mentioned will no doubt help, if it goes through. The shift to low-carbon vehicles is in its early stages and, as Malcolm Chisholm stressed, it is uncertain.

I would like to make progress. It will take bravery as well as vision and, of course, funding, to achieve the shifts that are needed at all levels. The serious concerns about the level of EU targets were explored by my colleague Claire Baker and many others. In view of the strong possibility that, even if the EU target is changed, it might well not be changed before 2016, the RACCE Committee recommendation that “the final RPP2 be more explicit in demonstrating how greater domestic reductions could be achieved within the current 20% EU target” becomes even more significant. I hope that the minister will address that in his closing remarks. As the debate draws to a close and the minister grapples with consideration of changes that might be made in view of the committees’ reports, I want to instil a sense of optimism. Many of us have a vision of how we could move forward towards a low-carbon economy, so I will look at the positives and at the opportunities. We can make the step change to meet our targets; Scottish Labour is clear that that must be done in a way that is inclusive and fair for all our communities and at household level—in particular for those who are living on the edge. While meeting our climate change targets, we must also tackle fuel poverty and food poverty, air pollution, poor local environments and—as many members have mentioned—insulation to tackle cold and damp houses. Helping people through cold winters is essential. Yes, we missed our first target. That must not happen again, but I puzzle over what is a “normal year”, as was mentioned by Angus MacDonald. We must firm up proposals into policies and there are concerns that much has been pushed into the later years. The RACCE Committee asked the minister about interdepartmental discussion, which is so needed if we are to succeed in meeting our targets. That discussion must be on-going in order to evaluate progress and the need to adapt. I am sure that the minister will commit to that continuation. The minister’s commitment to milestones today is significant—we must see those milestones in the final document. There can also be a strong commitment across all departments to properly funded research with appropriate academic partners, aided by citizen science. Research is needed into the effectiveness of current programmes, such as farming for a better climate. The RACCE Committee “notes the Cabinet Secretary’s ambition for every farm in Scotland to have a carbon reduction plan in place,” but without research, there cannot be real monitoring of programmes, and alteration—and indeed regulation—as is needed across all sectors. Research into new technologies is also needed, so that the step change that we are all committed to can become a reality—otherwise our ambitious proposals for the later years of RPP2 will not be realised as policies. The minister emphasised clarity, which was encouraging. Who leads on this challenge to reach our targets? We all do. Local authorities all signed up to the climate change declaration; Kevin Stewart stressed the need to report to the Scottish Parliament on that. Primary schools—and now, many of us hope, more secondary schools—will contribute through the eco-schools programme. All public bodies can play their part as well, as can businesses across sectors. Dr Andy Kerr, the director of the centre for carbon innovation at the University of Edinburgh, told the RACCE Committee: “it is very much about creating the conditions under which we can also encourage private investment, because there are huge opportunities to deliver fairly radical change. Markets in this space are growing around the world.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 6 February 2013; c 1705.] I want to focus on the marine environment, which other members have not mentioned today—it sometimes seems to get left out. The RACCE Committee “recommends that the Scottish Government ensure the final RPP2 acknowledges the contribution” of blue carbon, which could have “an ambitious route map for future development, which can be updated in RPP3”. The committee agreed that publication of the marine “plan has become a matter of some urgency” and that “concurrent consultations on marine protected areas and a marine renewables plan” are also extremely important. Although I am disappointed by the lack of focus on marine protection and opportunities in the draft RPP2, I was somewhat reassured by the cabinet secretary’s remarks to the committee: “The Committee notes the comments made that the final RPP2 might benefit from the inclusion of a specific marine section, and/or improved presentation of issues relevant to the marine environment and welcomes the Cabinet Secretary’s remarks which indicate he is prepared to consider this issue before the RPP2 is finalised.” It was disappointing that the behaviour change framework came out so late, as many members have highlighted. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee report recommends that “behavioural change should find expression in all sections of the RPP2 report and should not be stand alone as change is needed across all sectors of the economy and society.” We all have a responsibility at individual level and to all the communities to which we belong, but people will contribute only if they believe that their contribution matters—that it makes a difference—which, often, they still do not believe, and if there is a pay-off. For some people, one of those will matter more than the other, depending on their circumstances. It is up to all of us in the chamber to ensure that everyone in Scotland understands that tackling climate change matters for both reasons. Finally, let me use the words of Simon Pepper, with his wealth of experience of sustainable development. In evidence to our RACCE Committee, he said: “One of the problems is the label “behaviour change”, because it tends to focus the mind on individual action whereas, in strategic terms, we need to concentrate on societal attitudes and norms. I like to think of it more as culture change.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 6 February 2013; c 1708.] A culture change is what we need, and we must all work towards that in the future.

Whatever our way of tackling the dreadful issue of nuclear weapons—whatever our approach—nuclear weapons are an unacceptable part of our world. That said, very few constituents have raised the issue with me recently, although many constituents have contacted me about other issues. Many of those issues were very immediate; some were desperate; and many were about devolved matters, or concerns that we could mitigate. Kinship carers are living under pressure; young people are worried about finding or keeping a job; and many people have constant worries about transport. This week, we might also have debated the very current issues around the Leveson inquiry and developments here in Scotland. To state the obvious, defence is a reserved issue. However, we are here today with a debate on the future of nuclear weapons. There are a range of opinions on that matter in my political party and other parties. Decisions on the future of Trident should be based on evidence and on what is in our national interest. Would the world have believed that apartheid could be deconstructed, or that the Berlin wall would fall? In our own small ways, we all tackle issues as momentous as nuclear weapons in the best way that we can. I and others have held and continue to hold a principled position against nuclear weapons. Long ago, I lived between Upper Heyford and Greenham Common. Along with others, I was what we called a legal observer for my group. I was then involved in direct action, and I was arrested, charged and convicted for obstruction. Although that was a small thing in the grand scheme of things, it was a hard decision to take as a young teacher. I feel saddened not so much for myself but for those who have made a lifetime commitment to working to rid us of nuclear weapons—much more than I have done—that they can find their principled position muddled up and sucked into the constitutional issue here in Scotland. The Financial Times contributor Max Hastings, who is pro nuclear weapons, commented earlier this month: “Professor Sir Michael Howard, at 90 still Britain’s wisest thinker on strategy, surprised me recently by saying that he now opposed the Trident replacement. I reminded him that he had always favoured it. ‘Yes, but as Keynes said, when circumstances change, I change my mind,’ he said. ‘We simply can’t afford it any more.’” There are indeed questions to be asked and answered about cost and Trident replacement—about cost in relation to the straitened times in which we and many of our constituents find ourselves here and now, and about spending, some of which might be shifted from our defence budget to other priorities such as child poverty. The list must not be too long, however, if there is indeed to be such a shift. What is Trident for now? One could raise questions about the utility of nuclear weapons and their central role in NATO strategy. Most people would agree that the world has moved on, and that the threats that are faced by countries such as ours are more to do with asymmetrical warfare than was the case in the past. Should NATO members perhaps focus their efforts on counterterrorism and counter-insurgency, rather than retaining a surplus of nuclear weapons? Could it be argued that the UK’s diminishing defence budget could be better used through contributing to collective defence in that manner? In 2007, I made a contribution to a paper about the economic and employment consequences of cancelling Trident. In the chapter concerned, I explored the opportunity that defence diversification presented to the renewables industry. Some of the figures have been rightly challenged, and they are not up to date any more anyway. Indeed, some of the arguments have moved on. In geographical terms, it could be argued that the locus of renewables is now more focused in Aberdeen and the far north. However, there are many other possibilities to consider—

No, I need to make progress. I want to get on to other matters, too. There are many other possibilities in addition to conventional defence. To highlight but one, there is the chance of retrofitting and building wellboats for fish farms here in Scotland, which was brought up at the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee during deliberations on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill. There is potential for this Parliament to urge the UK Government to do more work with regard to cutting nuclear weapons within the alliance structure of NATO and as a member of the Security Council.

I need to finish—I am going into my last minute. We could be ideally placed to encourage other nuclear states to work towards realising article VI of the NPT, which obliges signatories “to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament”. As a member of the Security Council, the UK, encouraged by this Parliament, could also make efforts to implement the five-point plan, which suggests that Security Council members could “commence discussions, perhaps within its Military Staff Committee, on security issues in the nuclear disarmament process.” I am not saying that the answers to any of the questions that I have posed will be anything other than deeply complex to disentangle if we are to work towards diminishing the horrible risk that is presented by nuclear weapons in our world. We must all try to do that, however we can.

What support will there be within the RPP for behaviour change in low-income families and challenged communities?

Will the member take an intervention?

This is indeed a timely debate with the European Parliament finalising the new CAP today and the agriculture and fisheries council meeting next Monday. I hope that the whole of the UK will work together to get the best deal for all parts of it. Claire Baker highlighted environmental issues, greater transparency and a focus on the public good. Stewart Stevenson raised the important greening issue. It was helpful to hear some of the remarks made by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on related developments. We must keep pushing forward on that. The cabinet secretary stated his belief, in evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee on the draft second report on policies and proposals, that carbon reduction should be a central factor of any greening but that, at the present time, it is uncertain what will be involved. Will he explain in his closing remarks to the chamber how to input at the EU level to progress the issue? It was helpful to hear from the cabinet secretary in the same committee meeting speak about SDRP and how carbon measures could be a strong focus. In addition, we must ensure that SDRP is, in part, focused on the supporting the development of vibrant rural communities, as Jayne Baxter highlighted. Claire Baker stressed the serious challenges related to ownership and the tenanted sector that new farm entrants face. The facilitation and establishment of the next generation of farmers is, of course, essential. The commitment of £2 million a year to support new farm entrants who will be affected by the delayed introduction of the CAP reforms until 2015 is welcome. Will the cabinet secretary provide more detail, if possible, about how the money will be spent in order to reassure the new entrants? We must get the area-based payments right for Scotland. Modelling is indeed key, as Tavish Scott highlighted. The Welsh Government has modelled CAP reform into payments by region. We cannot wait for the exact details in order to model and check various possibilities that would at least give farmers some understanding of how the CAP reform will go forward. Exact scenarios could be tested and then we could see where we get to in the end. The cabinet secretary has recognised the importance of coupled payments, and some level of direct support for the beef systems is essential. It is significant and important that there is an option in pillar 1 to give more support to areas of natural constraint, to supplement the area-based payments that may well be necessary. The Scottish Government motion talks of independence, which is somewhat divisive given the imminent negotiations in the European Parliament. It makes it difficult for other parties to join together and work with the Scottish Government within the UK, to take forward the best deal for our farmers now and in the future. Although that is disappointing—

Although that is disappointing, this has been a helpful debate. We must all gather together, in this chamber and beyond, to support farmers in Scotland.

I want to highlight the importance of local butchers. I saw a statistic that in the UK in the past 20 years, the number of local butchers has dropped from 30,000 to 6,000. Does Richard Lyle agree that it is vital that the Scottish Government and anyone else do anything that they can to help increase that number?

Today in the cafeteria there was salmon and beef, and I stood there and dithered. Sadly, I could not try both, but never mind. There was also a vegetarian option, of course. We have heard many speeches about how vital it is that we engage with the issues of food sourcing and provision and that we rethink the structure of supply chains in Scotland. The on-going horsemeat scandal has been a significant factor in our debating of Scotland’s food policy. As my colleague Richard Simpson highlighted, labelling is extremely important. The complexities of trans-European and global supply chains are daunting to grapple with, and proper regulation is essential. As the Minister for Public Health told us in his statement to Parliament, the Scottish Government is to set up a food standards agency for Scotland. Although I am supportive of that measure, the question that remains is why it has taken a highly publicised scandal for a consultation to be launched. As Scottish Labour has highlighted throughout the debate, there is a need for a well-funded and robust regulatory regime to be implemented. In that context, I highlight Unison’s survey and the school meals summit with COSLA. I look forward to hearing the cabinet secretary’s comments on what actions the Scottish Government has taken as a result of that. Almost all members have highlighted the issue of local food. Graeme Dey gave an awesome list of foods that are produced in Angus, but the same is true across Scotland. Elaine Murray stressed the value of food to our tourism industry, which I do not think that the motion or any of the amendments stressed. I turn to nutrition and the difficult issue of obesity in Scotland. There is a lamentable lack of nutrition in many people’s diets. The complexities and challenges of buying food on a low income can often drive people to make poor food choices. Studies that have been conducted by the Scottish Government and others show a significant link between obesity, deprivation and a lack of education. The Scottish Government’s national health survey topic report on obesity states: “Suggested mechanisms for socio-economic status affecting obesity include the cheap cost and palatability of poor quality, energy-dense foods appealing to those with limited income, and area-level density of fast-food outlets.” That is just one extract from the report, but it suggests that improving nutritional education and tackling food poverty must be a priority for the Scottish Government. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will take that on board to an even greater extent following today’s debate. The inescapable fact is that some of the most affordable foods—I stress the word “some”—can be of the poorest quality and the lowest nutritional value. That presents families with great difficulties. I recognise Neil Findlay’s global analysis, which I am sure set us all thinking. Importantly, Bruce Crawford highlighted the if campaign to tackle hunger worldwide, and Rob Gibson raised the importance of the issue of genetic modification and the threat that it poses. On food banks and food poverty, the latter is as serious a concern for many families across Scotland as fuel poverty is today. As my colleague Jayne Baxter and others have already discussed, many communities do not have access to high-quality foods. As my colleague Elaine Murray highlighted, better-quality and healthier food should be made more available and more cheaply. That discussion has been at the heart of the debate, as it should have been. I certainly agree with Elaine Murray that people living in food poverty must not in any way be blamed for not being able to afford many of the healthier, expensive foods. I recently met members of Kirkton church in Carluke in my region who work with other churches in Clydesdale to support increasing numbers of people who are in urgent need of food. Elaine Murray and Bruce Crawford stressed that the welfare reform agenda will make things only shockingly worse for such people. On health promotion, I want to be a little bit anecdotal, although I am making a closing speech. On Saturday, we had an international women’s day event in the Scottish Parliament that was chaired by the Deputy Presiding Officer, Elaine Smith. I met a women’s group from Kirkconnel in Dumfriesshire that runs a lifestyles group to help promote wellbeing. It holds a come-and-taste meeting, for which some of the group cook lunch with fresh ingredients, while others do an exercise class. They then share a healthy lunch and the recipe. There is also a voluntary weigh-in, which has encouraged weight management. What the group does helps to break down barriers to trying new menus, the cost of which is not borne at home if they are not to the group’s taste. The popularity of television food programmes is well known but, as Nigel Don highlighted, how many of us actually cook in the real sense of the word? Can the cabinet secretary tell members what the Scottish Government is doing to support initiatives such as the one in Kirkconnel? That brings me on to food procurement itself. It is now becoming increasingly clear that we should encourage the development of a sustainable food strategy. Jayne Baxter has raised the quality versus price debate, but I ask the cabinet secretary whether we can move towards regionally integrated food procurement and, indeed, local procurement where possible. I have been pleased to hear of examples of that from across Scotland. Rob Gibson highlighted how essential collaboration is in that regard. Like Alison Johnstone and Richard Simpson, I want to draw attention to the Soil Association’s food for life scheme, which is quickly gathering pace. For members who do not know, the scheme’s aim is to transform food culture across the country by promoting a sustainable supply of fresh, healthy, local, organic and seasonal food. The food for life catering mark is already being used by four local authorities, including East Ayrshire Council. Alison Johnstone argued for local food procurement to be the default position for schools, which I agree with. The food for life partnership in Edinburgh has been working in conjunction with the City of Edinburgh Council, Nourish Scotland and Whitmuir farm in West Linton to develop a sustainable food strategy that has at its heart a commitment to healthy food promotion, environmentalism and joint procurement. The issue of food miles, which has not been raised much in the debate, is also a significant part of the debate on food policy. Sourcing local food not only ensures that it is fresher, but it reduces carbon emissions through transportation and, of course, helps local communities. According to the Scottish Government’s report “Food and Drink in Scotland: Key Facts 2012”, out of Scotland’s population, 54 per cent and 49 per cent said that they would buy local to support local producers and local retailers, respectively. Those statistics show that there is certainly a public will for projects such as the food for life partnership. I urge the Scottish Government to do all that it can to promote similar projects. Members have stressed the significance of grow-your-own projects, allotments and the use of empty urban and rural spaces, and I would highlight co-operative models in the context of food. Scotland has rich food resources, many of which are both healthy and delicious. They must be safely shared by us all as well as exported. The cabinet secretary used the word “transformative” in relation to food. The new food council will have much to take on and I wish it well in its quest.

What provisions are there at present within the Scotland Excel guidelines to encourage local, fresh and fair-trade food procurement? The Scotland Excel website highlights that it shares best procurement practice.

Does the member agree that it is the role of the Parliament, and particularly the Opposition, to scrutinise what has happened in public bodies such as the NHS when an issue such as social unavailability has not been resolved and a previous cabinet secretary has hidden behind issues such as IT? That is our job, in part.

Murdo Fraser’s point about the need for a multifaceted approach to species protection is important. It is also essential that there be an adequately funded vaccination programme for red squirrels. Will he comment on that?

As the minister said in his statement, there is much at stake. After all, the food that we eat is vital in ensuring that we live longer and healthier lives. Does the minister therefore acknowledge the significance of East Ayrshire Council’s Soil Association-accredited food for life catering mark for providing food that is as far as possible locally sourced? What plans does the Scottish Government have to develop similar support across the public sector? Moreover, in view of the importance of the traceability of food—-

The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee supports the bill’s general principles, as the committee convener has stated. I want to consider the bill’s context for a few minutes, which takes me immediately to the policy memorandum and the request from the committee to the Scottish Government “to consider whether the assessment of sustainable development in the Policy Memorandum fulfils its potential as a means of ensuring a consistent and thorough regard for environmental, economic and social impacts of the changes proposed by the Bill and alternatives.” The memorandum does not fulfil that potential. I therefore ask the minister to assure us that there will be an on-going assessment of the measures in the bill, as it progresses. The committee has recently heard evidence on biodiversity; I stress its importance in relation to the bill. Concerns have been expressed about the delay of Scotland’s marine plan because marine spatial planning is key to appropriate development. All potential development in our seas, whether aquaculture fisheries, marine renewables or oil and gas, must be judged in the context of marine carrying capacity. The delay to the marine protected areas is also a cause for concern. Our fragile coast and rural communities—where livelihoods depend on fish farms, fish processing, wild salmon rivers and tourism—must to be considered, too. The science is vital in determining what appropriate development is. It is essential that data be readily and publicly available for research into the sustainable future for all sectors concerned, and for the wider marine environment. That is even more of an imperative in the context of the changes in our marine and river environments resulting from climate change. We all need to do our best to climate proof the bill—hard as that may be—and the ensuing regulations. Excellent work on that is on-going, but it is important that the Scottish Government and all sectors work strategically so that we honour our climate change commitments more broadly. Before focusing in detail on the sections of the bill, I, too, will say something about the adversarial nature of the engagement of some of the sectors involved. As our report points out, the committee’s work was hindered by it, which “made it difficult at times for the Committee to assess the best way forward”. That was not helpful. I highlight paragraph 2 of the committee’s opening summary: “As important as this legislation is, perhaps of equal significance for Scotland in the long-term, is improving the current relationship between the wild and farmed fishing sectors, with a view to establishing closer, productive, cooperative working relationships for the overall benefit of the people of Scotland and the environment.” I make a strong plea to that end to all those concerned. The committee was certainly welcomed by many on its two days of fact-finding visits, which upped my knowledge. One must always try to be positive in times of conflict, and I believe that those visits set a good tone. Part 1 of the bill focuses on the future of the aquaculture industry. There is no doubt that the Scottish Government is keen on the development of the industry for home consumption and export markets. The minister highlighted the point that new markets are opening up. The Scottish Government is negotiating agreements on salmon exports to China, which have grown exponentially in the past two years. During his evidence to the committee, the minister stated: “The clear message is that growth must be sustainable.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 9 January 2013; c 1614.] That is reassuring in the context of the Scottish Government’s target of a 50 per cent increase in the sector by 2020, 34 per cent of which is, I believe, still to be achieved. The market for many products that are branded as being from Scotland is based on clear provenance. Scotland’s reputation for good-quality waters is quintessential. Therefore, it is essential that there is careful monitoring and action, to which the bill and the regulation following it will contribute strongly. The committee’s visits to Marine Harvest demonstrated the good practice that exists in the fish farming sector. The committee supports the move to put farm management agreements and statements on a statutory footing, but there is a need, in addition, to focus on the minority of farms that are not currently signed up, in order to ensure their quick compliance. Co-ordinated management to underpin the building of trust and good relationships across the sectors is as important as marine spatial planning. The committee recommends that the Scottish Government work with the SSPO to ensure that mediation services are “fully accessible and fit for purpose”. I acknowledge the minister’s input in that regard. The committee also “notes concerns raised about the number of seals which are being shot at fish farms as part of predator control.” The key point is that alternatives to killing must be as humane as possible. Therefore, I was encouraged to hear of the work of the Scottish Aquaculture Research Forum in the minister’s feedback to the committee. The committee explored the possibility of human error, which is important in relation not only to escapes but to broader good practice. I note that there are many good in-house training schemes in the aquaculture industry, but the situation should be monitored in case there is a need for further intervention. The minister stated that, at stage 2, an amendment would provide a clearer definition of wellboats. My colleague, the convener Rob Gibson, already highlighted the importance of building of wellboats in Scotland. We hope that the Scottish Government will consider that on a broader level, especially in terms of employment. I note that the minister will look to the MGA to keep the issue of the revoking of consents under review. Is that robust enough? I welcome today’s funding announcement on sea lice. I will quote from the committee report, because I believe that this section is important: “The Committee is still considering whether sea lice data should be published on a farm-by-farm basis, after taking evidence from the Minister, the aquaculture industry, the wild fisheries sector and other stakeholders. The Committee welcomes the Minister’s commitment to look at this issue as part of the work of the Ministerial Group on Aquaculture if not taken forward in the Bill”. I stress that I hope that any delay in reporting that is introduced in any amendments will reassure the aquaculture industry about commercial confidentiality concerns. I am not convinced that the minister’s position takes us far enough on that. The committee is also concerned about “the current lack of … farm-by-farm data”, but there has been some reassurance on that issue. Across the committee, we are absolutely conscious of the importance of the availability of scientific evidence. The focus in part 2 is of equal importance. I know that other members will look at the management and governance of the district salmon fishery boards. As a committee, we are keen to “establish the principle of improving accountability and transparency” through the bill. The challenges that are faced by small boards should also be taken into account. The disappointment of the coarse fishing sector about the lack of connection is recognised and has been acknowledged by the minister. On one of its visits, the committee was welcomed by Usan Salmon Fisheries Ltd. It is important that the Scottish Government’s review of wild fisheries considers the range of issues that have been raised, not least the weekly close times. It is reassuring that the minister has stated that those are key issues for the forthcoming review, and I hope that the discussions between Government officials and salmon fishery boards on short-term actions will help to resolve what appear to be local concerns. The committee is clear that “good water quality is vital for the shellfish industry”, and I understand that the minister has already set up a working group to work collaboratively to resolve pollution challenges. All members will be aware of the tragedy that took place at Morecambe bay because of illegal cockling. My colleague Graeme Pearson will highlight that issue in relation to the Solway Firth and other parts of Scotland. The committee believes that it is essential that the Scottish Government provide its view of the way forward in helping to break that trade and to tackle the danger that is posed by fast-moving tides to the people who are being exploited.

Does the member agree that the possibility of a delay in the publication of the sea lice data would help with regard to the SSPO’s concerns?

I want to stress something about being a sea trout champion that I did not get time to say in my speech. The serious point is the concern that the sea trout is under even greater threat than the salmon. Jamie McGrigor highlighted that as well. I would like the minister to be aware of that issue.

I seek reassurance that, with its partners, the Scottish Government will look at the possibilities of rolling out that sort of model strategically. I think that the minister highlighted that in his report to the committee.

As the cabinet secretary has outlined, local authorities are carrying out inspection visits to all 229 approved meat-processing premises and 29 cold stores in Scotland. At present, the industry is indeed under great scrutiny. However, in view of the cuts to inspection resources that other members have highlighted and given the need to develop new protocols, can the cabinet secretary reassure the Parliament that there will be a suitably robust framework for future inspections, not just in the light of the present concerns about horsemeat but in a broader context to deal with any further potential meat contamination? What will the review process be?

What additional advice and financial support is the Scottish Government providing to farmers in view of the recent severe weather, particularly with regard to field drainage, which must be tackled in a sustainable way, within guidelines? The weather has particularly impacted on Clyde and Forth valley NFU Scotland members in my region, as well as farmers elsewhere.

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. Can he reassure members about what research funding provision there is for us to move faster towards the low-carbon economy that we are determined to get? Specifically, is the assessment of downstream projects, as discussed in the committee previously, now included in RPP2?

What interim arrangements will there be? I understand that, in NHS Borders and other parts of the south-east and Tayside, the Scottish Government has required the boards to introduce plans to move to a non-training-grade workforce by August. Will the cabinet secretary assure us that families in the Borders will have sufficient out-of-hours paediatric and neonatal care in the meantime?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that an expanded retrofit programme, as proposed by Scottish Labour, would help to tackle fuel poverty, address climate change issues and—going back to the point that the member made about jobs—bring jobs to the local economy?

I thank Rob Gibson, as convener of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, for his wide-ranging remarks at the start of the debate. The continued loss of biodiversity has been called Europe’s “silent crisis”. However, members will be all too aware of the importance of sustaining a viable level of biodiversity—not only in Scottish ecosystems but globally. Ensuring that our ecosystems remain as diverse as possible is essential, not only for environmental reasons but to sustain the Scottish economy, a great deal of which is built on the foundations of our natural environment. As the minister stressed, there is also the intrinsic value of biodiversity. This morning, I heard a nightingale singing on my way to the bus and anyone standing among bluebells in the RSPB reserve at Creetown or beside the Falls of Clyde, near Lanark, or picking fruit from a tree that they have planted, knows that feeling—the pleasure that the natural landscape can bring. In all those contexts, I welcome the publication of the Scottish Government’s consultation on biodiversity, in which respondents raised a number of very important points. As Rob Gibson highlighted, the formation of the Convention on Biological Diversity was based on scientific research that produced “unequivocal evidence” that a fall in species numbers has a profoundly negative effect on ecosystem efficiency. The most striking conclusion found in that body of evidence is: “The impacts of diversity loss on ecological processes might be sufficiently large to rival the impacts of many other global drivers of environmental change.” Climate change caused by unsustainable levels of carbon emission is not the only man-made impact on the environment that we must address. Scottish Environment LINK has urged the Scottish Government to prioritise biodiversity conservation, and I add my voice to that call, as other members have done today. Indeed, the scientific evidence suggests that a high level of biodiversity may help to offset the effects of climate change. In 2010, Parliament took the decision to commit to ambitious targets for reducing carbon emissions. I recognise that biodiversity does not attract the same level of public attention as climate change might, but I argue that a similar commitment must be shown if we are to meet our targets, as other members have also stressed. Ecosystem services also have a great importance to the Scottish economy. According to statistics provided by the Scottish Wildlife Trust, the natural environment contributes roughly £21 billion per annum to Scottish economic output and supports 242,000 jobs. That is by no means a paltry amount, and its significance should not be disregarded. Like Jayne Baxter and Angus MacDonald, I want to encourage more individual and community engagement on biodiversity, which could yield results that are perhaps more immediately recognisable than efforts to reduce climate change. To give a personal example, our Lawson cypress hedge did not survive the bitter cold of two winters past. It was a challenge to dig it out and prepare the ground for the native species hedge—mostly done by my partner, I have to admit—but last weekend we planted blackthorn, hawthorn, wild rose and holly. We look forward, in winters ahead, to seeing birds feasting on the range of colourful berries, not to mention a quick sip of sloe gin. I believe that individual action, when put together, has a major significance, but for that to happen widely we need a national awareness-raising campaign on how we can do that. Biodiversity is one of the 10 topics in the eco-schools programme. In my own school at Braehead, where I worked previously, we investigated the raised peat bog of Braehead Moss that was behind the school. With the input of a local artist, the children made a large tapestry, claiming an animal or plant as their own to depict. Through that, they understood the urgency of protecting the moss. Such experiences feed into collective action, and there are already many community-based projects, as other members have highlighted. I want to highlight a Scottish Wildlife Trust project that has been very proactive in this area in the Nethan Gorge reserve in South Lanarkshire, where the trust works predominantly with unemployed people to give them practical training in conservation work. Access to land for community biodiversity projects, which no member has mentioned specifically so far, is certainly an issue for local communities. However, lateral thinking can often prove its worth. On Monday, I saw that on a visit to Fintry, where the development trust showed me its community orchard, which is planted on a strip of land between the rugby pitch and the road. As highlighted in the consultation, the need for funding is a frequently recurring and utterly vital theme. Members may recall my interest—shared by other members—in preserving bee populations, on which my motion received cross-party support. As Rob Gibson highlighted, as part of our committee’s deliberations we will look at the concerns about neonicotinoids that have been highlighted by the European Union this week. Scottish Environment LINK states: “in order to protect, and where appropriate enhance, the health of the Scottish Marine environment (a Ministerial duty under the Marine Act) we highlight the need for a three pillared approach to marine nature conservation: species conservation, site conservation and wider seas policies and measures”. I am, indeed, a sea trout champion—I must admit shamefacedly that that is not my first choice, but it is an important role for species support that I am pleased to do, and I encourage other members to do the same. It is essential that we develop the theme from the debate and the committee’s inquiry. As the consultation states, we need to define the “roles and responsibilities and timescales for key steps and actions”, so that our EU targets can be met in the future.

13. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports young carers in balancing the demands of schoolwork and caring responsibilities. (S4O-01691)

I thank the minister for that detailed answer. Issues are certainly being taken forward through the Scottish young carers services alliance in relation to support, but there are also headlines in the young carers strategy that recognise the important role of school staff in identifying and supporting young carers, and local authorities’ carers strategies should reflect that. Can the minister tell the Parliament whether there are any plans to monitor those developments during 2013 and check uniformity across local authorities and individual schools? Concern about that has been raised with me.

On communities, I want to raise a specific case—it has already been decided, and I raise it in order to discuss the broader issue. Last week, the Scottish Government reporter dismissed an appeal in relation to a sand and gravel quarry at Overburns farm in the Clyde valley in my region. That was the second application for that development. For the benefit of communities, can the minister shed any light on the issue of serial applications being made for the same site and say whether there are any plans to protect communities from what they have described to me as something that feels like a war of attrition?

Although I agree with previous speakers that the oil and gas industry has been of tremendous economic benefit to Scotland and the UK as a whole, members perhaps will not be surprised that, in my capacity as shadow minister for the environment and climate change, I would like to draw attention to the detrimental impacts fossil fuels have had and will continue to have on the global environment and to pose some questions about long-term strategy. The oil and gas industry will continue to play a significant role in providing employment and attracting investment in Scotland, but one cannot help but recognise that it is a finite resource—in spite of members’ points today. As we are continuously told by the Scottish Government, Scotland is a world leader in renewables technology, and I certainly would not wish to dispute or undermine that claim. That being the case, it seems that we should concentrate more on moving transferable skills to the renewables industry from the oil and gas industry to ensure the long-term health of the Scottish and British economies. As Stewart Stevenson said, we have to map our transition, and I would like to hear more from the minister about that transition and what the plans are for it. Does the Scottish Government’s “Oil & Gas Strategy 2012-2020” sit well with the Scottish Government’s commitment to a low-carbon economy? I am pleased to see that the strategy contains provisions to create opportunities for supply chain companies in the offshore and carbon capture and storage sectors. The increase in oil recovery is very welcome, as the minister highlighted. In the context of climate change, the UK CCS demonstration projects are deeply significant, as highlighted by my colleague Rhoda Grant and others. It is disappointing that the UK Government is cutting funding to those demonstration projects and it might be helpful if the minister could update us on that, especially as one of the projects is to be in the gas sector. One of the more striking elements of the oil and gas strategy is the intention to help expand the oil and gas industry abroad, with Brazil, west Africa and others being cited as recipients of support from Scottish Development International. I believe that the Scottish Government—though no doubt with good intentions—has missed the central point: that we work with other countries to reduce emissions rather than increase them. Indeed, when I spoke to our Minister for Environment and Climate Change on his recent return from the international climate change negotiations at Doha, I was pleased to hear his thoughts on the progress of negotiations and his continuing commitment to reduce carbon emissions in Scotland, so as to set an example to the wider world. How does that ambition sit with increases in oil production in the longer term? Indeed, members will be only too aware that this very chamber recently passed legislation committing the Government to emissions reduction targets under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. Now that we have unfortunately failed to meet the first annual targets for decreasing emissions, I am concerned about the oil and gas industry’s impact on the next annual targets. The contradictory nature of these competing aims must have occurred to the Scottish Government; strengthening the oil industry in the long term and reducing carbon emissions surely cannot sit comfortably together. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee will soon be scrutinising the draft second report on policies and proposals, and many share the view that we need to shift transport modes away from oil and that, as well as cutting fuel poverty and the high demand for oil and gas in house heating, energy efficiency measures will be key to cutting our emissions. In Rhoda Grant’s words, we need to loosen our dependence on carbon in the long term. On the future of fracking, a range of legitimate concerns have been expressed about the expansion of this industry in Scotland and my colleague Claire Baker has lodged a motion that highlights concerns about fracking’s impact on the environment. The extraction process uses a great deal of water, which is not plentiful in some parts of Scotland—not that we would believe it sometimes—or in Britain. Moreover, the UK Government report on fracking failed to consider the potential for groundwater contamination. As things stand, there is a distinct lack of clear guidance for councils on dealing with applications from private companies. The current regulatory regime is cluttered and confusing and communities find it extremely difficult to get represented. As a result, I have backed my colleague Claire Baker’s call for the Scottish Government to introduce national guidelines to provide clarity and to stop the potential for the industry’s rapid expansion without proper scrutiny. I ask the minister to clarify today whether such guidance will be forthcoming for local authorities and, if so, when.

As other members have done, I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on bringing this members’ business debate to the chamber. I thank him and Christina McKelvie for their work as conveners of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on men’s violence against women and children. As a new deputy convener of the group, I hope that I can make a contribution in future. I take the issue extremely seriously, as do all members. I want to take a sideways look at the issue, having just returned from a trip to Thailand. As I was driven through rubber plantations to meet my new in-laws, I recalled a tale that my grandmother told of her niece Jessie from Aberdeen, who married a rubber planter and then returned to his plantation with him to find her life intolerable. She left him and returned to Scotland, only to be told by her relatives here that she should have stayed and made the best of it. How far we have come from those attitudes in Scotland today. I decided to light a candle in Jessie’s memory in the Lana Ram Buddhist temple that we visited on new year’s day with my new son-in-law. I did so to try to shine a light on relationships the world over that are wrongly based on men’s abuse of power over women. The film by Lyndsay Mann that was commissioned by Zero Tolerance to mark 20 years since the first Z campaign in Edinburgh looks at the current focus of Zero Tolerance’s work, which is to effect positive social change here in Scotland. In the film, Evelyn Gillan, a previous director of Zero Tolerance, says: “the value of any legacy is the extent to which people pick up the baton and carry on with it.” It is important that, as members have highlighted, Zero Tolerance is now working in new ways. With my sideways look across the world, I ask myself how much we can share the zero tolerance campaign across the globe in these times of connectivity. On a recent fact-finding visit to Gaza, John Finnie and I heard from a community mental health programme about the high incidence of domestic violence as a result of men turning their anger and frustration at their powerlessness in society on to their families. Support for women and children is essential and yet resources are few. With the support of the Council for European Palestinian Relations, we intend to arrange a visit of young women from Gaza, and we hope to arrange for them to meet young people from the zero tolerance campaign so that links can be made. There is a clear opportunity to support women elsewhere, so we should always look for chances to pick up that baton. We should also have the confidence to speak out about the broader oppression of women by men around the world. We should not be afraid—because of cultural relativism—to say that women have the right to fulfil themselves outside the home through education and in the world of work if they so choose. In my view, the stifling of opportunity for women is also an abuse by males. Alison Johnstone highlighted the case of Malala Yousafzai, the 15-year-old girl who was shot in the head after campaigning for women’s education. That case has had a positive outcome, in that she has recovered, but the recent gang rape of a young paramedic, which Alison Johnstone also highlighted, had a tragic ending. She was left on a road for dead and, after 13 days in hospital, during which she gave accounts of the attack, she died. One Indian professional has called the case the “clash of centuries”. After many years of Government promotion of girls’ education and young women entering the world of work, many men, who have been raised with a sense of entitlement simply because they are male, still believe that women should be restricted to roles as wives and mothers.

Recently in India, tens of thousands of people carried the baton on the streets, and the Indian Government has now acknowledged that violence against women is a national challenge. I ask all members not only to work in Scotland but to find ways in which we can work to support women across the world to have equal rights, today and from now on.

I welcome the opportunity that the debate gives us to explore the long view, and welcome the minister back from the Doha deliberations. I hope that the Labour amendment challenges us all to ask ourselves what we need to do by 2020 and by 2050, and how we can do it in a way that is inclusive and fair for the people of Scotland. This debate enables us to share views and work together to develop them beyond today. I am glad that the minister has accepted our amendment in that spirit. The protracted Doha negotiations gave some grounds for optimism, tempered by the bitter sense of foreboding on many of the critical issues. As the minister said, there was agreement on the renewal of the Kyoto protocols, which were set to expire this month. As the only legally binding treaty on emissions reductions, it is welcome news that 194 countries have signed up. However, one cannot help but be disappointed by the omission of significant potential signatories. Although the EU and a few additional countries, such as Switzerland, have reaffirmed their commitment, it is disappointing that previous signatories, such as Canada and Japan, have decided to opt out at this stage. Although one can understand the reasoning behind this stance, considering that the largest emitters, such as the USA and China, have failed once again to ratify the treaty, the fact remains that the agreement of all of those nations is essential. It is also disappointing that the developing countries are exempt from the protocols. I recognise—as we all do—that the emissions reduction demands must seem a bit rich to countries such as China and India, which have not enjoyed the historical benefits of industrialisation. However, the world is in a new technological age of renewable energy and other technologies, and developed countries must support those who are utilising those options. Omitting such vast and emissions-heavy nations from international accords is surely a dangerous game to play. Like the minister, I welcome the news coming from Doha that the developed countries, including the UK, have reaffirmed their commitment to the provision of long-term financial support to those countries that are still developing. Also like the minister, I will mention the climate justice fund. The Scotland Malawi Partnership “applauds the Scottish Government’s commitment to climate justice in Malawi” and states: “The rural poor are most at risk of food insecurity due to climate change in Malawi. ... it is the poorest and the least complicit in causing such climatic shifts, that face the greatest challenge.” My colleague John Finnie and I have just returned from a trip to Gaza. I ask the minister to consider Gaza City in any future climate justice fund round, to enable residents to put the power in their own hands with the support of small-scale renewables such as household solar technology. I am sure that members will welcome the news coming out of Doha that, in the period leading up to the talks in Durban, governments will undertake a “robust process” to review the long-term 2°C goal. According to the chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, approximately 20 to 30 per cent of species assessed will face extinction if the increase in global warming exceeds the 2°C target. Too regularly, people ask me what they can do individually. Some ask whether there is any point and cannot see how their contribution could make a difference to the seemingly intractable problem—a problem that is occurring by land, sea and air. We can all make a difference in simple ways: by walking children to school, turning down the heat and wearing a jumper or switching off lights in empty rooms. I commend the contributions of individuals, families, communities and businesses throughout Scotland and emphasise the necessity for the Scottish Government to continue to support their efforts—indeed, to develop further opportunities to help, both financially and with advice. I am reassured that it is rarely a young person or a child who asks that question from a sense of feeling overwhelmed by the issue. As a former eco-schools co-ordinator, I might be tempted to say that the green flags that are flying over so many of our schools in Scotland might be the reason. It is in part about a culture change and a confidence issue, although I do not think that it is that simple. I believe that it is also about the sense of solidarity that comes from collective action and the sharing of information, which happens in each eco-school as projects such as energy and water assessments move forward and the children see the results of their actions. Beyond the school context, Scottish Government support provides a very valuable seedcorn and kick-start mechanism for projects. Like-minded people in a wide range of groups from eco-congregations, small rural communities and ethnic minority groups to small towns and many more have been helped through the climate challenge fund to raise awareness and to develop strategies. I hope that the minister will consider the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s request in its budget report to enable economic activity, which would enable so many projects to continue beyond their funding.

I do welcome that and thank the minister for that comment. Business is also of vital importance. The minister recently visited a climate monitor farm in the Borders, near Jedburgh. The Scotch Whisky Association’s actions and the green tourism business scheme also help. The Scottish Government missed the first annual emissions targets, and those must be put into the second report on proposals and policies if we are to have any chance of playing catch-up and retaining our position in the world’s respect. That has been highlighted by many people in non-governmental organisations. Today, I ask us all to reflect on how we can bring about the structural reforms needed to help hasten, at all levels of Government here in Scotland, the changes that we need if we are to continue to be global leaders. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee took a significant step in the mainstreaming of climate change by asking all committees to report on climate change as part of the budget scrutiny process. How valuable that exercise is in reality remains to be seen. The committee also asked that the downstream spending of projects be assessed through the carbon assessment tool, so that we include, for example, not only the building of a road but the traffic that will travel on it. I know that the minister has agreed to look at that difficult assessment process. All political parties, whether in or out of Government and whether at parliamentary or local government level, need to find a shift in spending, which is a challenge in straitened times when every penny is committed. At its simplest, few would say no to safe, segregated cycle routes, but how do we cut something else in a strategic way? Given the challenges faced by local government and the need to meet the duties signed up to in the climate change declaration, it is imperative that we work together at local level, so I am glad to hear that the minister is in dialogue with COSLA.

Perhaps the collective community action that I highlighted earlier can help us all to bring about an incremental change in the process across departments through the land use strategy, the national marine plan and—perhaps most important—the national performance framework, which will give us ways into policy that will be profoundly significant.

Lastly, I hope that the possibility of a complement to GDP that reflects the environmental damage that can happen in Scotland will also lead to a way forward. I move amendment S4M-05186.2, to insert at end: “; commends the actions taken so far by many in this regard; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that sufficient remedial action is taken in the next report on proposals and policies to compensate for missing its first annual emissions reduction targets under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, and calls on the Scottish Government to work closely with local authorities to help them translate Scotland’s Climate Change Declaration into robust and accountable action.”

What Scottish and UK plans are in place to encourage and keep the pressure up on those other nations in the interim?

I take on board Dave Thompson’s points, but can the minister clarify what sustainable development assessment was undertaken during the shaping of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill—bearing in mind the fact that sustainable development takes into account economic, environmental and social issues?

Along with other members, I pay tribute to our fishing fleets around Scotland, which work in frequently challenging conditions and have often contributed much to our conservation efforts on the coasts around Scotland. Today, members from across the political spectrum have voiced concerns about the state of Europe’s shared fisheries. I hope that it is safe to say that we are all in broad agreement, but a number of issues must be addressed if we are to achieve a sustainable and economically viable environment for our fishing fleet and fisheries for future generations. All these issues must be considered in the context of biodiversity and climate change—as Clare Adamson and others stressed—which is an essential consideration if we are to achieve good environmental status by 2020, as laid out in the EU’s marine strategy framework directive. That directive may be one of the better aspects of the EU to have been mentioned today, given that some of the other proposals are, I agree, very challenging to the ability of Scotland’s fisheries to move forward. A number of the important issues have been raised today, but I draw particular attention to the Labour amendment’s request that the Scottish Government publish the terms of the UK concordat on fisheries management, which we on this side of the chamber believe would be helpful at this stage. However, in my closing remarks I will concentrate on four main points that I believe are central to the on-going European negotiations, in addition to the points that the cabinet secretary stressed about science, support for fishing communities and tackling discards. First, like many members who have already covered this issue, I want to stress the point—without labouring it too much, I hope—about the intended cod recovery plan. I join the cabinet secretary in his trepidation over the impending plan. Like many members, I agree that the proposed 20 per cent cut in quotas and the cut in the annual days at sea are likely to have a profoundly negative impact on the state of the cod fishery. That concern has been voiced by many stakeholders, including the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation. Clare Adamson also stressed the obscenity of discards in a world of food poverty. From previous experience with mixed fisheries, we can expect that imposing such quota cuts will merely result in increased discards. I know that members will agree with me that the practice of discarding dead fish is not in any way helpful and must be prevented; it is simply unnecessary and counterproductive. I know that the cabinet secretary will do all that he can to prevent the plan from being put in place. The cabinet secretary stressed that some of the EU posturing was “self-indulgent legal bickering”, which must not prevail. The bad compromises of Brussels were also pointed out by Angus MacDonald. Dennis Robertson highlighted how failure to reach agreement will have an impact on the processing industry, which our amendment also mentions. Graeme Dey highlighted the fears of the young people whom he met in Peterhead this summer about the future of both our fishing industry and our processing industry, which I know members of all parties are concerned about. My colleague Elaine Murray pointed out how the delay in the negotiations endangers the maritime and fisheries fund, which could also affect fragile coastal communities. I add my voice to the unanimous call for a way forward on the mackerel negotiations, in spite of the apparent misunderstanding of Tavish Scott, who seems to have misinterpreted the position of the Labour benches. As members are well aware, the continuing dispute with Iceland and the Faroe Islands must be resolved; otherwise, what is an already rapidly depleting fishery will be in danger of being beyond recovery. Those countries’ decision to grant themselves quotas that, according to the Scottish Parliament information centre, exceed the scientific advice by more than 40 per cent, is extreme folly. Frankly, that is simply unacceptable coming from two supposedly mature and developed countries. The loss of Scottish mackerel’s MSC status, through no fault of our own, is simply wrong and unjust. If I understand him correctly, the cabinet secretary has indicated that he is not willing to resume talks until the representatives of Iceland and the Faroe Islands are prepared to negotiate properly and to move away from their unilaterally declared quotas. Labour agrees in principle with that stance. Sensible negotiations are certainly the most desirable way forward, but, if that does not happen, it is imperative that sanctions are enforced. We all know that sanctions are not a risk-free solution, but we must make a stand if necessary. As members will be aware, quotas and days at sea are but one aspect of the efforts to ensure that Scotland has sustainable and economically viable fisheries for the future. Although those provisions are important, I believe, along with many of my colleagues, that technical measures—specifically, modernisation of technical gear—are essential to the functioning of shared fisheries. We heard in the cabinet secretary’s statement last week that the new gear that the North Sea prawn fleet is using has resulted in far less unwanted catch. That is a prime example of innovative and flexible fishing practices that other member states should recognise and, if possible, replicate. Although I am sure that that is already in the cabinet secretary’s mind, I call on him to pursue that policy line in the remaining stages of the negotiations. Rhoda Grant stressed the need for fair management so that crew and staff are not put in the impossible situation of not knowing from week to week whether boats will be going out to sea. Those specific points bring me on to a more general point about EU fisheries policy. The expected failure of the cod recovery scheme; the breakdown in mackerel negotiations; and the lack of technical information sharing demonstrate the importance of a general reform of the common fisheries policy. It is hopeless, not just for the people involved, but for the countries in which fishing is an important industry, that people annually have to negotiate through the night. That must end. We wish the cabinet secretary well with the negotiations this time, but let us hope that they are the last of such negotiations. As we all know, the common fisheries policy has been in place for a number of years, but it does not seem to have resulted in the coherent Europe-wide fisheries policy that was intended. Frankly, the CFP has merely resulted in a tedious and unproductive process going backwards and forwards between member states. I agree with the cabinet secretary and with the many members who have stressed the point that a greater emphasis on regionalisation is essential. That would allow us properly to take advantage of the various forms of expertise in European countries, particularly ours. Margaret McDougall was right to emphasise that local knowledge is essential. In the context of a broad Europe-wide fisheries policy, local groups and fishermen must have the flexibility to make decisions, as long as those are based on science and take sustainability into careful consideration. I believe that all members would agree that the current round of negotiations is an ideal opportunity for discussions about possible reform. The current policy of centralisation has proved unfit for purpose. I urge the cabinet secretary to redouble his efforts in calling for discussions on reform, so that we ensure that the stocks in Europe’s waters are properly managed for current and future generations. We in the Labour Party wish the cabinet secretary well with the negotiations next week.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to the development of employment across all ages in rural areas. (S4O-01570)

As the cabinet secretary knows, age is one of the nine protected characteristics in the Equality Act 2010. Can he say what assessment the Scottish Government has made with regard to the development of support for rural employment specifically related to age? For instance, what resources have been committed to the development of apprenticeship schemes and transferable skills for training older people in their communities?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

As convener of the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on carers, I am glad to have the opportunity to speak about this important bill. I hope that I will shed some light on the carers’ perspective and put down some markers for the future. I have listened carefully to the views of kinship carers, carers and young carers through, for example, the Midlothian kinship carers group. This Friday is carers rights day 2012, the theme for which is getting help in tough times. The Princess Royal Trust Lanarkshire Carers Centre is holding a drop-in day in my regional office, and I know that other members will support the theme that carers should know what their rights are. That is only part of the story; the other part is ensuring that carers have rights and respect across Scotland. As highlighted in “Caring Together: The Carers Strategy for Scotland 2010-2015”, carers should be seen as “equal and expert partners” in the provision of care. The cross-party group on carers has talked through and fought on many issues. Many members have supported carers’ concerns, not least Bill Kidd and Johann Lamont, who are previous conveners of the cross-party group. The bill will provide local authorities with the power to provide such support, rather than a statutory duty to do so. At present, a discretionary power is the only workable option, because of the uncertainty over costs and many other issues. However, it is disappointing that the Scottish Government has had years to cost the implications of a duty. I ask the minister to consider bringing the issue back in future and to address the possibility of that in his closing remarks. As convener of the cross-party group on carers, I challenge all local authorities to provide the high-quality services that are needed without a specific duty to do so in the bill. There is already good practice in some local authorities. One key recommendation of the 2010 Carers Scotland report, “Sick, tired and caring: The impact of unpaid caring on health and long term conditions”, was for free or concessionary access to leisure services, as many carers found the cost prohibitive. Not all local authorities specify the carers allowance in the range of eligible benefits. Glasgow does so, whereas North Lanarkshire does not. That simple and not very costly support for carers should surely be available Scotland-wide. I turn to the issue of carers employment and associated training. In many situations, people want only small amounts of care, such as two hours a week to drive a person for whom they care to an activity and home again. As it can be difficult to employ someone for such a small number of hours, particularly in isolated, rural or island communities, I am sure that members will agree that in many circumstances close relatives are ideally placed to do that type of work. With high-level disabilities such as autism, the advantages of having close relatives as carers can be valuable. People with autism require their carers to show consistency and understanding of their routines, and family members can be well placed to provide that. I hope that members will join me in welcoming the provision on that in the bill. Training for unpaid carers should be supported by local authorities. I look forward to hearing from the minister what the clear guidance will be on the issue. Can the minister also confirm that any provision of self-directed support to an individual carer will be kept separate from the provision to the person whom they care for, as that is crucial for the wellbeing of carers? My colleague Jackie Baillie’s amendment to leave out section 16 did not receive the required support but I, along with many carers organisations, will look carefully at what seems to be a rather last-minute agreement by the minister to introduce regulations on the issue. I hope that the consultation on that will be produced in the near future.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Just for the record, I have not used that title for a very long time because I do not believe—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. That is not the title by which I wish to be addressed. I have not used it for many years, since I became an adult, which was rather a long time ago. Thank you. What does the member think about the fact that, in the press release that we were all party to, Mr Flanagan went on to say: “Now that the true extent of the cuts are no longer in dispute, we would argue that before decisions are taken about future spending on Further Education there should be an extended period of discussion during which the voices of those most closely involved in the provision and receipt of college education - the staff and students - are clearly heard.” Would the member like to comment on that?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it will take to improve cycling infrastructure. (S4O-01511)

What commitments has the Scottish Government made to ensure that segregated cycle paths are included in all new transport infrastructure, whether it be rail or road? A lot of research shows that a journey culture change can come about only with the creation of safe cycleways.

I welcome the opportunity to lead the debate and I wish, in so doing, to record my thanks to the save our Shambellie campaign and to the members who have signed my motion, and to acknowledge the representatives who have got behind the campaign at local, Scotland and United Kingdom levels. The issue strikes at the heart of our aspiration to celebrate Scotland’s rich cultural history and to ensure that it can reach and connect with as many people as possible. This evening, I want to talk about why I believe the museum’s closure runs counter to that aspiration; about the interdependence of the tourism industry in Dumfries and Galloway; and about the need to have a full and open consultation to try and find a positive solution. The proposals to close the national museum of costume arose somewhat out of the blue in early October. National Museums Scotland has told us that its decision has been influenced “by the twin financial pressures of reduced public funding and reduced income” from other sources. Members are all too aware of the financial situation that the country finds itself in, as are our constituents. We all know that difficult decisions have to be made, but the Scottish Parliament has—especially when those decisions are made by organisations that rely on public money for their existence—a duty to analyse them. I do not believe that the answer to balancing the books of NMS lies in the budgetary equivalent of sacrificing a limb. Among the aims of National Museums Scotland is to ensure that its collections reach and connect with as many people as possible, as I said. Quite rightly, part of that process involves partnership working with local museums and groups across the country. Although I welcome and encourage that valuable aspect of NMS’s work, it is not the whole story. Alongside the cultural value of the collection it houses, I believe that Shambellie house has a physical value as a permanent anchor for NMS’s work outside the central belt. Such anchors against centralisation should be encouraged, not withdrawn. We are told that the cost per visitor stands at £23.06. That figure counts the 9,500 visitors who visit the museum itself, but ignores the further estimated 6,250 estimated annual visitors to the shop and cafe. With those people included, the public subsidy comes to £13.93 per visitor. As the save our Shambellie campaign has pointed out, recent investment in the relaunch of the museum of flight in East Lothian and the museum of rural life in East Kilbride has seen visitor numbers rally. A similar approach at Shambellie could surely boost visitor numbers and income, thereby demonstrating that the site is viable. The campaign brings together strong voices in the region's tourism sector: the Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce, Destination Dumfries and Galloway and the Association of Dumfries and Galloway Accommodation Providers. The sector brings in around £270 million a year to the local economy, supporting almost 6,000 jobs directly and a further 1,300 indirectly. All three organisations in the SOS campaign emphasise that, although the 15,000 visitors that Shambellie attracts might represent a small number relative to the numbers of people who visit other NMS properties, they are hugely important to the region’s tourism sector. Those businesses and jobs do not exist in isolation; there is a strong interdependence between the visitor attractions, the markets, the cafes, the bars and the accommodation. James Wilson, a constituent who operates self-catering accommodation in Rockcliffe on the Solway coast, wrote to me to highlight his efforts to promote Dumfries and Galloway. He said: “It is absolutely vital for small businesses like ours that Dumfries and Galloway has a diverse and quality offer for culture and the arts. We have been long term supporters of the Museum at Shambellie House, regularly bringing friends and family to visit, and recommending the facility to our visitors.” Gordon Mann, chief executive of the Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce and chair of Destination Dumfries and Galloway, who is in the gallery tonight, has stated: “Closure now following one of the toughest tourism seasons the region has had would be a body blow to the industry sending out all the wrong signals.” Despite the impact that closure could have on the wider tourism industry in the region, the voice of the businesses that stand to be affected has not had a chance to be heard. That lack of public consultation is a key weakness in the case for closure, and I am keen to see National Museums Scotland revisit it. Earlier this month, I had the opportunity, with other South Scotland members of the Scottish Parliament, to meet the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, Fiona Hyslop, and I enjoyed what I think was a constructive discussion on the issue. Following that meeting, the MSPs who were in attendance wrote jointly to the board of NMS to add our weight to the calls from Dumfries and Galloway Council and Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce for a decision to be postponed for 12 months to enable wider engagement with local communities and businesses. That would give NMS time to reflect on the views of those who stand to be affected by the proposals and it would provide a breathing space in which to consider options. A wider consultation would allow different organisational and management structures to be fully explored. For example, a problem that has been identified with Shambellie house is the lack of physical space for the full costume collection. Given the size constraints, could not there be a case for retaining the site but using it for a permanent schedule of rolling exhibitions? There are also opportunities to expand the use of the house as a picturesque location for private events. During our discussions with the cabinet secretary, I was heartened by her acknowledgement of legitimate concerns, particularly in relation to public consultation. The issue has attracted support from across the chamber and I welcome the cross-party efforts to make progress. I also welcome the work that has been done by my colleagues on Dumfries and Galloway Council, Tom McAughtrie and Davie Stitt, and by my Westminster colleague Russell Brown, whose web campaign has attracted support. Finally, I welcome Alex Fergusson’s amendment to my motion, to which I was pleased to add my support. Shambellie is an important part of the tourism landscape in Dumfries and Galloway, and there is real support for safeguarding its future. The challenge now is to turn the warm words into action.

Further to Christine Grahame’s question, what discussions has the Scottish Government had with local authorities and the police and fire services on its flood prevention programme, particularly in the Borders, which are part of the South Scotland region, which I represent?

What is being done to educate the public and involve communities and schools, such as the school in which I used to work near Braehead Moss, in relation to lowland raised peat bog conservation? Lowland raised bogs are a rare and threatened habitat and their management helps with flood prevention and in many other areas, including biodiversity and carbon storage.

I, too, wish the new minister well in what will be a challenging role. I am pleased that members of the Parliament have gathered to discuss the important issue of Malawian development. I am a member of the cross-party group on Malawi, although I have not yet had the opportunity to visit the country; I hope to do that in the future. I draw attention to the good work that the Scottish Government has done to help Malawi to achieve its millennium development goals. As the minister and many members here will know, the Malawi development programme, which forms part of the international development fund, has been instrumental in improving the quality of life in communities around Malawi. I am sure that ministers would agree that such vital initiatives should continue to be supported, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. I was pleased to hear the minister’s announcements today in that regard. As a member of the Scottish Co-operative parliamentary group, I draw attention to the almost £400,000 that has been allocated to the Co-operative College’s work to support co-operatives in Malawi. That will undoubtedly continue to help small-scale farmers to work together to forge a better living for themselves and their families in challenging conditions. The co-operative model is vital for groups of women who are setting up businesses in Malawi. I am pleased to say that there are prime examples of women-run co-operatives, which I hope can be replicated throughout Malawi, possibly with Scottish Government support. For example, the Angelo Goveya community co-operative—I hope that I pronounced that correctly—helps women to build their own low-cost houses by providing them with the loans that they need for work to begin. So far, it has been able to help with the building of 465 new houses, and it aims to expand the project. I also highlight the issue of microfinance in Malawi more generally, and the possibilities for that. There are a number of co-ops that focus on the production of goods, such as Mbawemi, which sells honey produced by its own bees, and Kwitha, which produces textiles. Indeed, much of Kwitha’s profits go towards supporting orphans. I am sure that members will be pleased to hear that. I welcome the financial support that is being directed towards helping women to become more involved in leadership roles throughout Malawi. The Active Learning Centre’s empowering women as local leaders project, which aims to equip Malawian women with the skills and knowledge that they will need to be successful candidates in 2014, should act as an example for further investment. As we all know, Joyce Banda recently became Malawi’s first woman president. As Patricia Ferguson said, her support for maternity access has done much to improve the care that pregnant mothers receive. That is just one example of how much she has done for women’s issues over the years. However, there is still a great deal of work to be done to ensure that women in Malawi can enjoy the same rights and privileges as their male counterparts. This time last year, I attended and spoke at an inspiring event on gender equality and female empowerment that was part of the global community links series funded by DFID. The event highlighted the challenges that are faced both in Scotland and in Malawi by women who want to represent their communities. That opportunity to share experiences was valued by Scottish and Malawian women alike. To further promote equality, the Scotland Malawi Partnership gender equality forum was established earlier this year. It aims to raise the profile of gender equality as a cross-cutting theme across Scotland-Malawi links. At its first meeting, it was agreed that the most important equality issues in Malawi centre on education, leadership and economic empowerment. Although the situation is gradually improving, consultations by the SMP have found that there are still significant obstacles to equality. It has been found that cultural values as well as religion have been drastically holding back progress towards gender equality. Maureen Watt highlighted the educational challenges that are faced by women in Malawi. I have been made aware of a number of troubling statistics through the research of Lucy Philpott, a masters student who has been working on gender-related policy in Malawi. According to her research, girls make up 51 per cent of primary enrolments, but few girls make the transition to secondary school. According to the World Bank, only 27 per cent make it to secondary school and even fewer access tertiary education. Sadly, only 5 per cent of Malawian women have passed the Malawi school certificate of education or MSCE, which is the national end-of-school exam. According to that research, there are a number of factors that act as barriers to girls entering education. Siobhan McMahon highlighted some of them from her personal experience, but the research shows that they include poverty, the lack of girl-friendly spaces, harassment, gender-based violence, parental attitudes and the lack of female role models, although I am sure that the presidency of Joyce Banda will help with the last of those. I stress the importance of sensitivity in tackling those often cultural hindrances in projects that are carried out by the Scottish Government. I hope that the cabinet secretary will say something about the cultural barriers in his closing speech. I make a final point on equality issues. Of course, gender is not the only aspect of equality, and I welcome the news that Malawi has suspended its laws against same-sex relationships pending a decision on whether to repeal the law. Lastly, I touch briefly on climate justice. I welcome the Scottish Government’s call for funding, which focuses on African countries including Malawi. As members have pointed out, Malawi has few natural resources of its own, so it is vital that opportunities for communities to develop renewable energy are supported. I hope that the cabinet secretary can reassure me that the two secondees whom the Scottish Government has funded recently will support small-scale community projects for empowerment for Malawians in every sense of the word. Our partnership with Malawi is strong. The continuing focus on Malawi is essential across civic society, Government and all our communities.

I thank Adam Ingram for securing the debate, which gives us the opportunity to celebrate the life and works of William Murdoch. He was fittingly dubbed “The Scot Who Lit the World” by Janet Thomson in her book of that name, which I will certainly now read. I thank the member for bringing alive the life of William Murdoch so brightly for us today. It was quite inspiring. As we all know, he was a brilliant figure whose work and innovations played a significant part in the industrial revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries. Of course, he hailed from Lugar in Ayrshire, and I am always happy to celebrate the achievements of one of South Scotland’s sons. Among Murdoch’s achievements was the first working model of the steam carriage—or road locomotive, as I understand he preferred to call it—in 1784. Murdoch’s innovative idea was to design a three-wheeled vehicle about a foot in height, with, placed between the two larger back wheels, an engine and boiler that had a spirit lamp beneath it to heat the water, and a tiller at the front to turn the smaller front wheel. Murdoch was able to build on the cruder design of engineers such as Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot to design the more efficient model that I have just described. By building that model, he had the honour of creating the first man-made machine that was capable of moving around completely under its own power. The harnessing of steam power cannot fairly be attributed to one inventor alone, but William Murdoch certainly played a major role in developing a technology that would power the whole industrial world. Indeed, his employer James Watt—another Scot—also played a part in the development of steam power, but is much more celebrated than this modest man was and is. He also built on Murdoch’s design by developing a reciprocating engine that was capable of powering a wheel. As members will be aware, the steam carriage was not Murdoch’s most famous invention; he is better known for his 1792 invention of the gas light, as I found out yesterday, which replaced lighting that used oil and tallow. In that sense, he lit the world from his house in Redruth in Cornwall, which was the first in the world to be lit by gas. In my capacity as shadow minister for environment and climate change, I am not accustomed to celebrating the burning of gas, but I will forgive Mr Murdoch this time. After all, his method of lighting was far cleaner and more efficient than earlier methods and I am sure that he would, were he alive today, be at the forefront of sustainable energy design. There is an air of, if not tragedy, then perhaps bad luck in Murdoch’s inventing career. It seems that he was not able to gain full recognition for his inventions through time. He failed to follow up his steam carriage invention, having been dissuaded from pursuing the project further by his employers, so he left further development of the device to other engineers. Patenting of inventions by employers is perhaps a lesson for the whole world and it seems ruthless to us today. He also failed to patent his gas lighting system, because he was advised that it would not make commercial sense. His idea was built on by Friedrich Winzer, who was a German inventor and the person who patented coal gas lighting, in 1804. That is unfortunate, but I am delighted to have heard that William Murdoch received a gold medal, and I am sure that he would have been happy to learn that he has been given some small recognition in the chamber today. I hope that our highlighting the achievements that he brought to the industrial revolution will serve as an inspiration to today’s men and women inventors in South Scotland and far beyond.

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with National Museums Scotland about the potential closure of the national museum of costume, which is vital to the local economy of Dumfries and Galloway in my region? That museum is part of a strong network involving the area’s tourism infrastructure, and its closure would be a serious loss to the local economy.

I highlight to the cabinet secretary that I have received a number of representations about urban and rural cycling issues and infrastructure. On that basis, and as I am a member of the cross-party group on cycling, I ask whether the Scottish Government intends to follow up the proposal to invest £1.32 billion in active travel over the next 11 years, as set out in the report on proposals and policies.

I welcome the minister’s remarks about charter trains on the basis of the cross-party discussions that we have had. How does Transport Scotland plan to ensure the accessibility of all stations for bus users, pedestrians and cyclists?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for allowing the intervention. Can he clarify whether that part of the report was written by me? Also, that report was an attempt to have an honest and clear debate about the future and about the alternatives for defence. It was done by a wide-ranging group of people, including the STUC and some eminent academics, some time ago.

I highlight the recent Citizens Advice Scotland energy briefing, which says that the Scottish Government and local authorities might be able to help with rural fuel poverty by looking at the crisis loans that are provided, particularly in view of off-grid issues, such as the fact that oil suppliers often want a £300 minimum order before they will deliver.

Although I acknowledge the issues around the electricity companies, does the member agree that if the welfare reform process that is going through the Westminster Parliament recognised the benefits that people need, we would not have to deal with people who have to face making a choice between fuel and food?

Will the Scottish Government look at crisis loans for high energy costs, as suggested by Citizens Advice Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

In the context of adults challenged by dyslexia, I want to highlight that the motion refers to an employer’s toolkit. I very much hope that Mark McDonald agrees with me that it would be helpful were the Scottish Government to look at that. I also want briefly to praise the Scottish Parliament—for once—in that it leads by example and has processes in place to support employees with dyslexia, of which there are indeed some in the Parliament.

As I am sure the minister will acknowledge, there are some missed targets in the present report on proposals and policies. How will they be accounted for in the new RPP, which has not yet been announced? Will he commit to including downstream emissions in the carbon assessment tool for future budgets in order to get a realistic picture of emissions across departments and to highlight the sense of collective responsibility to which he referred in his statement in, for instance, transport policy decisions?

Before I speak about Gigha, I ask the chamber to join me in paying respects to Andrew Riddell, who died this week. Andrew, a tenant farmer of Peaston farm in East Lothian, made a strong contribution to the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association. He leaves a young family, to whom I am sure we all send our condolences. Impressions formed on a brief visit to Gigha more than 20 years ago of a beautiful but quite desolate island are in sharp and happy contrast to those created when I arrived on the island with my colleagues on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee only this May. Both times the weather was fine and the sand below was white when we saw the bottom through the aquamarine water as we docked. However, this time, the visit quickly spoke of a vibrant and forward-looking community running its own future. The words on the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust website are true. It states that the island is going “from strength to strength with a growing population that is sustainably developing its local economy.” Committee members stayed in a welcoming community-owned hotel and had a dram or two. We visited the community-owned gardens at Achamore and saw the dancing ladies, to which other members have referred. We tasted delicious local food and visited the primary school, which has an increasing school roll. We met young families who have come to make their future on Gigha and we also heard of on-going smallholding creation. Other members have spoken of the challenges of the new housing, much of which is affordable and sustainable. The master plan and design guidance process involves the whole community. People who would otherwise not have been able to do so have been able to come from the mainland and stay on Gigha. It sounds like nirvana but, as Mike MacKenzie highlighted, there are always challenges, whoever owns the land. However, the point of those challenges is that the land is owned by the community. As a result of all the hard work and the hard decisions that have been made, the vision of inspiring others and taking the community with them has become a reality. It was pointed out by the people on the Gigha trust and by people in the community that when there is an opportunity for a buyout, it can often be the case that islanders—or, indeed, people on the mainland—can be somewhat sceptical. Islanders on Gigha were inspired by a visit to Eigg, where people had already become community owners of their island. They were also strongly supported by Highlands and Islands Enterprise. David Stewart highlighted that funding—both funding at the start and on-going funding—can be a challenge. Last week, when the committee questioned Professor James Hunter and Dr Alison Elliott, who are members of the land reform review group, I was eager to hear how the group planned to engage with other communities across Scotland. Professor Hunter highlighted that in Scotland we have “one of the most concentrated patterns of land ownership in Europe.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1117.] I was interested to hear the word “release” used. The opportunities for community empowerment are chances all communities should have, whether they are rural, urban, ex-mining or coastal, and no matter where they are—whether they are in the north, in my own region in the south or wherever. I specifically asked the witnesses how young people could be engaged in the process. The answer was through Young Scot. Scots from all backgrounds and all parts of Scotland must be involved in the process. On Gigha’s website, the children of Gigha have wonderful paintings, which are all sunny and bright. Although I know that the weather is not always bright and sunny on Gigha, the paintings reflect the incredible optimism of the community. I congratulate them on their decade of community ownership.

Does the minister agree that HIE’s social remit might be developed in South Scotland, for which he is a member, to give support throughout Scotland?

Will Stuart McMillan give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

We lodged the amendment to highlight the fact that many communities in the Highlands and in rural and remote areas live on the edge—as highlighted in the Carnegie Trust report that was published this week—and need specific support for their rural businesses and social enterprises. We do not in any way want to detract from the issue of support for the future of our environmentally sustainable farming.

Does the member agree that, as well as our increasingly successful exports in the food and drink sector, sustainability, as highlighted in Claire Baker’s members’ business debate on the Fife diet and the sustainability of local growers, which the new minister attended, is also extremely important for our rural communities?

As we near the end of the debate, I want to focus on part of the CAP reform explanatory memorandum on the European Commission’s draft regulations on CAP direct payments. I am sure that I hear sighs from members—not least from Stewart Stevenson, who I am sure has been subjected to many long meetings. I promise not to take long and I ask members for their forbearance, because the issue reminds us of the context. The Commission says, in its explanatory memorandum on the proposal for a regulation on the financing, management and monitoring of the CAP: “agriculture and rural areas are being called upon to step up their efforts to meet the ambitious climate and energy targets and biodiversity strategy that are part of the Europe 2020 agenda. Farmers, who are together with foresters the main land managers, will need to be supported in adopting and maintaining farming systems and practices that are particularly favourable to environmental and climate objectives because market prices do not reflect the provision of such public goods. It will also be essential to best harness the diverse potential of rural areas and thus contribute to inclusive growth and cohesion.” Rob Gibson highlighted Rio+20, biodiversity and climate change. Subsidy will surely continue to be necessary to support the public good in agriculture. Graeme Dey highlighted the fact that 20 per cent of greenhouse gases come from agriculture, so a shift in emphasis is fundamental. Stewart Stevenson highlighted the need to do more about climate change in relation to forestry and peatlands. Of course, food production is also, as many members have said, at the heart of CAP reform. How do we ensure that we correctly balance development of our food and drink exports with the imperative of facilitating connections between growers and local communities so that they can access fresh and affordable local produce? I want to highlight the importance of the land use strategy in setting the context for Scotland for CAP reforms. Last week, I attended an event that was held in Parliament by Scotland’s Futures Forum, in collaboration with Scottish Natural Heritage, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and the Scottish Government. The event was entitled, “Rethinking Wellbeing.” The seminar, which was about thinking about the environment differently, looked at why the environment is treated as a separate category, and it examined the role it plays in the quality of individual and community life. Those issues must underpin our rural future if we are to make it sustainable. I will now move on to the specifics. It was reassuring to me, as a relatively new member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, that Jim Paice seemed to recognise the specific Scottish solutions that we need for pillar 1’s three sections on greening. The new minister of state must continue that approach. Are there tensions between farmers and the environment movement on ecological focus areas? Perhaps not. The Scottish Wildlife Trust states that the greening measures that are proposed by the Commission have the greatest potential to deliver environmental benefit, especially EFAs. We argue that many farmers are doing much to support biodiversity, and that the present action to support that should be included in future arrangements. Mapping is a worry, as was highlighted by Margaret McDougall. We want to work with the Scottish Government to consider how that worry can be addressed. She highlighted the new entrants issue, too, and the cabinet secretary referred to new entrants meetings—I believe that one took place a fortnight ago. Balance is needed in terms of how soon the move from historic payments to area-based payments takes place. From the new entrants’ perspective, that—understandably—cannot come soon enough. Will the cabinet secretary consider an on-going national reserve to help address their problems? For the farming businesses that stand to lose payments in the long term, the lead-in period must be fair, as has been highlighted by NFUS. NFUS has also highlighted the necessity for regional payment—an issue that I highlighted in my previous speech about CAP reform. It has stated that: “Scotland has the most diverse farming in Europe.” Scottish Labour supports that plea, as we support the request for an “early window for payments”. Will the cabinet secretary outline his present thinking on those issues, and on the concerns that have been highlighted by tenant farmers, and which were raised by my colleague Claire Baker, about the possible unintended consequences of Alyn Smith MEP’s amendment about slipper farmers? NFUS further states: “It is the EU’s proposal of converging payments through pillar 2 (based on objective rather than historic criteria) that will significantly improve the amount of money that Scotland has to spend on rural development measures.” Stewart Stevenson highlighted the economic multiplier of farming. In our view, CAP and SRDP commitments and priorities stretch across Government departments, into other areas in which there are rural commitments, including health. Beyond that—to take up James Kelly’s point—connections with urban Scotland, including processing plants, need to be made. Scottish Natural Heritage commissioned the “Scottish Recreation Survey: Annual summary report 2011”, which was published this week and highlights that walking is the favourite outdoor pastime of the people of Scotland. That might seem to be an obscure point to make, but we need to think about where people like to walk and how we can ensure that their enjoyment connects with the countryside in a real way. One way of doing that is to address the concern of Jonathan Wordsworth of Archaeology Scotland about “why the historic environment and other landscape concerns are not integrated in a holistic agri-environment programme in Scotland.” Another priority that is close to my heart—as is evidenced by what I am wearing on my lapel—is saving Scotland’s red squirrels, which are an iconic species. Beyond the red squirrel campaign, the Scottish Wildlife Trust would like 50 per cent of SRDP funds for agri-environment and climate measures “to be coherent with the agenda of making CAP deliver public benefit”. At last week’s meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, the cabinet secretary expressed the view that the SRDP might have to be more targeted. He said: “To be perfectly frank, I think that we need to make some significant and substantial changes to the rural development programme ... I am up for carrying out radical surgery on the SRDP of the future.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 19 September 2012; c 1087-8.] As other members have pointed out, the SCVO has stated that: “Less than 15% of the current SRDP budget was available to rural communities and small non-farm enterprises. This proportion should rise significantly in the next SRDP to promote social inclusion, poverty reduction and a wider range of economic development initiatives.” Dave Stewart highlighted the need for support for fragile communities. That is borne out by the findings of the Carnegie UK Trust in “Future Directions in Rural Development—Executive Summary”, which was also published this week, which “identifies the risks of leaving unequal rural communities to their own devices and the importance of an ‘enabling state’ supporting communities to reach their full potential.” Of course the SRDP cannot be all things to all people, but I am sure that in his dialogues and deliberations on the criteria for the new programme, the cabinet secretary will consider the essence of Scottish Labour’s amendment, as well as ensuring that there are synergies with other complex developments, such as tenancy issues, land reform, empowering communities and rural connectivity. Concerns have been expressed by the woodland expansion advisory group and others about the need for seamlessness in the future SRDP. My colleague Graeme Pearson highlighted the concern about the complexity of the SRDP application process. It is complex enough for land managers; how much more complex must community groups find it. I hope that the cabinet secretary and his department will make every effort to simplify the application process for the new SRDP and to support a specialist advisory service.

Scottish Labour will try to assist the cabinet secretary in working to avoid the problems that were created for many land and community-based rural businesses by the gap in SRDP funding between the two most recent rounds. I hope that the same will not happen when we move to the next programme. Although we wish the cabinet secretary well in the EU negotiations, we will certainly hold him and his team to account when we feel that that is necessary.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to speak in this debate on the green bus fund, which is just one part of the complex jigsaw that is the strategy for our low-carbon economy. In a small way, the fund will help with emissions reductions and will contribute to the targets that were set in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. However, as members have highlighted, transport currently accounts for an estimated 25 per cent of emissions in Scotland, while buses contribute only 3 to 5 per cent of road transport emissions. I understand that the fund is provided by the Scottish Government through the European state-aid framework. We hear that, in the recently announced third tranche of the fund, the grants to successful bidders will be for up to 80 per cent of the price differential between a hybrid bus and a conventional bus. Hybrid buses produce 30 per cent fewer emissions, so that will certainly help to deal with the rising emissions from buses and coaches, which I understand have increased by 45 per cent since 1970. The cut in fuel use should also be recognised. In South Scotland, where distances are large, Henderson Travel has benefited and now has six hybrid buses out of a total fleet of 48. This week, John Henderson stated that the buses use about 30 per cent less fuel on suburban and rural routes and 50 per cent less on urban routes, thereby reducing CO2 emissions and encouraging environmentally aware passengers out of cars and on to buses. Companies are making a contribution through appropriate company policies. John Henderson has said that “To minimise fuel usage we operate smaller, more economical vehicles which are speed limited, we train drivers to drive efficiently.” Another reason why the fund is welcome is that it helps to cut air pollution. That is a particular issue in some of our cities, and it has a negative health impact, as the minister said and Gordon MacDonald stressed. The “East Ayrshire 4 business” web page tells us: “The scheme will provide a fresh incentive to operators to purchase eco-friendly vehicles for their fleet, as well as help stimulate demand for green technology in Scotland.” However, as part of the determination to get travellers out of cars and on to public transport, we must recognise and act on the essence of the Labour amendment, which is that affordability and accessibility are essential. Early this morning, I crossed Edinburgh by bus for £1.40. However, I have had many letters from constituents in South Scotland about the expense of travelling by bus on rural routes. To give one example, the return fare on the bus from Law to Hamilton recently rose from £2.35 to £4.60. For a low-income family, that is a serious rise. Also, to be blunt, in many places timetables are being pared. For instance, the service that goes from Lanark to Hamilton via Crossford, from where people will want to get to work in Lanark or Hamilton, has gone from an hourly service to a one-and-a-half-hourly service. As we all know, other rural places have no bus at all—hybrid or otherwise. Last week, I supported a Unite rally against the Scottish Government cuts that are highlighted in our amendment. In the words of Pat Rafferty of Unite, it is “the public and workers who will pay the price”

The report has rightly been slammed by fishing organisations. However, on fishing stocks, is the First Minister able to update us on what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure a continued supply of mackerel to supermarkets and other outlets? Can he confirm that the meeting with the supermarkets that was promised by his Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has taken place?

I refer to the success of the UK-wide SOS dairy campaign. I note the cabinet secretary attended that important meeting at Lanark. What will he do to work alongside colleagues in the UK Government and other devolved Administrations and appropriate organisations to see that a fair price is paid to free-range egg producers?

As a long-time community and environmental activist, eco-schools co-ordinator and now shadow minister for the environment and climate change, I, too, thank Graham Dey for securing this debate, for focusing our minds on Keep Scotland Beautiful’s 2012 national spring clean campaign and for setting our sights on the 2013 campaign. The debate is vital in highlighting the major and urgent contribution that is required from communities across Scotland to improve our environment. I also pay tribute to Keep Scotland Beautiful’s work. Almost 60 years ago, the National Federation of Women’s Institutes set out to keep Britain tidy by trying to stop littering, and to encourage pride in local environments. Since then, that work has continued in various forms and the organisation’s remarkable achievement of getting 120,000 participants—and perhaps thousands more unofficial participants—involved in its recent campaign shows that it is as strong as ever. When I first came to Scotland 20 years ago, I, a farmer’s wife and a couple of others had a vision of turning a dump in our village—Douglas Water in Clydesdale—into a community nature reserve. Some members of the community council laughed when we first raised the possibility of cleaning up an area that had been undermined by years of dumping and neglect. However, years later, after volunteers had cleaned it up, divers had taken cars out of the burn and so on, people once again had pride in their local area. That—and the fact that we received financial support and advice from a range of organisations—shows that we need a behavioural change to allow communities to take ownership of their areas. If that happens, people can once again take pride in their neighbourhoods. That very point is made clear in the briefing from the Carnegie UK Trust, which has just produced a report that I would highlight, called “Pride in Place: Tackling Environmental Incivilities”. The specific initiatives that are organised by Keep Scotland Beautiful, such as the annual spring clean, help to build links between schools, their communities and local businesses. A primary 6 pupil in the community where I worked as a primary teacher wrote to a local hotel and asked whether the school could clear the burn between the hotel and the school. The owner got involved and was delighted not only to have the burn cleared, but to work alongside the local schoolchildren and to build community links. KSB also administers the eco-schools programme, for which I was responsible when I was an eco-schools co-ordinator. According to the KSB website, more than 3,000 schools have now signed up as eco-schools. The programme engages children and young people and enables them to learn about key issues, including the environment, sustainability, local citizenship and, of course, litter. Pupils take ownership of the problem of littering, and assessments for the coveted green flag award emphasise clean playgrounds and playing fields. As a result, many schools now operate a rota of litter pickers, which not only gets pupils physically involved in keeping the school tidy, but teaches them skills such as organisation and taking responsibility, and makes them feel that they are owners of their communities. Even more significant, recycling and reuse become common parlance, and through a cultural shift litter can almost become a thing of the past. The significance of developing children’s and young people’s understanding of a sustainable future—from local to global—is fundamental to the future of our planet, yet the work by Keep Scotland Beautiful is often overlooked. The work also flows through to parents and others, when children go home and tell them what has been going on. Unfortunately, as Graeme Dey and George Adam highlighted, there are still those who think that litter does not matter and who take no personal responsibility for the state of their community. The 2013 national spring clean will be an opportunity for all of us to help to change that by involving our communities in making their neighbourhoods better and clearing up a little more litter along the way. I thank Graeme Dey.

I add my congratulations to the new minister. I am looking forward to working with him on my own brief and to challenging the Scottish Government constructively where we see that necessity. I welcome the Fife diet debate that Claire Baker has secured. It helps to focus our attention on a range of proposals that, taken together, could lead to a new food economy. It is also timely, given the urgent concerns about food poverty, which have been highlighted by other members as well as by Citizens Advice Scotland and the Trussell Trust, which reports a 100 per cent increase last year in the demand on its network of food banks. The trust aims not only to have food banks, but to feed communities and to help to empower them. Access to fresh, affordable food that is sustainably grown should not be seen as a charity for those on low incomes. That is one of the reasons why I believe that the Fife diet is absolutely fundamental—as are other such initiatives throughout Scotland. In my region—which is also the new minister’s region—there are some fantastic projects, such as the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service project in Lesmahagow in which volunteer drivers deliver fresh, affordable food to pensioners. In the Douglas and Nethan valleys, the healthy valleys initiative brings together voluntary and public sector organisations to reduce health inequalities and to promote positive lifestyles. It has run events including “Dads can cook”, which aim to demonstrate a balanced and healthy diet and to improve access to fresh produce across the Clydesdale community food market and through the market bus. As an organic vegetable gardener, I know the pleasurable taste of tomatoes, although this year many of them have been green because of the lack of sunshine and I have had to find recipes for green tomatoes on the internet. The Fife diet stresses the right to grow, which is something that the proposed community empowerment bill will help with. We need to look at that further. Nanette Milne mentioned farmers markets, and there are some in Dumfries. There are also community markets such as that in St Abbs, in Berwickshire. Today, we have heard of initiatives across Scotland, but how can such action be taken on a more strategic level? How can we make fresh, affordable food accessible at a fair price countrywide? It is a question of scale, and the necessary changes cannot happen without a strong continuing lead and support from the Scottish Government and all levels of government. I call on the Scottish Government to go further in supporting the changes that we need, so that the dots are joined up. I was talking with Pete Ritchie of Whitmuir Organics in West Linton yesterday. The farm shop and restaurant there sell organic produce and he knows farmers who have pallets of vegetables that they want to sell locally, but the supply chain does not exist. He stressed that a lasting legacy of the Commonwealth games could be the creation of sustainable food supply chains on a city-wide basis. The Scottish Government could then possibly go on to work with City of Edinburgh Council, which is starting to work on a sustainable food project, and build on that by developing partnerships with local authorities, communities and producers in Scotland’s seven cities. Thus, urban and rural Scottish communities that ask for these opportunities could be helped by the Scottish Government, which could do more to facilitate the structural changes that are needed to help low-income families and communities in particular. I ask the minister to consider those points in his closing remarks.

The statement mentions the reduction in ROCs for onshore wind but does not mention the proposal on page 10 in the banding review to close the band “to new projects at or below 5MW from 1 April 2013, subject to consultation”. I seek clarification from the minister that small-scale generation will continue to be supported so that there is an incentive for all communities to invest in the technologies. What technologies will be included in the consultation? What is the timescale for the consultation?

I associate myself with the remarks of John Wilson on fuel poverty, which is one of the most important issues for the Parliament to resolve. Therefore, I am pleased to support our amendment, which was lodged by Rhoda Grant. The UK Government’s electricity market reform proposals set out some important aspects of the context in which we shape the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity. I am eager to speak in the debate to highlight some positives and to help to expose some of the remaining areas of concern. As other members have highlighted, a clear sense of direction is essential to provide certainty for the future of the electricity market. However, there remain questions to be addressed and issues to be tackled if we are to move forward in a fair and inclusive direction towards a low-carbon economy. Climate change is the biggest long-term challenge and electricity market reform must set the context for moving forward fairly in the quest for the targets under the bill. Is there healthy competition in the market? The big six are indeed vertically integrated companies and, on the supply side, they provide energy to 99 per cent of all domestic consumers. That cannot be right. As highlighted by Rhoda Grant and Mary Scanlon, no new entrant has ever reached the critical mass to break through past the big six. Are consumer electricity prices as fair as possible for customers? There are many who think not, and I agree with them. An Institute for Public Policy Research report argues that Ofgem “should enforce its existing policy that suppliers must offer tariffs that reflect their costs” more robustly. The report also highlights how “the ‘Big 6’ can overcharge their less price-sensitive customers in order to offer heavy discounts to others; discounts which new entrants and smaller suppliers struggle to match, thereby reducing competition in the market” yet again. Co-operative Energy—I highlight that electricity supplier, because I am a member of the parliamentary Co-operative group—which offers a simple single tariff to consumers is a good example of the challenge that is faced by new entrants. Is there overcentralisation in the market? Large-scale renewable generation—both onshore and offshore—is essential in meeting our obligations under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and moving to a low-carbon economy. I believe that there is agreement on that across the chamber. In its briefing for the debate, Scottish Renewables highlighted its concern that the auction process under contracts for difference may harm renewables in general, and especially Scotland’s nascent marine renewable energy industry, which would be unable to compete with other low-carbon technologies that have been established for longer. Some rural communities have voiced concerns about onshore wind energy. The revised Scottish Natural Heritage cumulative effect guidelines must address some of those concerns, and the Scottish Government’s community benefit register must lead to a more transparent system of community benefit. Communities and co-operatives that make joint applications with companies often have a different perspective from that of some communities that object to applications from large companies. Rhoda Grant highlighted the waste of energy and transmission losses through unused heat. EMR sets the structures within which the big six can operate vertically. Disappointingly, however, it does not do justice to the opportunities to facilitate localism and decentralise energy generation. Many communities across Scotland want to take the power into their own hands and the climate challenge fund has helped with that. Along with other members of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I visited Gigha and saw for myself the benefits of community ownership. The financial and social benefits are also highlighted in Fintry and many other communities in Scotland. As acknowledged by other members, Sarah Boyack and others have also worked hard to facilitate the microgeneration movement. The pleas of Friends of the Earth, World Wildlife Fund and others to the UK Government to—in the words of Friends of the Earth— “use the opportunity of EMR to break the stranglehold of the ‘Big Six’” have been largely ignored in all aspects of electricity supply and generation. Do the current proposals for reform of the electricity market address demand reduction? In 2011, Friends of the Earth stated in its consultation response to the UK Government: “the Government needs to ensure that EMR puts reducing electricity demand on a par with generating more power.” Friends of the Earth has also stressed that an overall demand reduction target should have been set, but that has not happened. EMR does not create a robust framework for smart technology, nor in my view does it make any significant contribution to addressing fuel poverty. The UK Government’s green deal, which runs parallel with EMR, is welcome in the context of demand reduction but fails to address the challenges of improving hard-to-heat homes. Other central fuel poverty issues can be tackled in Scotland—and must be, especially given the latest shocking statistics estimating that 800,000 Scots or almost a third of all households are now living in fuel poverty. The Scottish Government and those of us across the chamber who are united in tackling this issue have a responsibility to make a difference now. Scotland’s unique combination of factors—colder winters; more stone-built houses that are difficult to heat; and rural areas with no mains gas, which forces consumers into buying whatever is locally available and usually from the big six—has led to higher levels of fuel poverty and all of those issues must be taken into account if any UK electricity market reform is to be successful and implemented fairly for consumers in Scotland.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to ensure that young carers are identified by schools at an early stage so that they can be given appropriate support. (S4O-01241)

I note the initiatives that the minister highlighted. However, I joined hundreds of young carers at the young carers festival earlier this summer, and one of the key issues that they raised with me and other MSPs who were present from across the parties was the patchy nature of support for them in schools at present. That is an urgent matter as it is clearly an on-going issue for them. Will the minister pledge to look at it again in the near future to see what she can do to ensure that all young carers receive the same level of support, regardless of their local authority?

The fact that the debate is being held today is significant, as is the strength of cross-party support, along with support beyond the chamber, that it has secured. This is just one of the many ways in which an essential shift is happening in Scotland and elsewhere. I fully endorse the aims and sentiments that are articulated in Ken Macintosh’s motion, and the principles that underpin the humankind index, which alter the focus of our economic attention. Why do we badly need an alternative measure or measures? GDP is the market value of all officially recognised final goods and services that are produced within a country in a given period. In that way, it is often considered to be an indicator of the country’s standard of living, but is it really an accurate and meaningful indicator of a country’s standard of living? Many people strongly disagree. Members have mentioned Senator Bobby Kennedy’s famous speech, which is stirring and important stuff. Perhaps the most significant thing about the speech is that, although it was made 40 years ago at the University of Kansas, few countries—with some exceptions—have adopted those indicators. WWF Scotland believes that “the pursuit of GDP growth alone risks undermining progress in other areas key to securing a flourishing and sustainable Scotland.” It also believes that GDP “doesn’t account for depletion of natural capital and doesn’t distinguish between expenditure that is positive or negative.” An example of that is expenditure on hospital admissions due to air pollution. That shows as an expenditure, but it is not highlighted as an expenditure that we would rather not incur. It has been commented that the business community would be opposed to a measure that is anything other than a direct calculation of capital, as GDP is now. However, economists the world over have begun to accept that GDP ignores changes in the natural, social and human components of capital on which a country relies for its continued existence and future wellbeing. In business terms, that means that calculating things such as the cost of depleting resources is rarely factored into budgeting which, in the long run, will lead to unsustainable business practices. Thus, an index that measures more than simply the gross product will be a help to business, rather than a hindrance. The political engagement of our communities is at the heart of the issue. As a community activist, teacher and now MSP, I am keenly aware of some of what matters to challenged communities such as the ex-mining communities in the Douglas valley, in my region. Affordable warm housing and many other issues, including fresh air and being able to live in a clean and healthy environment, which have been raised by other members today, stressed by Oxfam and reinforced by a range of organisations from the Scottish Wildlife Trust to the Poverty Alliance, are all essential if we are to move forward in a positive way for the people of Scotland. Many communities are looking to change collectively through transition towns and many other initiatives. As the Poverty Alliance has suggested, we must realise that treating people as “passive recipients of policies rather than potential active agents of change” is not the right way forward for Scotland. People’s voices matter and we must listen to them. If people are to engage more with the political system, having alongside the reporting of GDP comprehensible quarterly reporting on issues that matter to people, broken down into headline measures, would surely help with the connections between politicians and policy makers and the communities that we represent. We could start by introducing two or three of the following measures, chosen in dialogue with communities: giving more prominence to the distribution of income, consumption and wealth; reporting on proximity to dangerous levels of environment damage; security of employment; and mental health and wellbeing. These and other measures should inform the Scottish Government’s budget and the direction of Government policy and action at all levels. The interface with the development and refinement of the national performance indicators is also essential, and I look forward to accepting Mr Swinney’s invitation to discuss the matter.

The time for those alternatives has come. I know that we will move forward on this issue.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does Patrick Harvie agree that if the Scottish Government is to meet its emissions targets by 2020 it will have to improve in housing and in transport, on which—in particular the latter—the programme for government says very little that is new?

I thank the minister for advance sight of his statement. We are glad that he attended the summit, despite there being some unhelpful comments about carbon and financial costs. Meeting people matters, and face-to-face meeting matters for this very important global issue. I hope that the minister managed to see some of Brazil, despite his comments in the members’ business debate last month. While coming through the heavy rain and puddles this morning, it was not difficult to reflect on the responsibility that we all share—in the chamber and across Scotland with civic society, NGOs, trade unions, businesses and our communities—to make the necessary step change to living sustainably and, specifically, to reflect on the responsibility that we have as representatives, to seek to ensure that that is facilitated in a fair way. We all recognise that Scotland is a world leader on climate targets, as the minister highlighted in Brazil. Scottish Labour is proud to have pushed those further than was initially intended. Targets are one thing, but what more will the minister’s Government be able to do to ensure that we actually meet those world leading targets, especially in the light of consumption and emissions concerns? The Rio+20 text in the outcome of the conference document states: “we encourage each country to consider the implementation of green economy policies in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication”.

Will the minister please clarify how he will help all sections of society in that context, at home and abroad, to move forward on the issue? We share the minister’s frustration that the agreement is being seen as “timid”. What are the Scottish Government’s plans to engage with the agreed framework in the future?

Scottish Labour is glad that the relationship between common good land and ultra-long leases was debated at length in the committee. A considerable amount of evidence was received. In fact, due to the lack of response from some local authorities, the committee pushed matters and in the end received responses from all the local authorities. Seeking and receiving clarification has been in the public interest. At stage 1, the committee was undecided on the issue of common good exemption. At stage 2, we supported Jim Hume’s amendment from a desire to protect the public interest. The Waverley market issue has now been resolved, and the only long lease that will transfer to a private landlord—Buccleuch Estates—has more than 800 years to run. There would, in effect, be no public interest in exempting the common good for that specific case.

I agree with the member that there is a need to protect the common good, but I am coming to the point about whether there are likely to be any other ultra-long leases. The other eight leases will transfer to public ownership, protecting the public interest, so there is not a reason for exemption. After consideration and discussion, Scottish Labour is of the view—this answers the member’s point—that there is very little likelihood that further parcels of common good land that are subject to ultra-long leases have not been identified and that, if there are any, the identified parcels will not be of great value. Therefore, we are not minded to support the amendment.

It is not a case of doing a U-turn. We believe that, as all the local authorities have responded to the question on ultra-long leases, it is extremely unlikely that other such leases exist. We decided after much deliberation and discussion within our party and with others that we are not minded to support the amendment.

Does the member not accept that there have been developments since stage 2—that is what I highlighted earlier.

I am pleased to close on behalf of Scottish Labour, and as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, because the bill contributes in a limited way to moving Scotland further away from feudalism and closer to a system of property law that recognises where rights and responsibilities should fairly lie. In the policy memorandum to the bill, the Scottish Government highlighted some of its benefits. It stated: “Ultra-long leases amount to virtual ownership. It would simplify property law in Scotland to convert them to ownership.” As highlighted by the Scottish Government, the bill will also further minimise any threat of title raiders—a point that has not yet been raised in the debate. It will also ensure that property rights lie where they should lie, in the 9,000 or so relevant cases. The Scottish Law Commission stressed that ultra-long leases are “barely distinguishable from feus”. As highlighted in previous stages, that can juxtapose very small rents with unreasonable and sometimes sudden obligations on the tenant. Alex Fergusson stressed that the bill marks the end of the feudal system. I wonder whether that is the case—I very much hope that it is. Rob Gibson stressed the importance of clarity for those who have been tenants in ultra-long leases, and said that the ownership of such property is an important step forward. It is also important that there is clarity about ownership in relation to the land and property in question, due to the difficulties of seeking investment for anyone holding an ultra-long lease. There will no longer be concern about the uncertainty of compensation for improvements at the end of an ultra-long lease, and no anxiety about the issue of renewal of a long lease in that category. Annabelle Ewing highlighted the fact that tenants can opt out, which is also significant. The rarity of ultra-long leases means that in some places in Scotland it can be the case that it is hard to find a legal practice where there is knowledge of them. The passing of the bill will end that concern. The minister explained that land register arrangements will be distributed over time. Although Scottish Labour acknowledges the concerns that are connected with that, we note the fact that—if I understand the situation correctly—it is possible for a registration to be made through choice rather than only through time, as it were. The issue of ownership, which is usually assumed in relation to tenements—again, something that is not mentioned in the bill—will be resolved, as ultra-long leases will no longer exist. That will end such complications. The externalities that could occur in that respect—if, for instance, a group of owners wished to improve a tenement and the long lease was in an unclear position—will now be resolved. Since the bill was considered by the Justice Committee in the previous session of the Parliament, ports and harbours have, rightly, been exempted if there is a statutory port authority. That follows on from evidence that was given by the Peterhead Port Authority. Further, the pipes and cables issue, which could cause complications for owners, has been resolved. There was much discussion at earlier stages about the exemption of common good land. In its stage 1 report, the committee argued that “common good land is an extremely complex area”. Many, including Graeme Dey, have highlighted that today. We spent a great deal of time discussing Jim Hume’s amendment. The lack of an evident threat to the public interest, our concern about legal implications and the resolution of the Waverley market issue led us to the decision that we took today.

I think that I will just move on. I have tried to highlight the point. We considered issues as carefully as possible and arrived at the decision that we thought was best for the future in order to avoid complexities. As Claire Baker highlighted, Brodies LLP, said that “common good has been an issue for a few hundred years and is a matter that is not going to resolve itself. If it were to receive the attentions of the Parliament, that may be a favour to all concerned with it.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 22 February 2012; c 624.] As Graeme Dey pointed out, the complexities of unravelling the issue might go back to the 12th century. I am confused about that, as I understand that the concept of common good land started in 14-something. We could have a debate about that, but perhaps not on the last day of the term. Common good land is a matter for another day, but Scottish Labour sees a resolution of the issue as essential to clarifying fair land ownership in Scotland. The minister has highlighted the opportunity to explore common good in the context of the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill. We welcome that. Ultra-long leases of over 175 years, with more than 100 years to run, are indeed a feudal anomaly and modern Scotland is better off without them, so we support the passing of the bill.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on rolling out an infrastructure for electric cars. (S4O-01199)

I thank the minister for that helpful answer. An electric vehicle charge point has just been installed at St Bride’s community centre in South Lanarkshire in my region, but it is rarely used by the public, which is disappointing. The minister has highlighted the advertising of possibilities. In addition to the infrastructure work, what is the Scottish Government doing to encourage uptake of electric vehicles and to give consumers confidence to overcome range anxiety, in particular?

I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee and its excellent convener, Mary Fee, for bringing forward this important debate, particularly on a day when figures have been released that show that female unemployment is not going down in line with more general trends. As a previous convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I want to touch on two issues. They are seemingly separate, but they share some similar solutions. Both relate to women on the edge. This is refugee week and today is world refugee day. I want to highlight the particular plight of refugee women in their quest for work, so that both we as parliamentarians and others can consider how best to help. “The Struggle to Contribute” is a report by the independent refugee women’s strategy group. Some of the group members are in the public gallery. The report identifies some of the barriers that are encountered by refugee women on their journey to employment in Scotland. The names of the women and some personal details have been changed to protect their identities. More affordable childcare that is accessible for refugee women is sought. Amina fled her abusive husband and family in Pakistan with her young daughter three years ago. She was taken out of school to work before being forced to marry at 15. She had only basic literacy in Urdu when she was granted refugee status in Scotland. Amina had several hours a week of tuition in English for speakers of other languages while she was in the asylum process. Her jobcentre adviser has tried to persuade her to get a job in social care despite her poor English language skills. More funding is needed for specialist employability services, information provision, work placements and employability preparation for those who are in the asylum process and for those who are recognised as refugees. Leila has a law degree from Algeria and had just started practising law when she was forced to flee with her husband and young son in 2001. Leila spent many years in the asylum process with her family living on less than 65 per cent of income support. Throughout the challenges that she faced, including two years in administrative homelessness, she has been an active member of her community and a volunteer. She speaks fluent English, Arabic and French, but her law qualifications are not recognised in this country. I ask the Equal Opportunities Committee and the Scottish Government to consider what the report recommends—that there should be mechanisms in place to recognise the qualifications and prior work experience of refugees. We need to consider how we can monitor the specific impact that welfare reform and cuts to services are having on refugee women. I also want to touch on the subject of women offenders, which is close to my heart. I have spoken on the subject in the chamber several times and, in the recent debate on women offenders, I spoke about the importance of breaking the pattern of reoffending by helping to create openings for women who have few or none. For many women who are caught up in the cycle of reoffending, the cause is financial exclusion, whether that is directly linked to criminal activity or whether it simply leads to circumstances in which crime is seen as the only option. The Royal College of Psychiatrists in Scotland noted in its evidence to the commission on women offenders: “The social characteristics of prisoners suggest a lifetime of social exclusion. Compared to the general population, prisoners are ... 13 times more likely to have been unemployed”. Evidence continually shows that women in employment are far more likely to desist from criminal activity than those who are unemployed.

I ask the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee and all other members in the chamber to consider those concerns and the issue of women on the edge. I am delighted to hear about the event to be held on 12 September, but I ask the minister to ensure that women on the edge are included in it.

I am glad to speak again on fishing issues and to hear the views of members on the importance of fishing to our communities across Scotland and to the Scottish economy. Scottish Labour supports the cabinet secretary’s motion and Jamie McGrigor’s amendment, which recognises the contribution that the fleet makes to conservation. Although I will not quote myself, as Jamie McGrigor did, I spoke in the debate last September on the importance of the small-scale fishing communities such as those in my region; more than 700 people there are employed on vessels, many of which are involved in small-scale fishing. I hope that there will be a debate in the future on the importance of that vital part of the industry. Dave Thompson stressed the social considerations for coastal communities. I want to recognise the importance of the processing industry, which was touched on by Jim Hume and explored by Graeme Dey in relation to the transferable fishing concessions. Scottish Labour strongly supports the principle of regionalisation and it appears that there is cross-party consensus on the issue; I hope that that is encouraging to the cabinet secretary when he goes to the council. Decentralised control over fishing brings a number of benefits, many of which have been described by members today. They include faster decision making, tailor-made management that suits the characteristics of individual fleets and water basins and, crucially, the ability to change course if a decision is not working, which is in sharp contrast to the current unresponsive model of the centralised CFP. Jean Urquhart talked about subsidiarity, which is not a common term these days but is still important. The cabinet secretary highlighted the need for an injection of common sense. However, obstacles remain, not least of which is the need to hammer out the detail of what regionalisation will mean in practice and to ensure that the European Commission and Parliament truly devolve responsibility to the new regional bodies. Rob Gibson highlighted that this is the first time that the European Parliament has had co-decision-making responsibilities and he raised concerns about possible conflict between European Parliament committees. Labour MEPs will take a careful interest in that and will work with other MEPs. My understanding is that the powers will be devolved directly to member states, which will then be able to enter into regional agreements. If that is the case, I hope that the cabinet secretary and his Government will work constructively alongside the UK Government, as the representative of the member state, to ensure that a strong framework is put in place that encourages co-operation and joint solutions with our neighbours. On sustainability, Alison Johnstone highlighted the fact that the industry can be the stewards of the sea for the next generation. As Lewis Macdonald said, the problem with the CFP is not the objective of matching activity to resource, but the prescriptive approach to regulations by which that objective is pursued. I welcome the Scottish Government’s conversion to reform of the common fisheries policy, rather than withdrawal from it. I hope that that about-turn is the result of the Government’s realising that regionalisation is not about quasi nationalisation of fishing stocks, but about a real attempt to devolve decision making to a sensible level. Everyone—north, south, east and west—agrees about regionalisation. However, fishermen’s organisations have told us that it is essential that regionalisation results in more cross-country working and not less. Stakeholders, Government scientists and local people in ports up and down the UK and throughout the EU need to work in the common interest to deal with the issues of discards, sustainability and increased traceability.

I am glad that the cabinet secretary is going to the negotiations this time round. As I said, I wish him well with that. The strong vote that we have as part of the UK is a valid part of the argument on that issue. Discards are indeed a tragedy, as the cabinet secretary said. The four points that the cabinet secretary outlined are a positive way forward. As Margaret McDougall stressed, we must find a sustainable way forward. She emphasised data collection, as did Jenny Marra, who highlighted our good record on ecosystem management. She talked about the need for “Better and more targeted scientific advice”, which is essential. It was recently put to me, and it now seems obvious, that fish do not know national borders and do not swim around with national flags tattooed on them, so we should not become protective of our stocks to the exclusion of co-operation. The Scottish Fishermen’s Federation has called this period a crucial one for the Scottish fishing industry. Scottish Labour agrees with the Scottish Government on the need to reform the process and we welcome the Government’s change of heart on the issue of remaining part of a collective arrangement. In the main, we also agree on what form the reform should take. We call on the Government to work with the UK Government in all possible ways to ensure that the possibility of real and lasting reform becomes a reality. We wish the cabinet secretary well at the council in the near future.

11. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made towards developing alternative methods of measuring GDP to reflect quality of life and the sustainability of Scotland’s development. (S4O-01109)

The cabinet secretary will know that a range of civic society organisations have recently requested a more expansive version of the indicators that he mentions, which I am sure will be helpful in moving us forward. How will indicators that take into account issues outside the market and the need to live within our environmental limits sit with GDP and fit in with the national performance framework?

The Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill makes a modest contribution to clarifying and rationalising the relationships between landlord and tenant in the sector and, as such, Scottish Labour supports its passage today. In relation to succession, the cabinet secretary stated at stage 2 that the broadening of the definition of “near relative” to include grandchildren would “help to meet our objective of widening the class of people entitled to that degree of protection”.—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 9 May 2012; c 922.] In our keenness to encourage opportunities for new entrants, we argue, as we did at stage 1, that further consideration should also be given in the future to the extension of the definition to include nephews and nieces, despite the tenant farming forum’s previous consensus on that issue. That would further broaden the opportunities for new entrants to the sector. I note the cabinet secretary’s remarks about the TFF’s workstream in that regard. I welcome the Scottish Government’s initiatives for new entrants, including the new entry panel, and I note the remarks about the national reserve. Certainly, Scottish Labour members on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, my colleague Claire Baker and I, and others will be working hard to help move forward the CAP in that regard, to give a broader opportunity for new entrants, amongst other issues. Will the cabinet secretary, in his closing remarks, comment on progress on the development of conservation tenancies, as mooted by RSPB Scotland and others, in addition to the organisations that he has highlighted today, which are working to broaden the tenancies that they offer? As many have acknowledged during the passage of the bill, many wider issues must still be resolved, from the perspective of both landlords and tenants, to enable the sector to move forward in a confident and secure way. The TFF reached consensus on a number of challenging issues at the start of the process and has continued to do so during the bill’s progress. However, in our view, it has been an uneasy consensus on some of the challenging issues. I have seen much good practice when I have visited estates and met landlords and tenants over the past few months, especially in south Scotland. I have seen examples of major investment, such as a new state-of-the-art milking parlour and a large range of sheds for free-range chickens, to highlight but two. However, concerns about tenancy matters were expressed to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee during its visit to Bute; Margaret McDougall and, I am sure, other members will highlight that. Oral and written evidence to the committee has made me keenly aware of the need to reach the stage at which, more generally, the individual who owns is confident to let and the individual who rents is confident to invest. There are those who say that the sector should be left in peace to get on with things. Others say that there has been enough chipping away at landlords’ rights, but others again say that their rights as tenants are unclear and do not offer enough security. In the TFF, as I highlighted, there has been an apparent consensus, which has led to the introduction of the bill. However, the consensus has been uneasy on a number of matters and, in my view, it has not always been a consensus between equal partners. In that context, the future work plan of the TFF is to be welcomed as it is working towards a tenanted sector in which there is fairness and certainty. Douglas McAdam, of Scottish Land & Estates, said that “Agricultural Holdings legislation is complex and emotive. However, it is important that everyone with an interest, particularly politicians and decision-makers have clear, hard facts at their disposal. The industry as a whole will benefit from a more evidence-led approach.” I am sure that all those on the TFF agree with that approach, which must lead to a settled and fair outcome for all. I believe that there is consensus in the chamber that the rent review section of the bill is a step forward. Today’s announcement by the cabinet secretary that an independent rent review group for secure tenancies will be set up is welcome, as is the offer of technical and secretarial support and the clear reporting timeline. How regularly should rent be reviewed, even if it is not always changed? Will rent be determined by the market alone or by some additional measure? Analysis of the current process and scrutiny of section 13 of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991 and of the English system will enable the sector to work towards a model that I hope will bring confidence to both sides. Those who have been named as members of the group will inspire confidence in the process, as there is respect for their independence, their experience and their expertise—in particular, the group includes the necessary legal representation. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee suggested that the Scottish Government and the TFF should “re-examine the issue of investment in holdings, to ... clarify who is responsible” and find “the most appropriate balance ... for the creation of a vibrant and healthy tenant farming sector.” The inclusion of the issue in the TFF’s work programme will focus the different perspectives. Investment protocols may well be a useful possible way forward, and the group’s consideration of diversification is also welcome. It is essential for clarity to be brought on waygo compensation. A clear timeline for working to resolve those issues is imperative, as is reporting to the Scottish Government. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, of which I am, of course, a member, will take a keen interest in those issues. The aim must be to bring certainty to the sector and to help to restore trust where it has been broken. We support the bill as part of that process, but in doing so we hope that it is another step forward and not an end in itself.

Perhaps the member might agree that the possible amendments on nephews and nieces—they certainly were not rumours—that some members considered lodging at stage 2 were not ill informed, but that they were not lodged because of respect for and sensitivities in relation to the tenant farming forum. Those amendments were not considered not to be appropriate provisions that might go forward in the future to give new entrants more opportunity.

I thank Colin Keir for bringing the debate to the chamber. As the motion states, the Royal Highland Education Trust works “to promote Scotland’s rural and agricultural environment, farming and countryside activities and food education to Scotland’s young people”. In the words of farmer—and friend—Jim Warnock, who has been involved with the trust for many years, “RHET is the fastest growing branch on the tree of learning with 1 in 8 primary school children in contact with farming, either through a classroom talk or a farm visit.” In my view, RHET does a brilliant job—much of it through the dedication of volunteers who offer their services for free. They range from experienced farmers to agricultural students, and the support of the Scottish Government is essential for that work to continue. The motion highlights the lack of a link between urban children and our countryside. Perhaps surprisingly, many children who live in villages have no direct experience of farms, either. They do not know how farms work and how food is produced, nor do they understand the sequence from farm to plate—or, as Colin Keir said, “from ... gate to plate.” As a primary teacher, I was involved in a number of RHET initiatives, and a visit to Feufield Ltd’s smallholding in Clydesdale—which is part of the RHET scheme—with a rural primary school highlighted those valuable connections. We picked plums, washed and measured them, then boiled them with sugar and water. While they cooled, we were sent off to hold baby ducklings and play the game of distinguishing between different breeds of chicken and matching them with the right colour of eggs. Having—of course—washed our hands, we designed our own labels, put the jam in jars, then took it home to share with our families. The children made a recipe book that included ingredients that could either be bought at a farm or grown by them. It was all about food preparation and cooking, rather than about fast food. In these days in which we question consumerism, the opportunities to connect with where our food comes from can inspire people to buy more local and, one hopes, more affordable food. Its accessibility from cities, however, is another question for another time. I have seen the enthusiasm with which pupils begin to grow their own vegetables and herbs—whether it is tomatoes in a greenhouse or basil in a window box—and how they connect with the older generation in sharing that experience. As part of the same project through RHET, the children invited a young agriculture student to come to the classroom to talk to them and to answer questions about training to be a farmer and what it is like to juggle planning rotation, getting up early to milk and—yes—being computer savvy in order to fill in the common agricultural policy forms. That brought the industry alive in a realistic way and inspired one or two young people of both genders to consider a farming future. There was also a visit to Sandilands farm in Clydesdale, where pupils were welcomed by the Warnock family. Jim Warnock has said: “We tick all the boxes on curriculum for excellence and outdoor learning and are aiming for 1 in 4 schoolchildren benefiting from our countryside activities by 2020.” All visits are risk assessed, but it seems to me to be unnecessary that that should have to be redone by busy teachers—as was the case for my visit—when a risk assessment has already been done through RHET. Jim Warnock has welcomed many farm visits. He tells me that children fire questions at him on numerous aspects of food production. I will give some examples of the questions that they ask: “If a white cow gives white milk, does a black cow give black milk?” “Why do sheep only have teeth on their bottom jaw?” “Where are the keys to your quad bike?” “Does your collie dog count sheep to help it sleep at night?” As the motion highlights, the farm visits also allow children to become aware of the opportunity to walk in the countryside, and to become aware of the footpath and access codes, which enable children and their families to share safely the experience of going out and about in the countryside . RHET helps children, their families and the wider community to connect, or to reconnect, with farms and rural life, and it reminds us of the joys of fresh air and fresh food. I heartily commend its work and ask the Scottish Government to continue to support it.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. If I translated my speech into French, I would need a lot longer than your generous six minutes.

I will stick to my own language. I rise today to speak in support of the Government’s motion and our amendment, which concern the ambition to improve the opportunities that are available for young people to engage with modern languages, and I want to raise a number of issues to do with how we make that a reality. At the launch of the report, the minister spoke of moving beyond a monolingual society. That is, of course, necessary in part for the economy and for tourism. Although it might be argued that English is the language of business, if someone is conducting foreign business, it is essential that they are able to speak reasonably in the language of the other country. As a member of the cross-party group on China, I highlight our commitment to developing Scotland’s relations with China. That is in part for mutual trade benefits. It must surely seem arrogant and even postcolonial to think it appropriate to conduct a meeting about renewable energy systems in Tianjin in English rather than Mandarin. In that context, the Confucius Institute’s pilot primary school Mandarin programme is most welcome. The minister has stressed the issue of competitive advantage in the global job market. My daughter, Freya, lives in Hong Kong. When I spoke to her on Viber this morning, she acknowledged, without being prompted, that her getting a job as an economist in China had as much to do with her learning of Mandarin over five summers as it had to do with her—hopefully good—economic skills. Working in a rural primary school as a French teacher with a multi-composite class, I was delighted to see the enthusiasm among pupils every year when they were able to choose something French to research, such as how la tour Eiffel was built, where the beret came from, and the essence of haute couture. As other members have said, foreign language assistants are a crucial part of teaching languages. They bring not only a knowledge of the language but an authenticity to the teaching of it and they can encourage pupils to develop an understanding of the culture. I welcomed the news last month from the British Council that more language assistants are to be employed in Scotland, but there has been a huge decline, as highlighted by Neil Findlay. I will not go into the figures again, as they have already been quoted. However, the expected rise in the numbers of assistants will take them only to 70, of whom 24 will work outside the state system. I understand that the Scottish Government’s funding of such programmes through the British Council has also fallen. There must be investment in order to achieve good results. Foreign exchanges also bring different cultures alive. A group of primary 7 pupils from my daughter’s school brought back a pack of frozen frog’s legs from Dieppe and started sawing it up to take home to parents. Delicieux! In an article in The Independent entitled “Why learning languages matters”, Dr Shirley Lawes made a plea for language to be learned for its own sake and stated: “The study of a foreign language has a unique transformational capacity that differentiates it from other subject disciplines in the potential that knowledge of foreign languages has of opening individuals up to human culture.” That enables understanding of different ways of life and encourages tolerance. In the words of the veteran language teacher Eric Hawkins, foreign languages serve to “emancipate the learner from parochialism.” New languages enrich our experience. Another culture can be brought alive by different words, such as “clapotis”, which means the sound of little waves lapping on a quayside and has no equivalent in our language. Gaining an understanding of the grammatical structure of a foreign language can also feed back into a deepening understanding of how to use our own to best effect. I would also advocate ensuring that children and young people understand the syntax of our own language. Indeed, although it is not very modern, the study of Latin can be invaluable in the understanding of language, and I personally believe that it is a great pity that Lanark grammar school, where my children happened to go, is now one of the few high schools in Scotland that still teaches it. I agree with the Scottish Government’s languages working group that the earlier someone starts to learn a new language, the better. The pilot project in East Renfrewshire involving children learning French from their pre-school year is a good example. The pilot started in 2002 and uses songs, rhymes and games to encourage children to learn a foreign language in the same way as they learned their mother tongue. It is only in the past year that those children will move on to a secondary school setting, so the analysis of what impact that method of teaching has had will only now begin. However, it is clear that, as other members have stressed, by starting at an early age, the children do not have the inhibitions of later life and they grow up understanding language and having increased confidence in their ability to learn new things. When I was learning, many people in my generation lacked the confidence to take the risk of speaking a foreign language, even if they were in a campsite with kids in France, Germany or wherever. Often, that was due to how they were taught. These days in our primary schools, in the context of curriculum for excellence, the range of methods that are used—including games, role plays, visual materials and talking in groups and with partners—mean that saying, “Salut!” and opening a conversation is fun rather than traumatic. I disagree with Liz Smith: there is a clear methodology underpinning language teaching at primary level. The working group emphasises that “local authorities should provide regular opportunities for primary and secondary languages staff to work together ... to undertake shared CPD”. As a primary French teacher, I would argue that such work will aid the transition to secondary school and ensure that children are no longer turned off from the more rigid and perhaps less participatory ways of learning at secondary level. Equity must be at the centre of the development of the new strategy for modern languages. As Neil Findlay stressed, rural schools and those in more deprived areas must not be disadvantaged by the challenge of finding and retaining modern language teachers. If the working group’s report and recommendations are actioned consistently, we will, in a generation, have teachers who are leaving teacher training ready and able to teach modern languages, and children who know that part of growing up as a global citizen involves speaking one or two other languages. Enfin, if the first way to connect with another country is through its language, the second way is perhaps through its cuisine. I wish everyone today, “Buon appetito!” for the Italian lunch in the Scottish Parliament canteen.

In view of on-going concerns about flooding in parts of my region such as at Whitesands in Dumfries and in Peebles, can the minister give the Parliament details about Scottish Government research projects on flooding and say how those will help with flooding mitigation in the south of Scotland and more broadly in Scotland, and how that connects with the land-use strategy?

As a member of the Scottish Co-operative Party, I have a particular interest in the co-operative model, which is vibrant in the agriculture sector. Can the cabinet secretary give a reassurance that the Scottish Government will support the aims of the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, which wishes to increase the availability of local food in partnership with the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets, in particular with regard to problems of town planning constraints?

How will local communities be involved in those exciting new offshore wind initiatives, particularly with regard to transferable skills?

Does the member agree that there is serious cause for concern in relation to the proposed cuts, on which there is only a 30-day consultation period, to Heriot-Watt University’s textiles department? Does he agree that it would be very useful if the cabinet secretary could give some backing to the concern that has been expressed about jobs in the Borders and about the future?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take as a result of the Court of Session judgment on the Moonzie Farm rent review case in relation to section 13 rent reviews to ensure that the views of tenant farmers and tenants are taken into consideration. (S4O-00941)

I thank the minister for his clarification on that matter from the perspective of the Scottish Executive and the cabinet secretary. The minister may be aware that The Scottish Farmer recently stated that “tenants are now citing the whole protracted Moonzie guddle as proof positive that the current rent review system is ‘patently not fit for the 21st century’.” I ask for further reassurance that the minister and the cabinet secretary will consider the issue so that there can be clarity for tenants and landlords in what has been an extremely protracted and expensive case.

For a number of reasons, I am delighted to have the opportunity to participate in this debate. I will start by focusing on what I see as the significance of the interrelationship between the national performing companies and other professional companies and amateur groups, using theatre as a model. In January, I lodged a motion to congratulate Crossmichael drama club in Dumfriesshire on winning a United Kingdom competition and gaining the opportunity to perform in London’s west end. I am delighted that a group with fewer than 10 members from a small village in my region won the competition, especially as there were entrants from throughout the UK—all amateur groups—on a scale up to Regent Rep in Bournemouth, which has more than 100 members. Amateur dramatics are far from amateur and are thriving throughout Scotland and Britain. They make a big contribution to the arts in Scotland. I also highlight and pay tribute to our many professional theatre companies. Grey Coast Theatre does not exist any more, but it brought challenging and relevant work to some of our remotest islands. At that time, my partner was lucky enough to be an actor in the company when it toured to community halls across the islands of Scotland. We also have the innovative work of urban companies such as the Tron Theatre in Glasgow, which is now led by director Andy Arnold. Complementing the Edinburgh international festival is the Edinburgh festival fringe, which gives students and community groups an opportunity to explore and experiment and audiences an opportunity to see performances from around the world. Those companies are all part of a symbiotic creative relationship that stretches right into our national performing companies and also connects with our drama and music training in institutions such as the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland. With two acting and singing family members, I know how tough careers in this area can be, and all opportunities for people to develop their chances need to be taken up. I hope that the cabinet secretary will comment on the training aspects of the performing arts in her closing remarks. I also want to focus on the enormous value of the national performing companies’ outreach work, as other members have done, and we should not forget the role that is played by our theatre-in-education companies. As Malcolm Chisholm highlighted, opera is accessible. I still have a vivid memory from my time as a teacher in a rural primary school in Clydesdale of a series of workshops that were held by Scottish Opera. No one who experienced the coming together of children from several small primary schools to bring alive a Viking myth in shared song could doubt the impact on all concerned. The sense that opera was a remote, elite pursuit was dispelled for the many families and children who attended that performance, which I saw in the Memorial hall in Lanark. The comment about the ticket lines for opera being closed proves that opera is a popular performing art nowadays. The cabinet secretary also highlighted that. I support Patricia Ferguson’s remarks on the value of the support that local authorities can provide to make the arts and our national companies real to children. It was reassuring to hear from the cabinet secretary that all local authorities have been involved recently. As a parent, I was lucky enough to have the chance to take both my children—a girl and a boy—to Scottish Ballet’s summer schools for children from all over Scotland. For a small minority, they lead to a professional career but, for many others, they are an opportunity for self-exploration and working together beyond language. At the best Christmas outing ever, I was lucky enough to go with a rural primary school to Scottish Ballet’s production of “The Snowman”. We were all transported into a world of magic as the dancers literally flew through the air, and the young boys’ attitudes to dance changed as the snowflakes fell and the story unfolded. Theatre is so important for the breaking down of stereotypes in society. The outreach work and performances for children bring a sense of growing understanding of the value of participating in the arts and enjoying being part of an audience. I also want to highlight the value of our national performing companies expanding beyond the national framework and helping to develop shared understanding with other countries. As a member of the cross-party group on China, I heard about Scottish Opera’s visit to Beijing to perform “The Tale o’ Tam”. The universality of that work again went beyond language in the strict sense of the word. Cultural sharing of that kind is a vibrant way in which to develop understanding between countries. Finally, I highlight the work of Òran Mór and the National Theatre of Scotland, which this week brought together writers from the middle east to perform in Scotland. The challenging situation in the middle east has meant that developing the plays has not been an easy task, and the writers have often not wanted their names to be revealed. Others have struggled to get visas to come here at all. Abdullah Alkafri, who is the author of “Damascus Aleppo” said on Radio Scotland this week that he is glad to be here and is delighted that his stories have been given a platform. He said that the audience “know the stories from the news ... but don’t know the human part of the Middle East. It is good to get in touch more with the human side of the people ... more than the terror and the blood and misery ... we are like normal humans.” Abdelrahim Alawji, the author of “Sleeping Beauty Insomnia” commented: “At the first level I feel guilty to be here involved in the theatre because the situation there is really tough. The theatre gives a chance to give a real picture about the people there avoiding clichés or stereotyping thoughts from the media ... and create real dialogue with the people”. Those plays are a precious opportunity for Scotland to explore and better understand the challenges that are faced by people in the midst of a stark struggle. For all those reasons and those highlighted by other speakers, we must protect funding for the arts. On accessibility to the arts, including the work of our national performing companies, the most recent national indicator shows that the percentage of adults who have either participated in a cultural activity or attended or visited a cultural event fell slightly in 2010. It is only a small drop, but it is important that we support the arts when they come under pressure in challenging economic times, as other members have highlighted in the debate. The Scottish Government stresses the importance of the national indicator. It states that “Cultural engagement impacts positively on our general wellbeing—”

I am just about to, Presiding Officer. Thank you. The Scottish Government states that cultural engagement also “helps reinforce our resilience in difficult times.” I thank the cabinet secretary for her broad-sweeping opening remarks and I hope that today’s debate, with cross-party support, will help to protect funding in challenging times, when we need the arts more than ever.

I thank the minister for her explanation of the energy skills partnership. What provision is the Scottish Government making to ensure that people who live in ports such as Eyemouth in my region have the opportunity to develop transferable skills through colleges and outreach opportunities to enable them to work in the offshore renewables sector, in particular because travel to courses at the new Borders College department in Hawick is quite a challenge?

Last autumn, when I was still the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I had the pleasure of welcoming Baroness Vivien Stern, who is a senior research fellow at the International Centre for Prison Studies, to speak at our women in Parliament dinner. That evening, helped by her focused remarks about women in the justice system, it seemed to me that there was a sense of collective determination not to allow the “criminalisation of distress”, as one researcher has called it, to continue any longer. We all talked about the awaited report and hoped that it would not just be the 11th such report to gather dust. Last winter, I visited Cornton Vale and was shown around by the governor, Teresa Medhurst. Although I acknowledge—as many members have done today—the commitment and vision of the staff, I was very clear in my mind that we had to move on and to move beyond being a society that allows the criminalisation of distress to be eternally repeated and inadvertently passed on from generation to generation. This spring—only last week—I sat in a University of Strathclyde lecture theatre, along with Mary Fee and many others, feeling inspired not just by the collective wisdom of those who were assembled there, but by the palpable sense of anticipation as we awaited the report of Dame Elish Angiolini, Sheriff Daniel Scullion and Dr Linda de Caestecker and their recommendations. Somehow, that gave me a sense of optimism. After Dame Elish had outlined the recommendations, the discussions seemed to crystallise into a sense of resolve that this had to be a watershed moment. Although we recognise that there are a small number of women offenders who must, in order to protect society, have custodial sentences, a cultural shift is in the making that must be developed into a systemic change, as outlined in the commission’s report, which will break the pattern of reoffending by helping to create openings for women who have few or none. Many members have signed the motion that I lodged welcoming the report, and it is obvious from the debate that there is support for it almost throughout the chamber. I would like, however, to distance myself from some of David McLetchie’s remarks; no doubt many members will know to which remarks I allude. As parliamentarians, we all know of women constituents who are challenged by bewildering and fragmented lives—lives on the edge. I hope that the debate will coalesce our determination to drive forward the report’s vision. I am heartened to hear that so many other members are in agreement on that and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s invitation to members across the chamber in that regard. The report is about both breaking the cycle of reoffending and preventive work. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said, it is a whole-system approach, bringing together police, courts, education and social services and working with women in a holistic and effective way. As my colleague Graeme Pearson said, we need bespoke solutions. “Bespoke” is an old-fashioned word that refers to something that is carefully made for each individual. There must be a menu of options. There are examples of that approach in my region, such as the women in focus project, which was launched by the cabinet secretary in 2010. The service works with women offenders to reduce their levels of reoffending and reconviction, and to help them to lead fulfilling lives in the community. At the launch of the project, the justice secretary commented that women “need access to multiple services and forms of support in order to reduce reconviction rates.” However, the commission notes that Scotland’s public service landscape is “unduly cluttered and fragmented”. Clearly, much more needs to be done. There are countless examples of young women falling into the justice system because of financial exclusion, inability to access housing or health services—in particular, mental health services—or lack of family support. I disagree with Margaret Mitchell on the validity of short sentences for women in such situations. As many speakers have highlighted, it is indeed a gender issue. If the shift is to happen, we must put in place solutions systematically. I received an e-mail today from the Scottish Quaker community justice network urging us to support the thrust of the report. It said: “Any financial costs in making such changes will more than be met by the reduced social costs to society of finally breaking the cycle of most women’s offending and its collateral impact on their families.” As we have heard from many other members, this is not all about cost; it is in part about how structures and support are organised. The executive summary of the commission’s report, which Roderick Campbell highlighted, refers to prevention and the early years, even though that was not in the commission’s remit. From my time many years ago working in a unit for pupils who had been excluded from school, I recall the arrest of one of my pupils, who was stopped from going out of a supermarket with a frozen chicken under her jacket in the hope that the security guards would let her pass thinking her to be heavily pregnant, even though she was only 14 years of age at the time. That girl was forced to act as a young woman far too early, not responsibly and, indeed, not legally. However, I come back to the phrase “criminalisation of distress”. Let us sort it out together for Scotland’s girls and women who are on the edge.

The bill has been a long time coming. As we have heard, it was considered by the Justice Committee in session 3 before it came to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. As I am not, like my colleague Annabelle Ewing, a lawyer, I speak with some trepidation, but I will try to reinforce some of the important points that have already been made and to shed a bit of light on some of them. I am pleased to highlight Scottish Labour’s support for converting ultra-long leases into ownership. I believe that the principle is correct and that the granting of a lease of more than 175 years, in effect, amounts to a transfer of ownership. I agree with the Government that the bill will significantly simplify property law in Scotland. As we have heard, there are some 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland. The committee welcomed “the new provisions in the Bill to take into account variable rents for the purposes of exempting commercial leases from the Bill” and the Scottish Government’s commitment to bring forward an amendment on the issue at stage 2. In relation to additional payments, the committee noted the compensation provisions in the bill and the provision of an additional payment. As Rob Gibson highlighted, it is important that the level of that payment will be set by the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. The committee heard evidence on the concerns that exist about the land register of Scotland in the context of the bill. The Scottish Government’s recognition of the value to Scotland and to the Scottish economy—which we have heard about—of keeping the land register as up to date as possible is welcome, as is the minister’s recognition that updating the land register is not required for the bill to work. It is important to emphasise that the register should be as up to date as possible. The recently introduced Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill will have an impact on the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill. It is reassuring that the minister has explained that that bill will work in tandem with the long leases bill. The committee acknowledged that the common good is “an extremely complex area”. I am aware of that, not least because I live near the royal burgh of Lanark, which is a good example of a place where common good land gives rise to complexities and sometimes causes tempers to rise. Beyond the bill, although the committee accepts that the task of compiling a more accurate register of common good assets and funds would be expensive, it “recommends that the Scottish Government works together with local councils and relevant professionals to identify better ways in which this information could be gathered, verified, recorded and maintained.” The minister referred to that earlier. I believe that that is long overdue and will have far-reaching benefits, not just for this legislation, which it will not actually clarify. It has been highlighted that it is an issue that needs resolution. As Claire Baker pointed out, constituents come to us with concerns about the issue. It is in the public interest to have the issue resolved. The committee recognised that it was the view of the Justice Committee in session 3 not to support an exemption for common good and noted that there was no compelling case in favour of an exemption. However, as other speakers have said, there is further work to be done on the issue. We perhaps need to take further evidence on the issue before stage 2. As Claire Baker said, although the Scottish Government is not keen to impose statutory guidance on local authorities in relation to where any common good compensation should go, I seek further reassurance from the minister that it is likely that it will be directed into councils’ common good funds. I take the point that many properties will be of low value.

Scottish Labour supports the bill, in our quest for fairness and in consideration of the public interest.

In view of the planning permission for fracking near Canonbie in Dumfriesshire, in my region, will the First Minister say what is the Scottish Government’s position on fracking? In the context of the report, “Preese Hall Shale Gas Fracturing: Review & Recommendations for Induced Seismic Mitigation”, which was published earlier this week, does the Scottish Government have concerns about the environmental implications of the fracking process and about the potential impact on our climate change targets?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am delighted to close this debate for Scottish Labour. Before I begin, though, I would like to share the sentiments of members across the chamber and take a moment to remember all those who have been seriously injured or have lost their lives as a result of cycling accidents on our roads. No matter what level the accident rate drops to it will be too high, and I am glad to have the opportunity today to debate what we can do to reduce the number of accidents and encourage more people to engage in safe cycling. I thank Alison Johnstone for her broad-ranging motion. I often seem to begin my speeches with a quote from ministers and today is no exception, as I will quote from the ministerial foreword to the “Cycling Action Plan for Scotland”, in which the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, stated his vision, saying: “By 2020, 10% of all journeys taken in Scotland will be by bike.” He went on to say: “We just need more people to cycle more often and in so doing, develop a cycling culture in Scotland.” There used to be such a culture, certainly in rural Clydesdale, where I stay. My old neighbour and the first person I met when I moved there was ex-miner, Jim Simpson, who also used to play in a dance band. He used to tell me of many times making late-night rides home by bike with his fellow band members from as far afield as Moffat, instruments strapped to their backs. His village of Douglas Water had its own cycling club, as did many other villages. There is perhaps a renaissance in popular cycling; certainly, there is an interest in it. I whole-heartedly support the Scottish Government’s vision for cycling, but like many of the SNP’s visions it lacks detail about how we are going to get there. I am concerned that without the financial support for infrastructure development, access to safety training and the creation of schemes to encourage more people to take up cycling, we will fall short of the 10 per cent target. Today’s new national travel survey shows that only 1 per cent of journeys were completed by bicycle in 1985 and that today that figure is the same, so a step change is definitely necessary if we are to reach the 10 per cent target. Malcolm Chisholm highlighted the value of community-led initiatives. I, too, commend Spokes, Sustrans and other cycling organisations. The pedal on Parliament campaign group has some very positive suggestions in its manifesto. Some of its proposals inform the wider debate and are certainly worthy of consideration. I will attend its rally, but despite Alison Johnstone’s kind offer, I will not bring my bicycle. It sits in my basement, because I am a rural cyclist and not an urban one, and I was made even more nervous about urban cycling by Malcolm Chisholm’s remarks about the dangers of Leith Walk. How do we ensure that cycling infrastructure is incorporated into the planning process for new roads and other projects? There is an example of that working well along the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line. However, as we heard from Helen Eadie and others, there are many poor examples. Also, cycle paths are often put in as an afterthought, with painted lines taking the place of safe and dedicated cycle tracks, as Marco Biagi highlighted. I have spoken before about the great example set by the Netherlands, where a remarkable 25 per cent of journeys are completed by bike. We should look to incorporate infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists into planning guidance for rural and urban local authorities, and Scottish Labour supports that element of the motion. We also call for support for safer speed limits, which Elaine Murray highlighted. I hope that the minister will consider more than 40 per cent of children having on-road training. Scottish Labour supports the Government in its target of having 10 per cent of journeys completed by bike and supports the motion. In Alison Johnstone’s words, we need to move up a gear or two.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Jim Hume for bringing this members’ business debate to the Parliament. I am encouraged by the cross-party support for his motion. Since becoming an MSP, I have spoken in the Parliament about community transport almost as much as I have spoken on all other subjects, because the issue is so important to me and to many constituents in South Scotland, as well as to constituents in urban areas and throughout Scotland, as we heard. As it rightly says in the motion, “community transport initiatives play a vital role throughout Scotland in meeting the needs of many communities”. Like other members, I commend the work of the Community Transport Association. I will focus, first, on the importance of having a diverse range of community transport initiatives, rather than a one-size-fits-all solution, and secondly, on the need to widen access to public transport for elderly and disabled people, which is mentioned in the motion in the context of Age Scotland’s recent campaign. At the start of the month, I had the opportunity to visit Tweed wheels in Peebles, as Jim Hume has done, to meet volunteer drivers and learn about the services that they offer. The group provides community transport services in Tweeddale, which enable local voluntary groups and people who have mobility needs to hire vehicles for travel to all kinds of activities. There are other excellent community transport initiatives in South Scotland. Clydesdale community transport provides a door-to-door transport service that helps some of the most vulnerable people in the community to travel where there is no other available option. Another great scheme, which combines rural development with community transport, is organised by the Rural Development Trust in Douglas Water. When I was a teacher, we used it to take a swimming group swimming, which would not otherwise have been possible, on cost grounds. It is involved with the WRVS in Lesmahagow, which I visited recently. Among the people I met was Tom Morris, a volunteer driver, who told me that, as well as providing a useful service to the local community, the scheme has given him the confidence to meet new people and a new purpose in life. Such schemes are essential for people who often find themselves isolated and for whom a lack of transport makes it nearly impossible to access local services. That is a real problem for older people who, as other members have highlighted, can all too easily find themselves stranded at home, and for people with disabilities, who find it difficult to locate accessible transport. The Scottish Government recently acknowledged the important role that organisations such as Tweed wheels can play, and I was encouraged to hear its commitment to looking at how it can support such initiatives in the future. Like other members, I attended a recent rural transport solutions event in Kirkcudbright. It was highlighted to me that, rather than there being one solution that fits every situation, there is a myriad of possible solutions, each of which should be actively encouraged. As Aileen McLeod highlighted, Wigtownshire Community Transport, which works with the Scottish Ambulance Service, NHS Dumfries and Galloway and local authority partners, should be commended for the access that it gives people to numerous services and leisure facilities. There are door-to-door services that take people to specially arranged activities. Community groups run scheduled services where no other public transport service exists, although they do not do so simply to cover for cuts to services. In addition, there are self-drive services that provide accessible transport vehicles for individuals with reduced mobility. All those services are lifelines for local communities and, as the motion says, play a vital role in meeting the needs of those whom they serve. We must encourage more such schemes and support those that exist, and I welcome the cross-party support that has been expressed for that this evening. I hope that I am not making too many assumptions when I say that I also welcome the support for the extension of the concessionary fares scheme, which Jim Hume explored.

I am pleased to speak in this debate, which is so significant for Scotland’s vibrant agriculture sector. I thank the cabinet secretary for setting the context and Dave Stewart for giving us an historical update. I commend the tenant farming forum for working towards a consensus on these challenging issues from a wide range of perspectives. As has been highlighted by a number of members, the committee broadly welcomes the three proposals in the bill and Scottish Labour will support the bill at stage 1. Section 1, “Succession by near relatives”, defines “near relative”. Margaret McDougall and other members dealt in some detail with the issue, on which there are differing views. I stress that, although the committee wishes to show respect for the TFF consensus wherever possible and is keenly aware of the need to support a fair way forward for landlords and tenants, Scottish Labour finds it disappointing that the Scottish Government is unable to support the committee’s recommendation that the Government re-examine the issue and seek further comment from the TFF and its individual members ahead of stage 2.

That is certainly not what I am saying. Whenever consensus is possible, it is an excellent idea. However, a range of perspectives must be taken into account, which is what the committee has done, listening very carefully. The consensus is important, but it is also important that we take account of views as a committee, which is what we did. We simply ask the Scottish Government to look again at the issue of the definition of “near relative” at stage 2. On a more positive note, the committee believes that it is good that the Scottish Government will introduce a stage 2 amendment on the transitional provisions. The committee notes the widespread support for the provision on rent reviews and supports the removal of upward-only rent reviews and landlord-only initiation of rent reviews in a limited duration tenancy, believing that to be a positive and welcome measure. I note the cabinet secretary’s announcement of the meeting on 4 April, and I wish him and all those involved well in their deliberations. The committee notes the unanimous support for section 3, “Effect of VAT changes on determination of rent”. As the cabinet secretary stressed in his opening remarks, the provision is in the interests of both landlords and tenants. The committee received evidence on and discussed a number of important issues that lie beyond the scope of the bill, which my colleague Claire Baker and other members have highlighted. Annabelle Ewing emphasised the committee’s unanimous view in recommendation 80 that it is important that we continue to look at the issues from all perspectives to try to resolve them in the fairest way possible. I share the concern that our convener, Rob Gibson, expressed about the fact that some of those who submitted evidence felt the need to withhold their name. I would simply like that noted in this debate. I welcome the Scottish Government’s acknowledgement of the committee’s concern about the lack of available data on many issues. It is essential that that situation is addressed. The committee suggests that the Scottish Government and the TFF should re-examine the issue of investment in holdings in order to clarify who is responsible and find the most appropriate balance for the creation of a vibrant and healthy tenant farming sector, while of course taking landlords into account. As I live in rural Clydesdale, I am keenly aware of the barriers that are faced by new entrants to farming—by relatives of farmers and totally new farmers. The committee believes that the bill makes a modest contribution in relation to new entrants but is concerned about the decline in the number of agricultural tenancies in that regard and for broader reasons. Along with others, I have spoken in support of a register of new tenants, and I am pleased that that will be taken forward. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to plans to develop the new advisory service for new entrants in April. I hope that the Government will find funding for that. The committee supports further examination of conservation tenancies, which Dennis Robertson and my colleague Claire Baker highlighted. They are vital if we are to have new tenants and new entrants on environmentally supported land. The committee wants a code of practice to apply to all land agents, whether or not they are members of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. As Graeme Dey emphasised, greater consistency of practice is essential. SLE’s concerns about the break-up of estates seem misplaced but, as a way forward, the committee needs to assess the on-going scrutiny and change and to take all sides into account. The committee believes that clarity is needed on waygo compensation as a matter of urgency. I hope that the Scottish Government will progress that. The committee suggests that more legislation might well be needed on landlord and tenancy issues. The Scottish Government acknowledges that but says that that legislation is unlikely in this parliamentary session. That might well be acceptable for the consolidation of legislation but, in view of the uncertainty that the recent Scottish Land Court and appeal court cases have created, it is essential for the Scottish Government to look at the issue again, in order to clarify the position in relation to the 2003 act. Dennis Robertson asked for information on disputes to be available to all parties. Any disputes that can be kept out of the courts should be kept out of them, given the time that court cases take from the lives of all concerned and given the cost.

The committee supports calls for disputes to be looked at again. The Scottish Government expects the issue to feature in the new work plan, and the outcome will be looked at in future work.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what contingency plans it has put in place to ensure the continuing sale of mackerel in view of the possible loss of the Marine Stewardship Council certification at the end of March 2012. (S4O-00834)

Can the cabinet secretary give us further reassurance on what will happen to the fishermen? Can he give consumers a guarantee that there will be a good-quality and sustainable source of that popular fish, in view of the likelihood that there will be only a frozen back-up for some time?

I thank the minister for his statement and for advance sight of it. On the community renewable energy investment fund, I was reassured that the minister highlighted the mechanisms that will be put in place for support. However, I wish to push a little further and ask about the co-operative model, which I am meeting him next week to discuss. Will funding be available to cover the equity costs as well as loaned finance so that communities can take more control of their own power generation for the range of renewables, including microrenewables and combined heat and power?

I thank John Lamont for introducing this debate on a subject that is close to my heart and which is important to constituents across South Scotland—a point that has been highlighted by speakers from all parties. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment and the Minister for Housing and Transport quite rightly said in their foreword to the 2014 rail consultation that “an efficient railway, attuned to Scotland's needs, plays a key role in enabling delivery of ... a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth.” They also highlighted the point about linking our communities. As well as developing sustainable economic growth, increased services between Edinburgh and Berwickshire and East Lothian would contribute to our efforts to reduce our carbon emissions and would provide a green way for people to commute in and out of the capital. I, too, commend the work of the volunteers of RAGES who have done so much to keep these topics alive against all the odds. I must say that the group’s acronym is particularly apt for the subject, since I, along with many other rail campaigners, know from experience the frustration for rural communities that are unable easily to link with a rail connection. The MVA feasibility study is useful in identifying the main issues and cost benefit analysis of both the new stations and the improved service provision. However, I want quickly to point out several key issues. First, the proposal for the new stations, which has widespread local support, is essential to opening up rail transport in the whole of East Lothian. The MVA study suggests that there will be a combined annual demand for both stations of about 108,000 people, which contrasts with the annual use of Dunbar by about 80,000 people and strengthens the case for the stations. Additionally, those figures do not include weekend travellers, neither do they take into account the potential increase in the number of commuters who will change their travel habits if a reliable rail service is available, as Iain Gray highlighted. For example, on the Airdrie to Bathgate line, passengers at Uphall have increased by 21 per cent, and there are many other examples that we all know of. Secondly, the report states that the introduction of new services between Edinburgh and Dunbar and Edinburgh and Berwick-upon-Tweed resulted in a benefit to cost ratio of less than 1, as Chic Brodie pointed out, and that consequently the benefits that would be derived might not justify the outlay and operating costs. I would be very interested to learn of what that benefit to cost ratio consists. According to RAGES, the Minister for Housing and Transport stated in November 2011 that his main concern about East Linton and Reston stations was the £2.5 million subsidy that would be required. However, the benefits must not simply be seen in terms of potential revenue or even in simple expected demand figures, but within the wider context of reducing carbon emissions and changing personal attitudes. Only by providing increased frequency and more accessible stations will we be effective in moving travel habits towards more sustainable modes. That will also have the combined benefit of reducing congestion on roads into Edinburgh and the surrounding areas, as has been mentioned, and could lead to further regeneration of communities, thereby contributing to sustainable economic growth. I take on board John Lamont’s remarks about the STAG 2 appraisal. I hope that, when it is published, we will get a good result. I commend him for bringing the debate to Parliament and I commend all those who are involved in the campaign to improve local rail services. I hope that the Scottish Government will see the investment in those services and stations in the wider context of the low-carbon economy, and that it will invest in our sustainable economic future and in communities across the south-east of Scotland.

Given the Scottish Government’s admirable commitment to creating 60,000 green jobs by 2020, what assessment have the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government made of the skills gap that currently exists in green industries and technologies? What steps does the cabinet secretary propose to take to ensure that current and future Scottish students are equipped to take on the green jobs of the future?

I start by echoing George Adam—we need a joined-up approach. I will not talk exclusively about my region, but it will certainly come into my speech. I speak enthusiastically in the debate about the future of tourism in Scotland to support Rhoda Grant’s amendment, which would add that the Parliament “further commends tourist industry partners for working together to develop green and eco-tourism.” I was delighted to hear that the minister will support the amendment. Tourism worldwide is predicted to be the world’s largest industry by 2030 and to account for 14 per cent of world gross domestic product. In the shift to a low-carbon economy, all sectors must be seen in the context of our climate change targets. The International Ecotourism Society defines eco-tourism as “responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment and improves the well-being of local people”. A poll of 60,000 visitors ranked Scotland top in Europe and ninth in the world as an eco-destination. More broadly, many tourists from home and abroad look for a green experience. According to the UK Energy Saving Trust, “green tourism is about being an environmentally friendly tourist or providing environmentally friendly tourist services.” Ensuring sustainable travel options to destinations is essential to that for all regions of Scotland. Rail is a brilliant option. There are beautiful journeys such as the one to Mallaig—not in my region—which link with ferry services. We must also be certain to retain the Caledonian sleeper service. The Campaign for Borders Rail should be commended for its unstinting work along with others to bring the Borders railway back into use for green-minded tourists who go to the Borders. Just this week, the CBR secured the backing of four rail heritage companies to operate charter trains to key Scottish destinations such as Edinburgh and the Highlands. That would mean lengthening the platform at Tweedbank station, and I hope that the Scottish Government will consider the plea to do that. Links with buses in rural areas are also essential for connectivity. Once people are at their destinations, cycling options are already available in towns such as Innerleithen and many others. At last night’s meeting of the cross-party group on rural policy, the focus was on the low-carbon chance, and we heard that Northumberland national park has electric car points and that hire cars are available in the park. I hope that the minister will comment on the possibility of such measures in Scotland. Green tourism must avoid tokenism at all costs. The green tourism business scheme—GTBS—is the largest green accreditation scheme in the UK and was founded in partnership with VisitScotland in 1997. Xavier Font of the International Centre for Responsible Tourism endorses it. He says that it “provides excellent value for money to a ... range of tourism firms with first class environmental advice and auditing.” The minister highlighted business tourism, and many types of tourism have been mentioned. I am not sure whether we could call it political tourism, but a lot of us in the Parliament have been to or will head off to party conferences this spring, and I wonder whether the hotels in which we stay—they are larger hotels that are often members of chains—have clauses in their corporate social responsibility policies that cover matters such as sourcing food locally and the other environmental issues that they should address. The 84 businesses in South Scotland that have bronze, silver or gold awards in the GTBS are testimony to the range and scale that are involved. They include the St Abb’s Head national nature reserve, Dawyck botanic gardens, a youth hostel in Newton Stewart, the Pear cottage self-catering apartment in Melrose and the VisitScotland Borders network office in Selkirk. Just this week, the Whitleys of the Lamancha business, Bread Matters, received a gold award, and the assessor was “impressed by the commitment to renewable energy collaboration with local enterprises” and with the partnerships that had been built up in relation to green tourism. Along with tourism offices, an extraordinary range of visitor attractions and accommodation, including farms that have diversified to provide bed-and-breakfast accommodation, make up the list in South Scotland and beyond. Jean Urquhart spoke of the wages of people in the industry. The manager of the Buccleuch Arms hotel, Dave Smith, stresses the importance of that factor. Of the green tourism scheme, he said that the essential elements are that it has to be easy for staff to do and that it has to save money. He said that, at that point, “it becomes possible to use the green issue in marketing.” Members of the cross-party group on whisky, which Mary Scanlon has mentioned, will visit distilleries this summer. As far away as the University of Waterloo in Ontario, there is an academic study that stresses that “visitor centres at malt whisky distilleries are a type of industrial tourism attraction”— Siobhan McMahon mentioned industrial tourism earlier— “that can claim environmental credibility and thus has a chance to capitalise on the sentiments of a ‘greening’ tourism market.” The International Ecotourism Society says that eco-tourism is about “uniting conservation, communities and sustainable travel”. There is a new initiative in the Borders, action for the Innerleithen mechanical uplift—AIMUp—that is doing work that is essential in this context. How does the Scottish Government aim to support such environmentally friendly projects, which will bring new year-round tourism and spin-off business opportunities to fragile rural communities across Scotland? More generally, how will Scottish tourism benefit from becoming more sustainable? In the final analysis, urban, rural, island and mainland, the greening of the tourism experience is as essential as the greening of our whole economy. As the Scottish Government motion highlights, 2013 will be the year of natural Scotland. What a great opportunity to prioritise green tourism. Let us go for it.

I am delighted that the Parliament is discussing climate justice and that we are all part of a global first. That is extremely important. I fully support the sentiments that the minister expressed: the poor and vulnerable of the world are at huge risk unless we collectively change our behaviour. We are not just witnessing but living the greatest on-going silent crisis in human history. The crisis is of such magnitude that we could be blinded by its complexities and forget that there are solutions. I thank the minister for his analysis of climate justice, for his gender analysis and for the information on our commitment to Malawi and other international commitments that Scotland is making. The focus that the minister described must also be directed at activity at home, to ensure that the world-leading climate change targets that were set by all parties in the Parliament are met and that the move towards a low-carbon economy is fair to all the people of Scotland. Climate justice is a deeply complex issue. Climate change knows no boundaries. It cannot be controlled by individual Governments and its effects cannot be mitigated by people working alone. Although the effects of climate change are skewed, they are indiscriminate and threaten us all. We live in a global village in which everyone has a responsibility to protect our planet for future generations. If we are to combat climate change, there must be a common endeavour. There must be a sharing of knowledge, ideas, technology and skills, and there must be a shared vision, to help all people in the most vulnerable places on earth. The First Minister spoke on the issue during his recent visit to China. He said that we introduced our targets “to set our own house in order, to be part of the solution not the problem, but also to lead by example.” Those sentiments are correct. To deal with climate change globally, we must lead by example. That means that we must redouble our efforts to reduce emissions and work with local government, public services, business, communities and trade unions to respond to the growing threat. For those reasons, we were disappointed by the Government’s decision to cut the active travel budget by almost 40 per cent. I acknowledge that the position improved after cross-party work, but the budget has still been cut by 20 per cent. Demand reduction is also imperative. The target to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016 is jeopardised by Scottish Government budget cuts. The Scottish National Party commitment to work with partners to build a Scotland-wide adaptation fund—I think that the minister said that it is to be renamed the climate justice fund—is welcome. Scottish Labour thinks that the Government should take forward the initiative and work with the UK Government to find leverage to put greater pressure on global financial institutions to contribute funds. Given that the Scottish Government is only to co-ordinate the fund, perhaps the minister will talk about the steps that can be taken to ensure that the private sector invests in it. I am sure that Patrick Harvie will talk about such issues when he speaks to the amendment in his name. The climate challenge fund is another good initiative that the Government has championed. A few weeks ago, Humza Yousaf and I attended the launch of an awareness-raising booklet by the first steps initiative in Glasgow. The initiative comes from a black and ethnic minority group, who expressed to me and to Humza Yousaf their concern that in the current set-up only communities of place are entitled to apply to the fund, so communities of interest are precluded from applying. We asked the Government to look at the issue, working with Keep Scotland Beautiful to ensure that the fund can benefit the widest possible number of people in the next application phase. Equality must be at the heart of the fund. I highlighted that issue because it is important that we ask ourselves whether we are setting the best possible example in all areas. There are many good initiatives that the Scottish Government is taking forward, but if we are cutting back on the very programmes that encourage transition to a low-carbon future, are we setting the right example for others to follow? We support the Government’s ambitious renewables targets, but constant reassessment is necessary. There has been much debate in relation to wind farm applications. I am glad that, from April, there will finally be a dedicated community benefit register. However, the very structures of ownership are a climate change issue. When communities are empowered by joint ventures, virtual turbine ownership or co-operatives, the attitude to wind farms is different from the attitude when a multinational company is involved, often not with the best community benefit. I ask the minister and the Scottish Government to be sure that, as we begin to consider seriously the development of marine renewables, we learn from the concerns of communities and work together to develop an inclusive vision for the future. Needless to say, that applies to renewable heat, green transport and all other new ventures. Our amendment emphasises partnership working with local authorities, public services, business and individual communities. I draw members’ attention to a model that is not from Scotland, but from China, where there is a pilot involving 25 cities through which buyers of new energy vehicles will receive joint subsidies from central and local Government. In Shenzhen, there is a plan to have 2,000 more green public vehicles on the road in 2012, which will reduce pollution and provide transport links for the community. Perhaps China can teach us a thing or two. Does the Scottish Government really always work in partnership? For instance, it could give direction to the national health service on local food sourcing to address issues of carbon miles or freshness and to help develop local employment. That was highlighted to me by a constituent, Greg Flowerdew, as part of a medical school project. I raise those issues because it is essential that our environmental transformation does not in any way become stagnant and that we constantly refresh it in pushing forward. In the words of WWF Scotland, the publication “Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting the Emissions Reduction Targets 2010-2022: The Report on Proposals and Policies”, which should be the guiding document on our path towards reaching our climate targets, “falls well short of providing confidence that these targets will be hit” and “fails to commit to the ... step-change in policy action described as necessary by the UK CCC”, which is the UK Committee on Climate Change. The new report on proposals and policies for 2023 to 2027 will be carefully scrutinised by many people, not just those in the Parliament. As we call on the Government to ensure that Scotland’s domestic plans are in place, so we support the Government’s position in the motion. We need to find ways forward together to help the most vulnerable internationally to deal with the ravages of climate change. I thank the minister for giving an update on Durban. We will provide as much support as possible to the work in the lead-up to Rio. We are interested in continuing dialogue with the Scottish Government where appropriate. Kofi Annan, in his introduction to “The Anatomy of a Silent Crisis”, spoke passionately of the risk to the millennium goals and the all-encompassing threat to the economy, health and safety that is presented by climate change. My colleague Neil Findlay will speak of the importance of the green economy here in Scotland and of green skills. While those skills grow our economy here, it is important that we find ways in which to export that knowledge to the developing world and to share it with them. All too often, the west speaks of the importance of the developing world not following in our footsteps with its own industrial revolution. However, the “Do as we say and not as we do” approach simply will not work, unless we back it up with the offer of shared technology and innovation so that, as the minister highlighted, countries can develop their own technologies for the future. As we join together on 31 March to switch off our lights for earth hour, let us remember that it is not just a gesture, but that it is about people coming together to celebrate the appreciation of our precious world and to call for action to protect it. We have a stake in the future of our planet. We are all on the same side in the fight for climate justice. Let us work together, share what we know and push ourselves further so that Scotland can truly be a beacon for the world to follow. I move amendment S4M-02156.1, to insert at end: “, and calls on the Scottish Government to redouble its efforts to reduce emissions and target climate change in Scotland by working with local authorities, public services, business and individual communities to ensure that all are equipped to respond to this growing threat in a manner that puts environmental justice and equality at its heart, developing new and transferrable skills and encouraging the sharing of knowledge internationally to benefit the world”.

We certainly agree on the need to leverage in private finance, but will the member clarify how the UK Government will be sure that it is the people of the countries into which the CMCI is looking to put private finance who will really benefit?

Will the member give way?

I am delighted to wind up on behalf of Scottish Labour in support of the Government’s motion on the green investment bank. I am pleased by the cross-party support, so eloquently highlighted by Mark Griffin, for a proposal that was first mooted two years ago in the House of Commons by Alistair Darling and by the passion with which members across the chamber have argued for the bank to be based in Edinburgh. As the minister stated, fDi Magazine has endorsed Edinburgh as a number 1 city. That is a significant development. Members have pointed out why Edinburgh is the best place in the UK to host the bank. Those who are behind the bid deserve recognition, because it is not often that a coalition can be formed between environmental campaigners, banks, universities, engineering firms, law firms and the Government. On this endeavour, there has been a united front, which I am sure will pay dividends for Scotland and the UK when the final decision is made. As the minister stressed, Edinburgh is the only city with synergies between finances and green energy. Gavin Brown and Sarah Boyack highlighted the commitment of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, and Gavin Brown put forward the cluster argument, which is very important. As Marco Biagi said, one would think that the criteria had been designed with Edinburgh in mind and when the bid result is announced we hope that that will be the case. In the words of the business case, no other city in the United Kingdom brings “finance and the clean energy industry together”. A pool of nearly 156,000 people is employed directly or indirectly in Scotland’s financial services sector, including 60,000 within the Edinburgh travel-to-work area. Colin Beattie also highlighted the analytical expertise in Edinburgh’s financial sector. All that is coupled with an unrivalled concentration of skills and expertise in clean energy and skills in the oil and gas sector that can be transferred to offshore renewables. Mark Griffin spoke of his background in engineering and of how some of Scotland’s great institutions can ensure a good field of future employees in the sector. Moreover, Sarah Boyack stressed the necessity of moving ideas from the academic to the commercial sector. Mark Griffin also highlighted the need to kick-start the GIB and unlock employment opportunities and the vital chance to research not only the issue of storage to deal with the problem of intermittency, but other new developments. The GIB must engage with partners in the sector to deliver on its objectives. If located in Edinburgh, the bank will be in an ideal place to engage with the new European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney as well as with partners in Scotland’s other major cities who are backing this bid. As Rob Gibson pointed out, proximity to intellectual knowledge and projects is essential. The GIB must be cost effective. With high rents, rates and other general costs, the costs of basing the bank in London far outweigh any benefits that that city can offer. Once again, Edinburgh becomes the obvious choice. In fact, beyond purely financial considerations, basing the bank outside London will allow it to be seen as something new and distinctive. It will not be just another bank in the city of London, but a new endeavour reaching out to all parts of the country. Colin Keir highlighted that point and John Wilson also indicated that Edinburgh has strong international links. I turn briefly to the bank itself. Although I welcome the cross-party consensus that we have seen today, I am disappointed in the way in which the coalition Government proposals for the bank seem to be developing. Sir Adrian Montague, the financier who has been tasked with overseeing the bank’s launch, has stated that it will act using commercial lending principles and that it will not offer preferential rates. It will be tasked with delivering a dividend for the Treasury. That is fair enough, but on that basis, would the Treasury not be better forcing other banks to lend to the sector on a commercial basis and more than they are doing at present? However, I have been somewhat reassured by Liam McArthur’s remarks. I also highlight the importance of the UK electricity market reform in relation to demand-driven aspects of investment in energy efficiency. The minister highlighted the Scottish Government’s commitment to the low-carbon economy and many members share that vision of long-term sustainable development for Scotland and Britain. If that is to become a reality, the GIB must be given criteria to ensure that it will bridge the gap between venture capital and the green economy, and be able to kick-start the low-carbon infrastructure projects that we need. As Graeme Pearson stressed by using the example of the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, a sector-specific bank is invaluable. Energy4All has raised with me the issue of co-operatives being able to borrow to cover start-up costs and told me how it is impossible for most banks to loan 100 per cent of start-up money to a co-operative. Sarah Boyack stressed the importance of unlocking finance at the city and community level. She argued that the bank must be transformative and must influence other banks. Kevin Stewart, from Aberdeen of course, also stressed that the CHP and hydrogen technology programmes will make a valuable contribution when it comes to deciding on siting the GIB here. I ask the minister to do all that he can to persuade the UK Government to ensure that the bank becomes not simply another commercial entity, but a real source of financial support to organisations of all sizes that are seeking to develop new green technologies. I reaffirm Scottish Labour’s support for bringing the green investment bank to Scotland and our strong support for the Government’s motion today.

There are organic dairy farms in South Scotland that are part of a countrywide organic dairy co-operative. In the international year of co-operatives, what support is available from the Scottish Government specifically for that part of the sector?

It is with great pleasure that I speak in this debate as a member of the Labour and Co-operative group of MSPs. I congratulate Helen Eadie on bringing her motion to the chamber for debate and I strongly welcome the efforts by the United Nations to raise public awareness of the issue globally, including in Scotland. I also congratulate Scotmid—I believe that Ian Miller is in the public gallery tonight—on being at the heart of Scottish communities for more than 150 years. In my speech, I will highlight producer co-operatives. Broadfield, in my region of South Scotland, is an organic farm that is a member of a countrywide co-operative of organic dairy farmers. That enables collective power in bargaining and also sharing of good practice. Such models are important, not least in relation to the power of supermarkets and the stranglehold that they often have on producers. Internationally, producer co-operatives have given power to growers and, increasingly, to women. There is often a fair-trade element, which brings additional benefits in addressing food security, population growth, climate change, women’s empowerment and high commodity prices. Jennipher Wettaka, a member of a co-operative of women coffee growers in Uganda that is supported by Equal Exchange, tells us about the Gumutindo Coffee Cooperative Ltd. I hope that I pronounced that right. She says: “Gumutindo means quality. We were asked to join and benefit as fair trade producers. We immediately joined without hesitation and have not looked back. I take pride in myself being a member of a co-operative that revived the spirit of working together on `.” As a member of the cross-party group on Malawi, I know that there are ways in which we can support co-operatives there as part of Scotland’s ongoing relationship with that country. Women farmers in Malawi speak about how farmers organisations, working collectively and often as co-ops, are using their power to break down material barriers; to enable better access to important extension services, credit and inputs; and to enable better access to agricultural markets. They are also offering women greater opportunities to engage in leadership positions in the public sphere. In a different sector, the ways in which we generate our energy globally is a power issue in more than the literal sense of the word. The Bangladesh rural electrification programme dates back to 1977. More than 70 co-operatives, or Palli Bidyut Samities, reach over 25 million people as customers. Typical household incomes have increased by 16 per cent, infant mortality has fallen, enhanced employment opportunities have resulted in people migrating to villages that have power, and a variety of new industries have developed. Although I whole-heartedly support small co-ops, I have to wonder how the myth developed that co-ops have to be small-scale. It certainly did not develop in Bangladesh or, indeed, in Spain’s Basque Country, where the Mondragon Corporation was founded long ago in the town of the same name. Although its origin is linked to the activities of a modest technical college and a small workshop producing paraffin heaters, the corporation is currently the seventh-largest Spanish company. Here in Scotland, energy could be in people’s hands more. Members will be keenly aware from a previous member’s business debate and our—mostly virtual—mailbags of concerns, of landscape capacity with regard to onshore wind generation. Although that issue must be addressed, there are also concerns about ownership. I am still waiting to meet the minister with responsibility for energy matters, Fergus Ewing, to discuss maximising opportunities for communities to retain ownership of larger-scale projects through the use of co-operative models. Now that the Government’s community and renewable energy scheme is under review, the issue has become very urgent.

I will, Presiding Officer. In Scotland and internationally, co-operatives build a better world. In this country, we must do all that we can to facilitate their birth and development as well as to support them internationally. I know that MSPs across the chamber will do so. We wish co-operatives well for the future.

In his opening remarks in the stage 1 debate on the budget bill, the cabinet secretary spoke about the importance of the low-carbon economy and sustainability. He also spoke of his willingness “to work constructively with all parties”.—[Official Report, 25 January 2012; c 5622.] Although I welcome the changes that have been made to the budget, there are still many cuts in it. In many areas, the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have simply neither listened to expert opinion nor listened enough to dissenting voices in the Parliament. However, having fought hard with Jim Hume and Patrick Harvie to get the Scottish Government to think again about the 45 per cent cut to the active travel budget, I find it refreshing that the Government has put its hands up and admitted to having made a bad decision. I am only sorry that Mr Swinney is not willing to reverse the cut completely when it is only a small part of the budget. There will still be a 20 per cent cut in funding next year and a 30 per cent cut over the budget period. The Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee’s report on active travel recommended: “the decline in the funding of sustainable transport and active travel line needs to be not only reversed, but significantly increased.” The many groups and constituents who argued the case for a better active travel budget in terms of health, road safety, congestion, greener cities and tackling carbon emissions should be congratulated. The local job opportunities have also been highlighted. However, there is still a cut in the active travel budget. Therefore, I ask the cabinet secretary to provide in his closing remarks reassurance on how active travel criteria can be integrated into the infrastructure plan, which is big on road building but says little about sustainable means of transport, such as space for walking. I appreciate that there is now £18 million for modal shift, but will that help us to develop travel infrastructure of the sort that is found in Holland, for instance, where cycle lanes and pedestrian opportunities are part of road systems as a matter of course? The altered announcement on affordable housing is disappointing. The cabinet secretary talked of innovation in that context. Will he reassure me that new-build homes will meet ever more rigorous sustainability standards so that they are not only affordable, but move towards zero-heating standards, such as those demonstrated by Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen? He will know that existing housing is responsible for a staggering 25 per cent of Scotland’s emissions and that reductions in those emissions are, therefore, essential if we are ever to meet our emissions targets. No doubt the cabinet secretary also agrees that energy efficiency has the added benefit of reducing fuel poverty, which shamefully now affects one household in three in Scotland. In evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Norman Kerr of Energy Action Scotland was clear that the sum required to achieve the Scottish Government’s target of eradicating fuel poverty by 2016 is near £100 million per annum. Although the figure for next year has been increased to £65 million, it is not enough. Investing in domestic energy efficiency by retrofitting homes is a win-win approach. It is one of the most cost-effective and sustainable ways of tackling fuel poverty and creating local jobs while reducing carbon emissions. I welcome the fact that, on a number of occasions, the cabinet secretary has spoken in the Parliament about the importance of preventative spend. I am sure that he agrees that energy efficiency is a classic example of that approach. However, despite overwhelming evidence from experts, his Government is not investing at sufficient levels to achieve the required returns. The budget continues to fail to address domestic carbon emissions, and it stops short of providing adequate funding to eradicate fuel poverty. I hope that the cabinet secretary will take that point into account in his closing remarks, although he does not appear to be very interested in listening to what I am saying.

We are discussing the SNP’s budget, not ours. It is for the SNP to say how it would deal with the issue. I am talking about very small amounts of money that would help people in fuel poverty. Many groups outside the Parliament, including non-governmental organisations and environmental organisations, are asking for such a commitment. I emphasise that we are still talking about a cut in that area. The programme monitoring committee that oversees the implementation of the Scotland rural development programme suggests that “there is a mismatch between budgets and demand.” I highlight that “papers demonstrate that decisions had already been taken or steps were being discussed in order to manage current demand and future demand for agri-environment options in rural priorities.” The UK Committee on Climate Change has stressed that there was an emissions rise in 2010. The Scottish Government must ensure that climate change targets are a priority across all portfolios, and this budget must surely be the starting point for that.

On the point about mobile coverage, I want to highlight an inclusion issue. Earlier this week, a care forum in the Borders highlighted to me the importance to deaf people of text messaging in relation to the national health service. That kind of service is not happening in the Borders or, I believe, anywhere else in Scotland.

I am pleased to be able to highlight the part of our motion that “urges the Scottish Government to consider ways in which it can support demand-led transport solutions such as community transport in rural areas”. Across South Scotland and elsewhere, robust and well-organised community transport initiatives are evolving, and they are increasingly developing an interface with public transport. I stress that they are not a reason to cut services, which should be developed, but are an essential complement to what is often a limited service in terms of routes and times. For people of all ages, community transport is a new lifeline that is helping to end rural isolation and bring communities together. When the Equal Opportunities Committee took evidence on the issue, we heard from the Rural Development Trust in Clydesdale, which runs its minibuses on waste fat from school kitchens. I say to the minister that I hope that support will indeed be forthcoming for such initiatives. As a teacher, I was able to book a minibus to take pupils swimming 15 miles away. It was driven by our headteacher, who became a volunteer driver, thus keeping the costs down. There are also community transport groups in Annandale and Tweeddale, and I am sure that members know of others in their regions. There are several different models for community transport because such initiatives are demand and community led and they have been developed to suit a range of needs, but that must not be—and does not have to be—a barrier to the interface with public transport and other provision. Last week, I attended a rural transport solutions event, with Elaine Murray, in Kirkcudbright, at which it was stressed that transport is a crucial element of community structure. The project is funded by the European Union northern periphery programme and it works with a range of local partners—Dumfries and Galloway Council, the south west of Scotland transport partnership, Wigtownshire community transport, NHS Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Ambulance Service. I welcome the minister’s remarks on partnerships of that kind. The downtime issue is being addressed. Its most ludicrous manifestation is the school bus sitting idle through the summer holidays. There is potential to save a lot of money by enabling community groups to use school buses. The requirements to train volunteer drivers, pass buses from one group to another and share maintenance costs do not have to be insurmountable barriers and they should not be an excuse not to develop new partnerships. The approach is already working. Wigtownshire community transport is working towards becoming self-financing through procurement. I stress that reregulation is essential if local community transport initiatives are to seek procurement in that way. There are also small charges for community bookings. Further to Elaine Murray’s remarks, I note that constituents have approached me as well to request that concessionary fares be extended to community transport. I welcome the minister’s remarks on that. One person stated, “Free bus passes are great, but they are useless if there is no bus to catch.” Community transport addresses many rural challenges. It prevents people from having to stay in town all day if there are infrequent public transport services. It enables households that do not have a car to get to their nearest public transport service, which is particularly important for people who live in very remote places. It prevents parents with small children and carers with elderly family members from being left trapped in the house when the only car user has left—in the case of one-car households—hopefully to go to work or training. It enables people in remote places to which public transport will never come to get to appointments, and it enables groups to get together in such areas. It also stops the branding of transport for groups who feel isolated and enables them to become more integrated in their community, and it enables managers in places such as day centres to get on with their jobs rather than working out the complexities of bookings.

Community transport is meeting the needs of schools, hospitals, healthcare, social services and tourism by developing sustainable systems, and it will also help us to meet our climate change targets. I commend the model to the Scottish Government and ask it to give community transport as much support as it can.

Will the member give way?

I would like to highlight a concern about energy efficient homes in addition to what Elaine Murray and John Mason have highlighted. Some members are concerned about the budget not really meeting the energy efficiency demand that many groups, including voluntary sector groups, have highlighted in relation to fuel poverty. Will the member comment on that?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive to what extent it monitors the site condition of seabird breeding colony special protection areas, including the corresponding marine extensions. (S4O-00569)

The minister will be aware that one of the SPAs with marine extension is St Abb’s Head, which is in the region that I represent. It supports in excess of 20,000 seabirds and is truly a site of European importance. Does the minister accept that, if the monitoring of the site is not sufficiently robust, licences for marine activities could be erroneously granted and negative impacts on the seabird populations might result?

As a rural dweller, the new shadow cabinet minister and a new member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I am delighted to contribute to the debate, albeit with some trepidation in view of the complexities of CAP that Mike MacKenzie has already mentioned. I do not intend to sum up because I think that that would be arrogant of me in my new role, but I will highlight a few points, some of which members have raised already and some of which I hope will be new. This is, of course, a time of uncertainty for everyone but particularly for farmers, who face the complexities of the EU and the CAP reform again. Food security, good-quality locally sourced food and air miles are all issues for consideration, and Scotland takes those issues very seriously within and beyond the agricultural and rural communities. Demand is increasing for a healthy diet and access to fresh food at fair prices, which has implications for our farmers and the whole food chain. David Clarkson of Woodlands in Clydesdale has said: “If SFP and LFAS payments have to keep reducing, the production of beef and sheep will become unsustainable. As soon as our prices go up our input prices increase, especially fertiliser costs which wipe out any benefit.” Regionality is a concern. NFUS argues for a CAP outcome that will allow flexibility for all member states and regions and, within that regionality, for three areas—possibly the Highlands and Islands, an LFA, and then the south-west, Fife and East Lothian. However, the issue becomes more complex as we focus on specific areas. Ian Parker, a Clydesdale organic dairy farmer, highlights that from one perspective: “Many of Scotland’s rural areas have different qualities of land in close proximity. This is very pronounced in South Lanarkshire” where dairy farming follows the course of the Clyde, but there are other forms of farming in the area. If regionalisation goes down to smaller areas, that is a concern. On the other hand—there is, of course, a counter-argument—Scottish Environment LINK argues for the division. It says that such calls are an area for concern and states that “the underlying rationale for such calls is to limit the redistributive effects of moving to a regionalised support system.” We must be clear in our assessment of more detail on how regionality can be done in the fairest way. Bureaucratic paperwork is not something that farmers, teachers or, indeed, politicians enjoy, especially when we feel that it is getting in the way of our daily work, and farmers often have to work long into the night on bureaucracy. However, the suggestion that there should be a shift from unannounced inspections to more emphasis on working with farmers on action plans and offering guidance that focuses more on outcomes would be welcomed by many and would take down stress levels considerably. There is no room for mistakes in the current system, and more engagement by inspectors in the process can help to tackle that injustice. I gather that the average age of farmers in Scotland is similar to mine. I certainly would not like to be out in a lot of the weather that they go out in. As many members have stressed, new entrants must have our support if the industry is to continue to be vibrant. Land costs, the challenges of getting a loan and the problem of not qualifying for the single farm payment in the shift are serious problems for new entrants. As Andrew Craig of Normangill farm in Clydesdale has said: “The industry as a whole is an aging one and needs to find a way to allow young people to take over the farming business without saddling them with an enormous debt that will be with them for a long time.” It is important that the new CAP recognises that farmers are already doing a great deal in respect of environmental worth, but one of our priorities is biodiversity. EU member states did not meet the 2010 biodiversity target, so there is a serious problem to be dealt with. In that context, Wilma Findlay of Cream o’ Galloway—I am always talking about her ice cream, but it is very good—argues for support of the Scottish Government’s land use strategy. We must make a contribution within the CAP to ecological connectivity. Indeed, we can all enjoy the benefits of that, even those of us who live in towns and cities—we can enjoy more green space around us and have access to the countryside and valuable habitats. The farming community has a strong role to play in meeting those targets. The Scottish Wildlife Trust has highlighted that issue, and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has stressed that it is “important to remember that CAP reform is not just about farming” in rural areas. Not only do the ecological connectivity arguments highlight that; the SCVO talks about the opportunities for an “increased share of the next programme’s funding to be targeted on supporting communities to take control of and develop their local assets, to improve their local facilities and services and to support small enterprises including social enterprises.” Margaret McDougall, who is a new member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, is unable to speak in the debate, but she wanted to highlight concern about CAP delivery in relation to economic growth, rural sustainability and food security without the waste of things such as tobacco, which is obviously a very unhealthy crop that is grown elsewhere. There should be support for farmers in the interim. Andrew Craig, who farms at Normangill farm, has said: “you will get a different answer from whomever you ask their thoughts about CAP reform.” Finally, I ask members to think outside the box. David Findlay of Cream o’ Galloway has proposed a new sustainable land use contracts scheme, which seeks to address and integrate the many challenges that we face. Let us think outside the box, but let us also get the balance right for all our rural communities in moving forward together. I thank the committee for the debate.

Like other members, I value the opportunity that the debate provides to express views and highlight experiences, which I hope will in some way inform the committee’s report. The challenge of enabling and supporting the best education for looked-after children and young adults who are in transition from being looked after is a great one. Many initiatives have attempted to grapple with the seemingly intractable nature of the challenges that looked-after children and young people face. In the honest and stark words of the convener, we have to admit that on the whole we have not achieved what we set out to achieve. However, we all acknowledge that there is good practice. Many members gave examples, not least Kevin Stewart when he described what is happening in Aberdeen. The committee has taken a great deal of valuable evidence, which has shaped the five key themes that inform the recommendations. If they are to thrive, looked-after children must have the support and guidance that they need, in education and in the structure of their very lives. I am somewhat daunted by the task of shedding further light on the issue at this stage in the debate, but I will try to do so. The convener asked to hear about members’ experiences, and although I can give only one perspective, I hope that it is worth highlighting the positive ethos of a small unit for pupils who had been excluded from school, where I worked for four years. The majority of teenagers in the unit were looked after. The educational team was able to offer continuity of appropriate educational experience, which generally matched the pupils’ needs, interests and increasing aspirations. Support from the psychological services was regular and frequent, for pupils and for teaching and other staff, who were helped to identify challenges and develop strategies. Such an approach has been endorsed to some extent by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Scotland, which called for “evidence-based therapeutic interventions” where necessary, especially in relation to attachment issues. Some of the young people who attended the unit were able to articulate the importance that they attached to being listened to and respected. As Mark McDonald said, it is important that we listen to young people. Other members talked about the importance of recognising achievement as well as attainment in looked-after children and young people. I am in no way advocating that looked-after children be educated in small, separate classes, away from their peers, but we must consider what lessons can be drawn from experience in the school in which I worked. We must acknowledge the role of the designated manager but, if the educational needs of our looked-after children are to be met, not just guidance teachers but all teachers and support staff must be equipped with an understanding of the challenges that such children face. The approach must continue to be developed as an essential part of initial teacher training and continuing professional development. It is perhaps key that we do our best to ensure that as far as possible looked-after children are with the same named and appropriately-trained member of staff throughout their two stages of schooling—primary and secondary. It is essential that staff support and advice arrangements are not just in place at times of crisis but accessible on a regular and on-going basis. At a more strategic level, of which I have some experience, there remain silos out there. When I was a teacher I attended a local authority interagency away day, which was also attended by social workers, the police, care workers, the voluntary sector and other people who had a significant role with looked-after children. We were presented with a challenging scenario to try to resolve and we were given roles that were different from our usual roles. It was disconcerting to learn how little some of us—including me—knew about how other professionals work and about the constraints that people face and the opportunities that they have in their professional lives. Sharing our experience was a positive exercise and I hope that we will reflect on the implications. The committee’s evidence from HMIE highlighted the value of multi-agency working, which remains patchy. I will conclude by talking about our post-care obligations as corporate parents. Needless to say, becoming an adult is a complex process for us all. Most of us managed it with the help of at least one parent, who topped up the cash now and then—perhaps sometimes in a rather immediate way—looked after us when we had a rotten cold, tucked us into bed and gave us a Christmas present that we hoped for or a silly stocking at the end of the bed. I hope that our parents were there for us when we needed them—for some of us, they are still there. Many children who leave care have not had such continuity of love and care. As corporate parents we must address how best we can set up an interlocking system of stability for such young people. The support needs of students in colleges and universities have been highlighted by other speakers and also by NUS Scotland and the University of Strathclyde students association. Their comments are vital. We must also consider the needs of young people who have been looked after who are not in further or higher education, as they are perhaps the most intractable group in relation to our post-care obligation. We must help that group by ensuring that suitable training and continuing support are identified and maintained as they move, we hope, towards work. I stress that the through thread—the continuity of support throughout a looked-after child’s progress towards adulthood—is key. Resources are also essential—that was the fifth of the key points that Stewart Maxwell mentioned. We all hear of the budgetary challenges that we are facing. The challenges that we face as corporate parents are about not only cash, but how we can best arrange support. Both aspects must be considered with the utmost seriousness when the committee draws up its recommendations. We must ensure that meeting any demands on the public purse that arise from the recommendations—whether they involve expenditure by local authorities or by the Government—is an absolute priority.

I support the substantive points in the cabinet secretary’s motion. We should strive to create a simpler welfare system, but UK Government’s proposals would undermine the benefits system with potentially serious consequences for the most vulnerable people in our society. I will highlight the concerns about the proposed personal independence payments, which would replace disability living allowance; the issues around work capability assessments; and the risks to the human rights of people with disabilities that will result from these scurrilous changes. Recently, I took part in an interview with Insight Radio, which is the radio station of the Royal National Institute of Blind People, and we discussed some of the issues that people with visual impairments are facing. The RNIB estimates that 85 per cent of those who are registered blind or partially sighted—nearly 60,000 people—receive DLA. Under the proposed arrangements, people who have been blind since birth will be forced to undergo upsetting reassessment and transfer to PIPs. The assessments often overlook individuals’ real needs and reduce complex care needs to a series of boxes to be ticked. Rather than understanding people’s needs, they often miss the true nature of individuals’ conditions and needs, underestimate the physical and emotional support that is required and trivialise important tasks such as people being able to dress themselves or make their way to the shops. ACT NOW, the autism campaign group, has also raised with me serious concerns about the assessments, which are putting adults with autism under huge stress and anxiety. The group raises the very real concern that, although on paper an individual might be able to complete a simple task such as making a cup of tea at home, in reality, they might find that extremely difficult or impossible, and they certainly could not transfer that skill to the workplace. For an individual with autism, being able to understand the process and what is being asked is paramount, but the evidence that we have seen so far suggests that the employment and support allowance assessments do not fulfil that requirement. Several of my constituents who are service users at Capability Scotland’s Windmill Gardens in Carluke wrote to me last week and outlined in great detail their concerns about the change from DLA to PIPs. Far from increasing the independence of people with additional support needs, the reforms will curtail their freedom and their ability to lead active lives in our society. One of the residents of Windmill Gardens said to me: “I already have to monitor my finances closely as money is already tight. Further cuts would make my life miserable and I would become a prisoner in my own home.” Under the reforms, one service user, Anne, who is in the public gallery today, and thousands of others like her, will lose the basic support that they require and the few recreational activities that they enjoy. Capability Scotland said that there is a risk that the reforms will “turn the home into a prison”. However, the concerns go much further. There might be a case for saying that the reforms breach human rights. Capability Scotland and Margaret Blackwood Housing Association commissioned research from the University of Strathclyde, which concluded that many care home residents would be unable to carry out certain activities, in violation of their human rights. For example, many residents would not be able to visit family and friends, attend college and educational activities or attend worship and other religious activities. Such activities will be severely restricted if the reforms go ahead. The pleas from Capability Scotland, the RNIB, Inclusion Scotland and autism campaigners demonstrate loudly and clearly the devastating impact that the reforms will have on the most vulnerable in our communities. Jackson Carlaw has done nothing to reassure my constituents. It seems that the changes are being introduced out of a desire not to make the benefits system better but to cut £2.5 billion from the Scottish benefits bill. When simplification leads to “winners and losers”, as Liam McArthur put it, there is a moral imperative to protect the vulnerable. The changes will mean that people become prisoners in their own homes and lose the vital support that they need to enable them to function as full members of society. I urge the Parliament to oppose the changes. For those reasons, I support the amendment in Jackie Baillie’s name.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how much it has committed to its rural priorities and how much it will commit for 2012 and 2013. (S4O-00523)

Can the cabinet secretary give an update on projects such as diffuse pollution catchments, including those in my region at Eyemouth? Will the reduced commitments—as I understand it—under the rural priorities budget mean a scaling down of that work, which supports farmers and is important to maintaining good water quality?

On the issue of scientific evidence, is it possible in these challenging economic times for the Scottish Government to put any finance into support for the evidence base that the industry needs for the future to address the complex issue of what the catches consist of? For the record, I am pleased to speak again in a fisheries debate. I say to the cabinet secretary that the negotiations must have been extremely challenging—it is not a place that I would like to be in.

Will the minister give way?

Ms Beamish. Thank you, cabinet secretary. Will the cabinet secretary answer for us the point that was raised by Malcolm Chisholm about the “total lack of detail”—in the words of Friends of the Earth—on the low-carbon economy in the Government’s plans?

Will the member give way?

As members will know, the Equality and Human Rights Commission Scotland inquiry into human trafficking in Scotland reported on Monday. Roderick Campbell has touched on the issue. Does the member agree that, in cases of trafficking, we should take extremely seriously the view of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service that the inherent difficulty of getting traumatised witnesses to come forward presents challenges in obtaining a sufficiency of evidence to satisfy the requirement for corroboration?

I thank the Presiding Officer for giving me the opportunity to speak in this important debate on our sustainable future. I am surprised that Paul Wheelhouse did not sign the motion. Twenty years ago, as a community councillor and local activist living in the heart of the Scottish coal reserves in South Lanarkshire, I, along with others, took to the then Scottish Office arguments for cumulative effect to be taken into account when opencast mining applications were considered. I support the highlighting by Neil Findlay and others of the landscape capacity concerns associated with wind farm developments. As with opencast mining, applications for wind farms are an environmental justice issue. On access to information, consideration of support with costs and legal representation, there must be compliance with the United Nations Aarhus convention, which helps to ensure the creation of a more level playing field between communities and developers. In communities across South Scotland, there is a lot of interest in small-scale renewables projects. I ask the Scottish Government to increase the provision of advice and to provide a huge increase in the financial support that is available to households and communities so that they can keep more power under their own control and, where appropriate, sell it back to the grid. We all know that wind power is not a catch-all solution. I urge everyone who is concerned about the proliferation of wind farms to emphasise to their representatives that it is imperative that Scottish Government funding is in place to support research and development to drive forward new marine renewables technology and other renewables technologies. If we are to meet the climate change targets that have been highlighted, including that of providing 100 per cent of our electricity from renewable sources, it is essential that we have some large-scale generation of renewable energy. Some of that will have to be in the form of onshore wind, but communities are disconnected from the generation of their own power by large multinationals putting in applications for nearby areas. As a member of the Co-operative group of MSPs, I want to highlight the co-operative model. Renewable energy is capital intensive and requires equity as well as loan finance. Community co-ops raise equity by allowing ordinary people to invest in their own energy generation. That model works well in Denmark, Spain and other parts of Europe. I have highlighted that in writing to the minister in relation to the development of the community and renewable energy scheme fund, and I hope to have continuing dialogue on that so that communities can be more in control of their own power generation. Where communities do not own wind farms, there should be clear national guidelines on community benefit; the existing guidelines should be much clearer and much more transparent. For the communities that have the chance, there is, of course, an opportunity to improve local amenities, but I propose the stipulation in the guidelines of a social section, whereby communities would be expected to use some of the funds to support the vulnerable—for example, free electricity could be provided to pensioners. Alternatively, universal measures could be taken, as the Fintry Development Trust has done, whereby audited homes were given free insulation measures that saved householders an average of £600 on annual fuel bills and which cut fuel poverty in the process. All development has an environmental and financial cost as well as benefits. For instance, when calculating the real cost of nuclear power, account must be taken of the waste that it leaves behind; I hope that John Lamont will acknowledge that. Proper account is not taken of that at the moment.

Therefore, we must support the fair sharing of costs across communities throughout Scotland. Environmental justice must be at the heart of the process as we move forward on wind power.

The cabinet secretary might also be aware that Galloway community hospital, which is in my region, was forced to downgrade its accident and emergency facilities to a minor injury unit during staff shortages last month. What assurances can she give that further reductions in NHS funding will not result in reductions in services in rural areas across Scotland, such as Galloway?

As members have highlighted, the international climate conference in Durban is a seismic event that affects the future of our planet and all living beings. It is our responsibility as humans to be sure to lay the foundations for a legally binding and fair deal for the future. Perhaps I reiterate the obvious, but the complexities of the global negotiations merit the attention of all of us. I will share some thoughts on leadership, community support and global connections. Scotland has the respect of the world for the vision that has been shown and the action that has been taken in having the first climate change legislation with binding targets. That has been shaped in part by Scottish Labour, with cross-party support, and by the current Administration. As part of the UK delegation to Durban, the Scottish Government can take a significant lead, and I wish ministers well with that. However, it is essential that Scotland lead by example, so I will, in spite of our reputation, highlight one or two areas of concern. In the vision section of “Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting the Emissions Reduction Targets 2010-2022: The Report on Proposals and Policies” the Scottish Government states: “Walking or cycling to work or school will become increasingly popular. Changes in travel habits and other actions to tackle climate change go hand in hand with important health, social and environmental benefits: reducing the incidence and economic costs of heart disease, obesity, diabetes, depression, and local pollution.” However, as has been highlighted by Sarah Boyack, according to WWF Scotland’s calculations, “motorway and trunk road spending is up by 25%” but “active travel equates to less than 1% of the transport budget.” I have been approached by South Scotland constituents who are alarmed by the cut in the active travel budget. Will the minister please look again at that budget, so that the warm words of the vision are matched by real support for initiatives in communities?

I acknowledge what Marco Biagi is saying, but the fact remains that there has been a cut of 45 per cent in the actual budget, which is a cause for concern. Leadership is also needed in energy efficiency. The Scottish Government is in the bottom half of the league table in energy efficiency in public buildings, according to a Department of Energy and Climate Change survey. In his closing remarks, will the minister shed light on that? The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body lay in 246th position; we should all take responsibility for making changes in that. I add my voice to the 15,000-strong Friends of the Earth petition to the UK Government, on its plans to slash financial support to communities that plan to install solar electricity systems. The decision has caused difficulty for many of my constituents who have already paid deposits, and there is now uncertainty about future initiatives. I know that the minister, Fergus Ewing, has already written to the UK Government on the issue; will he update Parliament? It is a ruthless, sudden and ill-advised decision by the UK Government to change the cut-off point for lower feed-in tariffs from December 12. If we are to continue to lead by example, the Scottish Government must go on supporting communities and householders in their quest for a sustainable future. I know that the Scottish Government will do that. Only last Saturday, I heard of an innovative plan to create a woodland allotment in Peebles—well, not in Peebles itself, but the plan is by people from Peebles. The residents will work together to tap into the wood life cycle to get fuel, while keeping fit and even, perhaps, providing work opportunities. Innovation is key, so when communities are being adventurous, I ask the minister to ensure that financial support is imaginative and not too restrictive in its criteria. The minister has highlighted our moral obligation. It is vital that we continue to make connections around the globe so that we can be in dialogue with other countries in the quest for a fair solution to climate change beyond the Durban negotiations. As parliamentarians, we are all in a position to do that. I would like to share a small example. In the summer recess, some of us welcomed a young Chinese group from a project at the University of Nottingham. I was asked to share thoughts, through an interpreter, about the economics of climate change, and I am now building future dialogue with members of the group. They were especially interested in issues at local government level. In developing the complex global negotiations about a fair way forward for developing countries, it is my belief that, post Durban, we can all take responsibility for taking forward connections. At a time of economic concern, I am reassured when the minister says that we must be more rather than less innovative. We need to keep our nerve in Scotland, in supporting our communities in their innovative quests for a sustainable life, in developing skills and green jobs, and in helping vulnerable people to adapt to climate change. Then we can truly speak out at Durban and beyond. I wish the minister well as part of the UK delegation. As he says, time is short, and it is our moral responsibility to act.

Will the member take an intervention?

Can the minister reassure members that, for her and across the Scottish Government, the issue is not just buildings but a sustainable future for communities and that the Scottish Government will make connections with transport, schools, sustainable energy and all the other things that we need?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in a debate on an issue that is close to my heart, and I am encouraged by the cross-party agreement in the area. I want to draw members’ attention to the challenges that kinship carers face and the plight of looked-after teenagers in residential care. Our amendment draws attention to a new study by Citizens Advice Scotland that states that two thirds of the local authorities that it surveyed are still not paying kinship carers the same as foster carers. As of July 2010, 61 per cent of looked-after children were looked after away from home, and of that group 20 per cent were in kinship care. That is a significant group of affected families and children. I welcome the minister’s remarks on the area, on which I would like to expand somewhat. Although all local authorities have set up a scheme to pay kinship carers, the amounts vary and there is no consistency or guarantee. It appears that some local authorities are even means testing payments, based on other benefits. That cannot be right, given the commitment that kinship carers make. Concerns have been expressed to me about those inconsistencies by constituents in Midlothian and Dumfries and Galloway. At a recent meeting of the cross-party group on carers, I met Jim Crombie, who is a parent and a grandparent—so he is a parent again—and a member of kinship carers action Midlothian. Although he has concerns about the anomalies in financial support, he told me, “It’s not always about the money.” The group has set up advocacy help for kinship carers to give support at review panels. He also points out that support would be valued on issues such as anger management. Children in kinship care are not there without a stark reason. They might have suffered bereavement, been subjected to abuse or lived in a chaotic and frightening household where drugs and alcohol distort family life, but in the words of Jim Crombie, “Often, kinship carers are just left to their own devices.”

I thank the member for that helpful intervention. I completely accept that point, but when we consider the range of services that the Midlothian group and perhaps others are trying to bring forward to support the families and children involved, there still seems to be a long way to go. Although the group has some funding, it still has to raise money to put in place support—often lifeline support. A breakdown in kinship care will be at least the second breakdown in a child’s life. Kinship carers deserve all the help that they can get to prevent that from happening. I ask the Scottish Government to consider guaranteeing that, out of the change fund commitment to carers, there will be adequate funding support for services from local authorities and specialist voluntary organisations for kinship carers. That is preventative spend where it really counts: at the sharp end. I turn to the plight of looked-after teenagers in residential care. In 2009, there were more than 1,500 looked-after children in residential care of some kind. With a few little ups and downs, the figure has changed little since 1997. A sizeable proportion of those children are teenagers, and I want to focus our attention on them. Although some will have to be in residential care and some will want to remain in residential care because of the familiar setting, there are others who are desperate to move into young adulthood from within a family. I have experience of working with teenagers in a unit for those excluded from school and I know that there are looked-after children who are waiting for a family that will never come. At the teenager stage, the answer might not be adoption, but there is a range of possibilities, which the minister has already highlighted. My understanding is that the intractable problem of finding a family has not changed over the years. I have seen in reality, as a teacher in a unit, what NSPCC Scotland highlights as growing evidence that poor attachment “increases the likelihood that a child or young person will have low self-esteem ... be hostile and aggressive ... and may deal with the anger by self harm, offending behaviour or risk taking behaviour.” I remember to this day that even if a family can be found, a teenager may well constantly test and tempt rejection before they are rejected. I still remember the words of one boy, who asked me, “How could they ever love me?” It is not an easy challenge for teenagers and families, or for those in the agencies who do their best to support and work with them. I welcome the Government’s motion. These teenagers deserve our support. I ask the Scottish Government to facilitate speedier decisions at that stage, bearing in mind the complexity of the decisions, and to look at preventative spending to support families who are in a difficult situation because they have taken on a teenager who faces challenges. The minister is right to say that we are corporate parents. We must not undertake preventative spending—I know that none of us will—in the hope of saving the taxpayer money from the future services and interventions that these children and teenagers might need later in life; we must do it simply because we have an obligation to do it.

As a former teacher, I find Liz Smith’s arguments about the inability of the present management structure to connect well with curriculum for excellence extraordinary. Perhaps she would explain her arguments further.

As a former primary teacher and as someone who worked in the 1980s—that long ago—in a unit for disaffected teenagers who were excluded from mainstream schools, as someone who worked with the community education sector and the Workers Educational Association, as someone who was an Open University student, and, like many of us, as someone who has been a parent, I am pleased to speak in this debate. I will focus on the threat to provision for students who are on the edge of education—and who could be lost to it—and on the threat to provision for post-16 rural students. I will also focus on some particularly vulnerable and poorly supported groups. As other speakers have stressed, and as our amendment highlights, the connection between deprivation and low educational attainment has long been known and is still intractable. Recent research by the Rowntree Foundation “demonstrates that barriers to achievement vary significantly among deprived areas as different factors combine to shape ambitions, and shows that the difficulty for many young people is in knowing how to fulfil their aspirations.” The continuation of the education maintenance allowance will undoubtedly help support many students in their later years in school. However, the same research also tells us that “better information is required to support young people in understanding how schooling, post compulsory education and work fit together.” Let us for a moment turn our attention back to the four capacities, which Marco Biagi highlighted. As a former teacher, I have already seen the clear benefits of that approach in effecting change, particularly in relation to inclusion. Those developments should not stop at post-16; they should go on right through life—no other member has said that today. Today the Black and Ethnic Minority Infrastructure in Scotland working group is holding a conference in Glasgow on human rights education and active citizenship. Brian McGinley of the University of Strathclyde tells us: “learning needs to be socially and culturally situated, over arched with values that are in keeping with the students’ understanding and aspirations. Educators need to find out what interests the students and then work co-operatively with them to agree the next steps which are both within reach and challenging for them.” The Scottish Government’s aim to link education more closely with employers is positive, especially in relation to the development of opportunities in new industries such as marine renewables. Jim Sweeney, associate director of Motherwell College, highlighted a problem that has come to light. He said that he “welcomes the focus on employability and better links with industry”. However, he felt the problem for some of our more vulnerable young people is that those opportunities might come only after initial courses and that “Cuts might prevent colleges offering this stepping stone and some young people will undoubtedly find themselves even further ... From the education or jobs market.” On the question of protecting and enhancing opportunities for rural young people, there is concern that students from outlying areas will increasingly be unable to access a place at college. Motherwell College subsidises transport from rural areas in my region, which enables students from communities such as Leadhills in rural Clydesdale to be given every opportunity to access education and training. The speed and depth of cuts could put that in jeopardy.

I take the member’s point, but when courses are running already and students are unable to reach the colleges that they should be attending because there is no rural public transport, that is a serious problem. Many rural students benefit from the Open University and in South Scotland the OU has a relationship with Dumfries and Galloway College, but there are now concerns about that, too. Funding pressures have led the college to prioritise full-time provision, which reduces opportunities for students who need to study at lower levels of intensity. Most of the students tend to come from areas that are very close to the Crichton campus and the OU provision must be protected there and at other institutions. I also want to focus our attention on vulnerable and underrepresented groups. Joan McAlpine mentioned disabled pupils and I want to highlight the situation for disabled students. The chances of those with learning difficulties are threatened by cuts to colleges. Project search at Motherwell College is one such example. Part-time courses for people with learning disabilities have been cut by a third according to the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability, which stated “there is little evidence of alternatives”. Will the minister consider that and guarantee protection for such groups? Many are relieved by the Scottish Government’s commitment in the spending review to looked-after children and children in care. As I have not much time left to speak, I shall limit my remarks on the subject to saying that those young people deserve our commitment beyond childhood into adulthood. Although the minister’s points were reassuring, the problem is intractable and has gone on for many years, so we all look forward to action. Those young people deserve no less. Evidence heard by the Equal Opportunities Committee highlights challenges faced by black and ethnic minority pupils, too.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I hope that the minister will consider supporting those groups, too. I hope that the minister will consider the various points that I have made and that, in considering preventive spend, which is a stream that is available, she will be able to consider supporting some of the groups I have mentioned.

On innovation, does the member agree that the co-operative model has a great deal to recommend it in relation to future housing, especially in view of sustainability, district heating and a range of other issues that can empower communities?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. My question complements Dave Thompson’s question about rural households, which are twice as likely to be in extreme fuel poverty as urban ones. Taking into account the high cost of alternative energy sources for off-grid households, what actions will be taken in the context of the sustainable housing strategy group to encourage the development of cheaper new technologies, such as solar water-heating panels and heat pumps, which will reduce household expenditure on fuel?

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to highlight something that everyone in the chamber and everyone in Scotland knows, which is that the waste issue is still unresolved.

In the spirit of cross-party solidarity in the debate, I highlight the fact that it was the Scottish Labour Executive that brought in the first renewables target.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the four recent negative Scottish Environment Protection Agency beach monitoring reports in South Scotland, what financial support it will provide specifically to help farmers tackle diffuse pollution. (S4O-00223) Actually, there were two recent negative Scottish Environment Protection Agency beach monitoring reports in South Scotland and four in the whole of Scotland. I apologise for that.

I highlight just six farms in my region of South Scotland that are within a 3-mile radius of a farm at Broad Field on the Clyde, which have heavily invested in storage capacity to mitigate the effects of diffuse pollution. They have indeed had the support of SRDP grants. I seek reassurance on behalf of my constituents there and elsewhere that that support can be maintained, as there are now also pressures given the cost of spreading machinery and the issue about fencing that the minister mentioned in answer to a previous question. There is also a concern for tourism—

Will the minister please reassure the farming community and tourism sector on the issue?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a concern about the tone and the implication that teaching at the moment is basic. Having been a teacher for 15 years and having worked as a supply teacher as well as a part-time teacher across South Lanarkshire, I know that I was never in a primary school where what we have all talked about today was not embedded right the way across the curriculum. John Finnie’s point about localism is important. I am burbling on here—I am sorry—but the suggestion that teachers are not teaching these things across the curriculum, with a local element, is extraordinary. It is happening and kids thrive on it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am pleased to have the chance to speak in this debate, to listen to other members and to try to find a way forward, and to support Elaine Murray’s amendment. I am reassured by the cabinet secretary’s words on the amendment—perhaps I am being too optimistic, but that remains to be seen. As has already been acknowledged, this is a complex issue and, frankly, quite challenging for a new member who is not on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. However, I want to highlight principles and issues in relation to sustainability, and to speak up for my region, South Scotland. Fishing communities in South Scotland, in which more than 700 people are employed in vessels, can often be overlooked. Much of the employment is in small-scale fishing. In Eyemouth district, 148 regular workers and 45 part-time workers are employed on vessels. In 2010, the district saw total landings of more than 2,000 tonnes, with a value of £5.5 million. In smaller ports, there is a real opportunity to develop local traceability further, such as we have seen in meat production. I certainly enjoyed the best fish supper ever in Eyemouth last week, looking out over the sea after a walk around the harbour. Consumers want to know where their food comes from, and net-to-plate identification has a strong resonance. The Scottish Fishermen’s Federation indicated that it supports the idea in the CFP green paper of small-scale fishing matters being dealt with by member states rather than through EU legislation. However, although the importance of small-scale fleets is acknowledged in the CFP proposals, the SFF is concerned that great care should be taken to ensure that nothing that is prejudicial to small-scale fleets appears in the subsequent legislation. The SFF stressed that the issue is not just regulation but ensuring that the proposals that are expected in November on financial support for the new CFP take account of small-scale fleets. Will the cabinet secretary reassure members that he will carefully consider how best to protect fishing communities that are away from the main ports? The cabinet secretary stressed regionalisation, and the concerns that Graeme Dey expressed about legality are worrying. Greater regional control of fisheries is important. The SFF welcomes such a move and wants the measures to be “robust and provide the opportunity for meaningful management on a local scale.” The environmental NGOs also support decentralisation. WWF talked of the need to “harness the expertise of local stakeholders who are best placed to draw up and implement plans for their fisheries to deliver high-level EU objectives.” From my limited experience, having been involved in discussions some years ago about a Solway marine park, I have learned that the coming together of different interests and perspectives in coastal communities is essential if we are to find a sustainable way forward—that applies in the context of coastal farming, renewable marine energy, tourism and much more. Investment is a necessity. RSPB said that there is a need for “investment in fisheries and marine science, and in fit-for-purpose data collection, monitoring and compliance”. The Scottish Fishermen’s Trust recently funded a remote electronic monitoring research project at the University of Aberdeen—Rob Gibson mentioned the research at Aberdeen. The findings of the evaluating observer effects in discard sampling project will contribute to the way forward on discard reduction. The issue is complex, as all members have said. Without the science, and without recognition from the EU that issues must be resolved in a sustainable way that does the least hurt to our fishing industry, we are on a hiding to nothing. EU financial support for the industry is imperative if we are to find a sustainable way forward. Will the minister reassure us that he is fighting for such support? The RSBP—sorry, RSPB; I am dyslexic—said: “investment will result in a financially viable, successful industry, free from discards, and ensure that fleet capacity is balanced with available resources.” As the CFP is shaped we must work together at all levels in the context of an ecosystems approach that—among other things—rewards people who fish in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner and minimises hardship for the people in the industry who are negatively affected. I make a big plea to the cabinet secretary to show support in the forthcoming negotiations for the resilience of smaller fishing communities in South Scotland and throughout Scotland.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what support and funding it has provided for anti-sectarianism programmes in primary and secondary schools since 2007. (S4O-00156)

Does the minister agree that moves to toughen sentencing on sectarianism must go hand in hand with preventive work and measures, including targeted education in our schools? What opportunities are teachers offered to receive training on anti-sectarianism issues—through teacher training and continuing professional development?

I welcome the minister’s statement. The route map states that microenergy schemes are most cost-effective and effective at reducing carbon emissions and energy bills only when combined with energy efficiency measures such as insulation. How does the minister propose to ensure that that vital link is maintained, including for those on low incomes? Will he also be more specific about the microgeneration targets? After all, the industry needs certainty if it is to grow.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what role it considers specialist young carers services have in implementing the young carers strategy. (S4O-00099)

Research from the Princess Royal Trust for Carers shows that for every pound spent on specialist carer services, more than £6 can be saved. Can the minister confirm what support the Scottish Government is providing to local authorities to support such services, many of which I understand face frozen or falling budgets and rising costs and which are creating waiting lists for young carers? Can he also please reassure us that a specific classification of young carer will be introduced as part of the 2011 school census, so that schools will be supported to look at their policies and practices to support young carers?

I do not want to compete with the previous member, but I represent the South Scotland region, which also has vast rural tracts of which many of us are very proud. Because of that, and as I have lived in Clydesdale for 20 years, I want to highlight protection for the arts in rural areas and rural public and community transport. Beyond Kilmarnock, Dumfries and other towns lie rural hinterlands, market towns, small coastal villages and ex-mining areas, all with their own heritage and future. Our identity, sense of place, dreams and aspirations are all celebrated in the arts, whether that is through creating, performing, participating or absorbing what others express for us to experience. The arts can be a path to regeneration and they can develop tourism and bring visitors to our communities. In the small town of Sanquhar, A’ the Airts, a new community arts centre, has been opened in a renovated building in the High Street after a long struggle. The funding is from a range of partners, including the Scottish Government. This week, also in Sanquhar, the Crawick Artland Trust meets to try to push forward an ambitious arts project at a former opencast mine. It is hoped that the world-renowned artist Charles Jencks will work with other artists to transform it into a land art site of national significance. At a time of economic challenge, the arts are always likely to suffer, not least in rural communities, where there is a sparser population to argue the case. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider with care and imagination how to help to bring forward those and other projects, through working with communities, artists and funding partners. Across the chamber, there is broad agreement that services in rural Scotland must be protected. It is vital that rural public and community transport is protected and developed, otherwise people without a car, who are often on low incomes, cannot access work, services and facilities, including arts and leisure facilities. What plans does the Scottish Government have to ensure that bus company contracts include times and routes that prevent rural isolation, as highlighted by the previous speaker? That applies not only to people of all ages without a car, but to those who choose public transport for environmental reasons. The valuable and popular concessionary fare scheme could be widened to include community transport. I ask the Scottish Government to support community transport projects generally, such as the Rural Development Trust in Clydesdale, which converts waste cooking oil from local school kitchens into biodiesel to run minibuses that are driven by volunteers. The buses are used by schools for trips and by community groups as diverse as the Clydesdale Befriending Group and Liber8, which works with young people who are affected by drugs and alcohol. As we all know, car use, which is often essential in rural Scotland, is one of the largest sources of CO2 emissions. Supporting imaginative alternatives can help us to reach our climate change targets. This morning, I joined cyclists in Edinburgh city chambers for a bike breakfast, although somewhat guiltily, as I came on the bus. Cycling must have funding support in rural areas as well as urban ones if we are to meet our target of 10 per cent of journeys being made by bike by 2020. I ask the cabinet secretary to be aware that although potholes on rural roads are dangerous for cars, they are even more dangerous for cyclists. Support for car clubs must not only be in cities. I am delighted to say that car sharing has come to Dunbar, with a voluntary group called SpareWheels, which was started with the help of Transport Scotland grants through Carplus. Such innovative projects cannot be kick-started or sustained without financial support from Government. We must support communities to work together, as happens in transition communities and through groups such as Sustaining Dunbar, A Greener Hawick or Carbon Neutral Biggar. We must give them the financial support and advice that they need. I hope that the Scottish Government will continue to do that, even at a time of economic austerity. There is a determination to change lifestyles and reassess our priorities, and I believe that there is consensus across the chamber when it comes to sustainable development. I join the members who have already highlighted those issues, such as Jean Urquhart and Patrick Harvie. I say to the Scottish Government, through the two ministers who are present, please commit to adopting complementary measures to gross domestic product. The Scottish Labour manifesto committed to adopting a pilot, but I will be honest: we were saying, “What shall we do, and which pilot shall we go for?” It was quite a difficult task, but it is important, and the national performance framework may offer the Scottish Government an opportunity to move forward on that. I understand that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee may address the issue, and that the Finance Committee may consider an inquiry, so I urge those committees to help us along the way. I ask the minister and the cabinet secretary to be bold in supporting that initiative. We cannot allow the range of options to let us hesitate. We must choose from the possible measures that complement and go beyond GDP, and put the structures in place to measure sustainability, wellbeing and equality, so that here in Scotland we can all move forward together.

I am concerned about the points that the member is making. For example, he does not seem to have taken into account the fact that, in certain circumstances, an animal might well have to perform through utter fear.

I am delighted to speak in this debate on a subject that is close to my heart. As we have heard, it is close to the hearts of many other members across the chamber, which is very exciting. I also acknowledge the significant contribution that was made by Karen Gillon in changing people’s lives during her 12-year term as Clydesdale’s MSP. It seems more than three weeks ago that I was working with pupils as an eco-schools co-ordinator in a rural Clydesdale primary school. I commend that programme and others, such as WWF Scotland’s one planet schools and the Dumfries Crichton Carbon Centre’s carbon busters project. Thanks to the pupil eco-committee at Braehead primary school, the new school has underfloor heating from a ground-source heat pump and light pipes, both of which save electricity. One primary 7 pupil always had to sit under a light pipe and bask in the natural light because he felt that he was the one who had got that into his school. Sustainable school buildings must be standard throughout Scotland—I hope that the minister will take note of that and act on it. Here is a generation who understand how to live sustainably and who keep their parents up to the mark. I ask the Scottish Government to ensure that those programmes continue. Scotland will have not only young people who are eager to be our solar roof fitters and our marine tech inventors, but citizens who contribute strongly to transition communities. I also ask the Scottish Government to prioritise training for those who are already in the energy sector, liaising with the unions so that Scotland benefits from the transferable skills of those working in oil, gas and nuclear as we move forward and the renewables industries grow. Having been central to establishing the first renewables targets with Scottish Labour, I commend the Scottish Government on its challenging target of generating 100 per cent of energy from renewables—the boldness will be judged by the delivery. I also welcome the route map. However, I emphasise that if Scotland is not just to become the green powerhouse of Europe but to move faster and further in a fair way, there are issues that the minister must address. Large developments, whether marine or onshore, are frequently controversial. Local authority guidance must ensure that communities have a real involvement in the process. Where the applications go ahead, communities must have the power in all senses of the word, whether that involves ownership of a turbine or the opportunity to give pensioners free electricity. The motion and the amendments show that the Scots whom we represent want change and to be part of that change—it is not being driven just by eco-school warriors. Across the south of Scotland, urban and rural communities, individual households and businesses are starting to make the transition and need support. I spent an evening with Tweedgreen, in Peebles, listening to residents planning their sustainable future. They ask that the climate challenge fund be retained. Wiston Lodge, in Clydesdale, aims to conserve and develop buildings on the old estate, leading to energy efficiency and the reduction of energy use. Cream o’ Galloway, a sustainable business with the best whisky ice cream in the south of Scotland, is asking for a carbon-cutting mentoring scheme and an adequately funded loan investment scheme with a higher upper limit. I seek assurances from the minister that he will support those communities, expand and increase the community and renewable energy scheme and ensure that the funding for community renewables schemes does not run out, as it often has in the past. As a member of the Scottish Co-op group of MSPs, I intend to promote that model both as a structure through which communities can take power into their own hands, on and off grid, and as a model for the manufacture of renewable energy, the technology for which will bring jobs to Scotland and can be exported throughout the world. We must ensure that Co-operative Development Scotland has the expertise to advise and the funds to support. Most important of all, I am certain that we have a responsibility to ensure that those households that are on low incomes or benefits are not left out of our new powerhouse. In that context, it is a great cause for concern that the fuel poverty budget was cut by a third in February, and I ask the minister to give us some reassurance on this issue, which relates closely to our amendment. On a more positive note, I want to highlight the work of the Energy Agency in Hadyard Hill in Ayrshire, in the region that I represent. It is blazing a trail in universal, area-based energy efficiency schemes. Given that, in 2050, at least 80 per cent of our building stock will be the same as it is now, we must consider retrofitting, and schemes such as the one that I am talking about will help to tackle fuel poverty and reduce fuel demand across the communities, which is essential if we are to meet our carbon reduction targets. Energy efficiency is just as much part of our new vision across the chamber as renewable energy itself. As a candidate in the south of Scotland, I was asked many questions about climate justice. We can work across the Scottish Parliament on many of those issues, along with the environmental non-governmental agencies and the communities. I have a vision—which I know that many of us share—of communities living in warm homes that are heated and lit by their own power. The people whom I represent want that. Although I know that it is too late now, I suggest that we need another word in the title of this debate. That word, which I ask the minister to consider throughout his deliberations, is “fairer”, because we need the future to be fairer as well.