I, too, thank Stuart McMillan for bringing today’s debate to Parliament and allowing us to discuss food banks. As he has highlighted in his speech and in the motion, the rapid growth in food banks across our country is simultaneously one of the most welcome and one of the most disturbing developments in our society. The passion with which so many members have spoken—Cara Hilton is an excellent example—shows how much the subject has touched us all. As a demonstration of our capacity for charity, selflessness and generosity, food banks are entirely admirable. The volunteers who run them, the members of the public who donate to them and the churches and other voluntary groups that sponsor and organise them stand out as a beacon of compassion at a time when it feels as though the bile and lack of sympathy of spiteful austerity are the order of the day. When I have spoken to the volunteers at the East Renfrewshire food bank, in my constituency, or at Netherauldhouse, in James Dornan’s constituency, which I visited last week, the message has been the same: yes, they are pleased to provide the service, but they hope not to be there for too long, as they hope that there will be no need for food banks in the future. As members will know, the Welfare Reform Committee will shortly hold an evidence session on food banks, which I hope will be able to shed some light not just on why they have sprung up in such numbers but on what the Parliament’s response should be. We are used to the concept of relative poverty in this country, but the return of food poverty in a wealthy economy and society is deeply troubling. What on earth has happened to our welfare state if we cannot ensure that everyone gets a square meal? We certainly do not have all the answers to shape our response, but we can make a number of observations. I agree entirely with Claire Baker, who accurately listed a number of factors and centred on income—low income, in particular—as one of the main concerns. I also agree entirely with Nigel Don’s comment that very few banks are for the down and out and the homeless. According to, I think, the Trussell Trust, less than 5 per cent of those who use food banks are homeless. They are often working people with dependants. In fact, two of the women whom I met at the food bank last week drove there in their own cars. All of them, however, were struggling to get by, and most of them had suffered from the welfare reforms in one way or another. Those to whom I spoke had all heard of the food bank through word of mouth and had then been given a referral strip by the jobcentre. The staff or volunteers at the food banks go out of their way not to be judgmental or to preach, but there is an awkward relationship to navigate and the potential for stigma or shame. In our parliamentary inquiry, it will be essential to establish a clear sense of the emotions that are felt by those who use food banks, so that we can understand and learn from the experience. Anecdotally—I do not wish to digress—I have heard that the use of benefit sanctions is a huge factor. One constituent has raised with me the possibility that benefits staff are being encouraged to meet targets for increasing the number of sanctions. That strikes me as an even more pressing issue than the bedroom tax in driving people to rely on food banks. There are clear questions for our UK Government if the DWP is referring people to food banks but is also imposing sanctions. There are clear questions, too, for the Scottish Government, as Jackie Baillie highlighted. What is the role of the Scottish welfare fund? Oxfam states: “Oxfam’s experience in food shortage situations around the world tells us that giving out cash, not emergency food parcels, is more effective and also a far more dignified approach.” The cost-of-living crisis is hitting us all but, as Neil Findlay powerfully pointed out, it is too simple to point to benefit cuts as being the only reason for the situation. I celebrate the benevolence and commitment of others, but there are questions for our Governments to respond to with similar compassion.

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

I read an attention-grabbing, if rather depressing, set of statistics this week. Over the past three decades, real incomes have risen for accountants by 60 per cent, for lawyers by 114 per cent and for doctors by 153 per cent. In comparison, over the same period, incomes have fallen for bakers by 1 per cent and for unskilled factory workers by 3 per cent. The figures reveal that growing inequality is a long-standing problem—here in Scotland, in the United States, where the issue was the focus of President Obama’s state of the union address, and across most developed economies. There is an accompanying trend, in that less and less of our overall economic output goes on wages and labour costs and more and more is paid out in profits. The growing gap that is being created was partially hidden when earnings were going up but, over the past four years, inflation has outstripped pay and most households have felt the cost-of-living squeeze. It has been particularly hard on people at the bottom, for whom rent, fuel and food account for a larger share of spending. Price increases have hit those people hard, and the effect has been compounded by the UK Government policy of hikes in taxes on spending and cuts to benefits. Against that background, I have welcomed not one, not two, but three Scottish Government announcements over the past few weeks of budget negotiations. The first was on the allocation of additional funding for childcare, which Malcolm Chisholm talked about. It is six years since Wendy Alexander and the Labour Party outlined our plans to give every child a positive start, beginning with an extension of support to vulnerable two-year-olds. The Liberal Democrats have long shared that ambition and I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s moves in that direction. I did not agree with everything that Willie Rennie said in his speech last night, but I endorse his quoting the Nobel prize winner James Heckman, who said that investment in a child’s education before the age of three is the investment that gets the biggest return. I think that most Scots will be as pleased as I am that we can share our progressive vision. Whatever the outcome of the referendum, we can work together, through a devolved Scottish Parliament, to deliver the transformational childcare that we want in Scotland. The second announcement that I welcome is the cabinet secretary’s confirmation today that he will meet our demand to find the full £50 million that will in effect stop the bedroom tax in Scotland. That has taken a little longer than we would have liked it to take, but the consensus that clearly exists among Labour and SNP MSPs—that shared anger and frustration at what is an unfair penalty on our poorest households—has found its political expression. I thank everyone who gave voice to their frustration and despair at the effect of that punitive measure. I thank the individuals who gave their testimony to the Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee and the people who led the campaign, including Alan Wyllie, whose powerful evidence was, I think, a factor in persuading the minister to change his mind. I thank Mike Dailly and his colleagues from the Govan Law Centre and, of course, I thank Jackie Baillie for highlighting what can and should be done. As the Welfare Reform Committee highlighted in its report, 80 per cent of the households that are affected by the bedroom tax include a disabled adult. In other words, the cut specifically targets the most vulnerable people in our society. I know that most members would rather that we simply got rid of the measure altogether by getting rid of the Tory Government, and I know that SNP colleagues would like to do that through independence. However, today’s announcement provides yet another example of why devolution works and how it protects Scotland from the worst excesses of a Tory Administration. We can say no to the bedroom tax, just as devolution allows us to say no to market forces in the NHS. The final announcement that I welcome is the additional £13 million for Scotland’s colleges. There is no point in pretending that my welcome does not come with a caveat—indeed, several caveats. It is tricky to work out the figures exactly, but it is fairly clear that the funding will not make up for the cuts that have been imposed over the past few Scottish budgets. I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre about that earlier and learned that the £13 million is made up of £6 million in European social fund money and £7 million in matched funding from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council—which might be existing funds. However, the money is welcome. The Auditor General for Scotland said recently that colleges across Scotland faced an overall 11 per cent real-terms reduction in revenue grant funding from the Scottish Government between 2011-12 and 2014-15, so the money still leaves colleges short. What has that meant in real terms to real people? It has meant that more than 140,000 Scots who might have had the chance to go to college this year have been denied that chance. That is an incredible and shameful figure. In 2007, when the SNP came to power, 380,000 people went to college; the number has declined to fewer than 240,000. Therefore, although I welcome the £13 million, I want to hear that the announcement marks a change of direction and that the Government will finally put education first. Benefits are important in the short term, but what really matters in the long term is education. I began by talking about what has happened to incomes in real terms over the decade—the inequality gap that has opened up between professional, highly skilled and educated workers, and workers who have no or minimal skills. We counter inequality and close that gap by investing in training, skills and education. Only by improving our productivity and building the knowledge economy, so that we give people the skills and confidence that they need if they are to flourish, will we truly prosper in this country.

1. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of figures from the Scottish Qualifications Authority that suggest a reduction in the numbers enrolling for national exams, what action it is taking to ensure access to courses. (S4T-00593)

The minister will know that the Scottish curriculum has always been based on offering a broad range of subjects to pupils not only up to secondary 4 but beyond. Analysis of the SQA figures suggests a significant narrowing of that choice. In parts of Scotland, some pupils are taking six courses, while in others some pupils are taking eight. The average number of courses taken is down from 7.3 to 6.8, which is a significant change.

There is a particularly marked impact on science and languages, which are down 8 and 10 per cent. That comes on top of a drastic fall in, for example, the number of pupils enrolling to study German. How is the minister addressing that very worrying trend?

I am not entirely sure whether local flexibility or having such variations is the answer to a national curriculum. As well as the potential inequity and anomalies that are introduced by such a system, we have a decision to introduce a brand new appeals system this year. Given that anomalies are likely to be thrown up and the Scottish Government has limited the opportunities that are available to pupils to appeal, what recourse will pupils have and what action will the minister take if there is inequity?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether the First Minister would like to clarify something that he said in his answer to Liam McArthur. I believe that he said that the white paper sets out the policies of the Scottish National Party. Was that a Freudian slip, in which case he can just clarify the record, or was it a statement of fact, in which case he could refund the taxpayer for the cost of that document? [Applause.]

I thank Stewart Maxwell for bringing forward the debate and recognising in his motion the excellent and moving contribution from Ruth Laird and William Seaborne of Queen Anne high school at time for reflection last week. Each year, we stop—for perhaps too short a moment—to reflect on the horrors of the Holocaust and on the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau. We think of all those who perished—the Roma, the gays, the mentally and physically disabled and the Jews. Ruth Laird and William Seaborne spoke about one individual, Kitty Hart-Moxon, who 70 years ago endured two years in Auschwitz and survived the death march through the Sudeten mountains. She survived the Lublin ghetto and the Salzwedel concentration camp and now, aged 88, she continues to make it her life’s work to tell the story of that period and to remind us all of a time that we must never forget. Her story is one of the many journeys recorded by the Holocaust Educational Trust whose work, along with that of the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, is so vital in ensuring that we all know the true horror of that time and of the genocides since. The human failings that led to the Holocaust are not limited to the past. In the past couple of weeks I have been struck by a couple of French words or phrases which have come to my attention. The first is “coup de blues”, which is a typically attractive French expression that is used to describe the very unattractive depression, or blues, that left France’s first lady in hospital. The second is the downright dangerous “Ia quenelle”, which is the repressed or suppressed Nazi salute that Nicolas Anelka recently used to celebrate scoring a goal in a football match. For those who are not familiar with it, the best description I have seen of la quenelle compares it to the way Peter Sellers uses his left arm to prevent his right arm from doing a Nazi salute in “Dr Strangelove”. The footballer denies any racist intent, but there is no doubting the link in many people’s minds between the quenelle gesture and anti-Semitism. I find it deeply worrying that in modern-day Europe people are prepared to be photographed pulling la quenelle in front of synagogues or former concentration camps. It is too easy for us to blame our woes on others and otherness—on immigrants from eastern Europe, on Muslims or on Jews. I was shocked—as I know other members were—by the recent poll that found that 80 per cent of young people and half of all adults cannot name a single genocide that has taken place since the Holocaust. A third of all adults could not even provide a definition of genocide. That survey and the gestures that I have mentioned show why it is so important that we continue to mark Holocaust memorial day—because the lessons from that time remain as relevant today as ever. The theme for this year’s Holocaust memorial day is journeys, such as the journeys into the ghettos, the Kindertransport—excellently presented in Glasgow central station recently—the reunions in the years after the war and the audacious escapes by people such as Jack Kagan in Poland. There are journeys today too. Thousands are fleeing violence in Syria, Congo, Sudan and the Central African Republic. I thank all the members who have taken the time to sign the book of commitment from the Holocaust Educational Trust, pledging ourselves to recognise the humanity that is scarred by racism and remembering the sacrifices of those who preceded us. For those who have yet to sign, the book is still available in my office and will be there all week. I am privileged to be able to support the motion that is before the Parliament.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to reduce the prison population. (S4O-02809)

I am aware that the cabinet secretary has been trying to reduce the prison population in Scotland for six years now, but we still seem to have one of the highest incarceration rates in the whole of Europe, coupled with one of the highest reoffending rates—notwithstanding the cabinet secretary’s remarks. Year on year, we seem to send more people to jail. The public would be reassured if those people were all violent and dangerous offenders, but the biggest increase seems to be in the number of women. Given that crime is falling year on year, why is his policy to stop sending people to jail not working?

I want to talk about the budget in the context of the national performance framework. Before I do, I will put a couple of questions to the cabinet secretary about an admittedly slightly more obscure topic—his 5 per cent limit on revenue-financed long-term investment. It was back in 2011 when the Government first announced its decision to cap future revenue commitments relating to long-term capital investment to a maximum of 5 per cent. That was a welcome move. The publication of further information at the back of this year’s budget documents is also to be welcomed. Unfortunately, there is still some confusion about how and why the 5 per cent limit is calculated in the manner that it is. As an aside, given the First Minister’s confusion over percentages last week, I urge all members to look at the very useful briefing from the Scottish Parliament information centre on the subject. The numerator—in other words, the payments to be made out of the Scottish Government’s resource budget towards those long-term projects—includes all private finance initiative, public-private partnership and NPD projects, borrowing on the rail regulatory asset base and some projected debt repayments relating to future borrowing to be made under the terms of the Scotland Act 2012. However, the denominator—the figure against which the resource payments are calculated as a percentage—includes capital, although the payments are only from the resource budget; it includes the local government finance settlement, although local government payments are excluded from the numerator; and it includes non-cash departmental expenditure, such as impairments or depreciation, although those do not represent the Government’s spending power. [Interruption.]

As just one example of why that matters, it is difficult to be sure what might be affordable under the future borrowing powers that are coming our way through the Scotland Act 2012. Furthermore, the Scottish Government’s projections assume a 25-year repayment period, whereas the Treasury assumes a 10-year timeframe. I fully recognise that this is a complicated issue and I do not wish to be overly critical of the cabinet secretary. As I have said, the 5 per cent limit is a welcome move in the right direction, but there could be greater confidence and support for the security that it gives us all with regard to the sustainability of Scotland’s long-term finances were the cabinet secretary to expand on how he reaches his calculations and offer the Parliament greater transparency in his reporting on achieving the target. Those are not just my observations but the conclusions of the Auditor General, and I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on how he intends to take the initiative further. As the cabinet secretary will know, many of us across the chamber have also been very supportive of his move to establish a national performance framework. I was delighted to see that the Finance Committee focused on that area in its report. However, I was also not surprised to read its conclusion that the performance framework has yet to fundamentally shape the budget decision-making process. I believe—or, at least, I hope—that the point of the NPF is to move not just to an outcomes-based approach but to values-based decision making; in other words, not to pretend that economic decisions are somehow value free, neutral or objective. I want the budget to more accurately reflect the values that we hold dear and the lives that we lead. I want us to move away from our reliance on GDP and the credit rating assessments of agencies such as Moody’s, which are downright damaging to our society, let alone our economy. That is why I am disappointed not just by the lack of process to formally link the NPF to budget decision making but by the decisions that the cabinet secretary has presided over. They have been most disappointing, and I believe that they are not in keeping with the aims of the NPF. For example, in the past few weeks, we have heard that the number of students who attend college has fallen yet again, this time by 7 per cent. That means that 140,000 fewer Scots are going to college compared with just four years ago.

I am very disappointed by Mr Gibson’s remarks. It is not that long ago that the Parliament was committed to lifelong learning and to building a knowledge economy. For many people, the way for them to get back into the economy is through part-time learning at college, as Mr Gibson will well know. In writing them off in the way that he does, by suggesting that their education is somehow not worth while, Mr Gibson does himself and the Scottish Government a disservice. I simply ask the cabinet secretary whether he believes that those cuts are sustainable. In contrast, just this week we heard that university principals, who are already the highest-paid public servants in Scotland, have awarded themselves huge pay rises, at a time when most of the public sector is subject to a wage freeze or below-inflation pay increases. When I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning about that yesterday, he pretended that he could not get involved, as that would somehow compromise the autonomy of our universities. Given the hundreds of millions of pounds of public funds that go into our universities, holding them accountable for the salary of senior managers does not compromise academic freedom in any way whatever. When I talked about building a moral economy in Scotland in our first debate after the recess, the cabinet secretary went out of his way to tell me how much he shared that vision, but does he not appreciate that it is the decisions that he takes in the budget that determine whether we put that ethical approach into practice? It is his Government that is giving millions of pounds to tax-dodging companies such as Amazon, it is his Government that is supporting companies that are involved in the Borders rail link or our universities in using zero-hours contracts and it is his Government that is funding huge construction cartels through the Scottish Futures Trust in a way that is entirely unaccountable to this Parliament and which makes them exempt from any of the conditions in the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill, such as those on blacklisting. I accept that that might not be the cabinet secretary’s intention and it may not match his rhetoric, but it is the reality of the outcome of public spending decisions for which he is accountable. The Labour Party has offered him an opportunity to demonstrate that progressive, transformational and compassionate values underpin his thinking and his decisions. I urge him to take the opportunity to support us on the bedroom tax that he has been offered.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the report in The Herald on 20 January 2014 on the pay of university principals. (S4T-00569)

I am delighted to hear that the minister will re-emphasise a point that he has already made. Does he not recognise the outrage that exists not only across the public sector but across Scotland at the above-inflation salary increases that have been awarded to senior management in universities, particularly given that they are already the highest paid public servants in Scotland? Two of those people have received increases of 11 and 24 per cent. The cabinet secretary’s own review, which was chaired by Professor von Prondzynski, called for remuneration committees, which agree salary levels, to include members of staff and university students to increase transparency. Why has he not implemented that proposal?

To hear Mr Russell’s private advice when we are talking about public funds is not acceptable to the Parliament. This is a public matter—£500 million of public money goes to these institutions. Why does he think that he cannot intervene on the matter? It is not as though this would be the first time he has done so. He is quite prepared, for example, to intervene on local authorities, which are democratically elected, and set class sizes at a national level. Last year, a report identified more than 8,500 people on zero-hours contracts in the university sector. Last year’s response to my freedom of information request revealed that severance pay over the past few years in the universities alone has amounted to £110 million, of which £34 million was spent on compulsory redundancies. If the cabinet secretary believes that he has a role in the matter, he should act. In particular, he should act on high pay. Is it the case that he cannot act or that he will not act?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to advice given by academics on tuition fees for students from European Union countries. (S4F-01824)

I ask the First Minister to clarify further a more immediate and pressing question. For more than three years, his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mr Russell, has tried to secure an arrangement to charge EU students who are studying at Scottish universities and recoup some of the tens of millions of pounds that that costs the Scottish Government. Is the First Minister still actively pursuing such a policy?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The minister will be aware that there is strong feeling across the Parliament against the bedroom tax. Given that the Government wants to do its part, and that Jackie Baillie has the requisite support for her member’s bill, will the minister intimate her Government’s support for that bill?

I thank the Government for today’s debate and for allowing Parliament to recognise the contribution that veterans have made and continue to make to our country. As the minister highlighted, the UK’s involvement in armed conflict remains a highly contentious issue but, by contrast, it is pleasing to note that public support for serving and former members of our armed forces seems, if anything, to be increasing. As we move further away from the world wars that so shaped the history of the previous century, we have the opportunity to develop a new and hopefully healthier relationship with the military and with our military veterans. I want to highlight two points this afternoon: the need for us to encourage successive generations to remember the sacrifice made by so many in defence of our freedoms and our way of life; and the practical help and support that we can and should offer those who continue to serve. In this anniversary year, when we look back at the momentous events which marked the outbreak of the first world war, it is easy to be swamped by the sheer scale of the devastation that was wrought and at the millions of people who died in that conflict. However, it is sometimes the individual stories that can most make us stop to think. That was certainly my reaction when I saw the work of the Mearns history group in my own constituency, which has recently undertaken a project to research the background of all those from the local area who died in the great war. For more than 10 years, on every second Sunday in November I have read the names on the memorial at Mearns Cross many times over and have wondered who those men were, what lives they led, and who they left behind. The local history group has done a wonderful job of finding out just a little of the story behind each name and the grief that their loss must have caused. The names on the memorial include Andrew Hamilton, private, 1st garrison battalion of the Gordon Highlanders, who was a joiner who lived with his wife Elizabeth and their six children at 35 Main Street, Newton Mearns, and who died of nephritis in Rawalpindi aged 39. Corporal Robert Close of the 2nd battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers, son of Robert and Sarah Close, was killed on the Somme on 16 July 1916, aged 25. I want to thank all the volunteers in the local community who have taken the time to unearth these simple facts, which allow us, even now, to make the connection to our war dead. However, it is not enough simply to remember the fallen; we should use this moment and this year’s commemorations in particular to help those who are still serving. I draw to the minister’s attention a worthwhile new initiative. Armed forces legal action, or AFLA, is a nationwide scheme to provide discounted legal services for current armed forces personnel and those who have recently left the armed forces. Lawyers up and down the country are being asked to offer a reduction of one third off their fees and to extend that support to wounded veterans and bereaved partners. To date, 117 law firms up and down the country have expressed an interest in registering for it. The scheme, which was the brainchild of a Scottish serviceman, will be launched officially on armed forces day later this year. I am pleased to be hosting a reception on the scheme here in the Parliament to which all members will of course be invited. If the minister is interested in finding out more, I point him in the direction of the website of the Law Society of Scotland. I am sure that he will recognise the advantages of such a straightforward, practical and supportive scheme, and I would be delighted if he could offer it his or the Government’s endorsement. I will end on a slightly lighter note. I took advantage of a previous debate to enlist the support of the minister’s colleague the Minister for External Affairs and International Development for a fair trade football match. The Scottish Parliament team is, once more, up against a team of Royal Air Force veterans in our annual fixture to mark armed forces day. Before anyone gets the wrong idea, the team might be veterans, but they are fit, skilful and, unsurprisingly, very well disciplined. I know that I can count on Labour’s shadow spokesperson, Mr Griffin, to shore up the back line. I also know from experience that the minister is a very useful player. We are counting on his support, so I hope that he can find a date in his diary for the match in June. I support the Government motion.

I was reading about optimism bias over the new year. That is the tendency to expect events and decisions to turn out better than they actually do, from predicting long successful political careers to losing weight in January—a tendency that many of us are prone to despite the lack of any hard evidence to support such positive expectations. It is a very human characteristic to live in hope and I am sure that, for example, after four years of doom and gloom, many of us will have greeted signs of improvement in the economy with hope, if not optimism. Optimism bias is a phenomenon that policy makers are specifically warned to be careful to avoid or, at least, to allow for in their forecasts and plans for the future, so it was no surprise that, at the time of the autumn statement, economic commentators at least tried to strike a cautious note, with the Office for Budget Responsibility warning that the upturn in the economy was “cyclical ... rather than indicating stronger underlying growth potential” and, furthermore, pointing out that it had been fuelled by low levels of saving rather than by higher levels of income. Even yesterday’s news of an increase in car sales suggested that much of it had been funded by personal protection insurance mis-selling compensation payments, which struck me as ironic, to say the least. If I have welcomed even modest signs of economic recovery with optimism, the chancellor has grabbed hold of them with something akin to desperation. In fact, as well as trumpeting the success of the UK economy, he now claims that the recent figures prove that austerity works. Given that we have spent four years lagging behind every other developed country, I entirely share the cabinet secretary’s view that if the economy is recovering, that is happening despite the actions of the chancellor and not because of them, but what really worries me—in fact, what strikes me as depressing if not downright dangerous—is the plans that Mr Osborne has outlined for the years ahead, as his vision of further cuts to our public services will be damaging not only to our economy but to our society. Figures that the OBR released at the time of the autumn statement suggest that the chancellor is en route to cutting back our public services to a level that has not been seen since the second world war—a time before the welfare state was developed. Government spending on public services currently stands at around 21 per cent of GDP but, over the next four to five years, the chancellor plans to reduce that to around 16 per cent of GDP, which not even Mrs Thatcher attempted. Given that borrowing and therefore debt repayments continue to rise under the chancellor and that he is committed to increasing pensions by at least the rate of inflation, that will put an incredible squeeze on the rest of the public service. In fact, leaving aside our schools and hospitals, we face a vision of a society in which the state will struggle to provide our social services, our roads and our libraries, and in which market forces will be relied on instead to meet our needs. Now, that is what I call optimism bias. Frankly, I for one do not trust market forces to deliver on the public services that many of us rely on. After the collapse of the banks, I barely trust market forces to deliver on the economy. I do not believe that the state has to run everything or is even the best at running everything, but it is certainly part of the picture. I go further: if we want to learn the lessons of the past four years and build a more sustainable economy, we need to find better ways of building accountability, scrutiny and transparency into our economic decision making, too. Economic decisions are not politically neutral, so it is vital that they reflect the values that we hold dear. The German economy has been seen as a model of resilience and the cabinet secretary will be aware of the recent McMittelstand conference, which looked at the lessons that we could learn from Germany, which include the need to focus on sustainable, long-term business planning; on locally rooted and owned medium-sized companies; and—most important—on an ethical and values-based approach to employment and conducting business. During the recession, those companies in Germany coped well and, as a result of schemes such as Kurzarbeit, workers were able to stay in their posts and retain the collective workforce experience while being compensated for reduced hours to fit in with the demands of the company. We should be looking to develop different forms of ownership and to encourage co-operatives, employee ownership, partnerships and so on. Those may seem like radical departures from the way we do things now but, with support from the Scottish Government, such models could be developed in Scotland, too. What is the job of the Scottish Government in that task? Quite simply, it is to do what it can using the powers that it already has. We are already spending too much time talking about what might or might not happen following a vote in nine months’ time. We know that just some of the problems that people and businesses face in our economy include skill shortages, lack of investment, blacklisting and zero-hours contracts, which are all issues that the Scottish Government can do something about now. I am relieved that the Scottish Government has decided to act on the scandal of zero-hours contracts and to use the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill—

However, ministers still seem to think that it is acceptable for billions of pounds to go to large private hubcos that will be entirely exempt from such new measures. The former chief rabbi, Jonathan Sacks, said, “Optimism is a passive virtue, hope an active one”, so, although I remain wary of the chancellor’s optimism bias, I have not lost my hope.

Presiding Officer, are you apologising to me or to Kenny Gibson? [Laughter.]

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the scores for science in the 2012 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development programme for international student assessment results. (S4O-02711)

I am slightly concerned about some of the claims that the minister makes for our performance. I would not wish to overreact to a survey of this nature, but it reveals that, for example, deprivation and poverty are still huge factors affecting attainment across our country, and that some countries are more successful at reducing the impact of poverty on education outcomes. The survey also reveals that in this country girls are being outperformed by boys by some 13 points in science, while the OECD average gender gap is just one point. We seem to have been tackling that issue about science and maths for more than a decade. How does the minister monitor the success of the programmes in order to improve performance, particularly in science? Are those programmes a success?

Does Mr Mason think that Professor Joseph Stiglitz would agree with him on corporation tax?

Last week’s autumn statement was supposed to be one of the big events in the parliamentary calendar and the economic cycle. In the end, it was a bit of a damp squib, overshadowed as it was by a matter of real political moment—the death of Nelson Mandela. In some ways, I am surprised that the Conservative Party brought the subject before the Scottish Parliament today because what I did see of the autumn statement was rather unedifying. The Chancellor tried to present his decisions on fiscal policy against a background of a return to economic growth, but it came across as an almost entirely political calculation. The reaction of the braying ranks behind him, for example, was to greet the news not with delight for the businesses that would be spared or the jobs that would be secured, but as a group of politicians who believed that their goose was cooked until someone turned off the oven at the last minute. If that was not unappetising enough, what really stuck in my throat was George Osborne claiming credit for this much-vaunted recovery. Many of us might indeed be thanking our lucky stars that we have returned to economic growth, but I suspect that very few will be thanking George Osborne. It is a sad fact that for 40 of the past 41 months, since the Conservatives came to power, we have become worse off as prices have risen faster than wages. In fact, for those of us who are intrigued to know what happened in the one month when we did not get squeezed, there was an interesting exchange at Treasury questions yesterday.

In a moment. My Labour colleague Clive Efford MP highlighted the fact that the number of people who are earning more than £1 million per year jumped from 13,000 in January to 18,000 following the budget. As he pointed out, that means that their combined income rose from £27 billion to more than £47 billion. He then asked, “Is that the reason why April was the only month in which earnings rose above inflation?”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 10 December 2013; Vol 572, c 112.] I note that the question was not denied by the Treasury minister. Perhaps Mr Johnstone can answer it.

A forward-looking comment from Mr Johnstone, there, trying to blame Labour for three years of no growth at all and flatlining from the Tory policies. The Tories justify their austerity economics with a promise that they will balance the books by 2015. Now they are not even forecasting a return to surplus until 2019. The Chancellor proudly boasted that the autumn statement is “fiscally neutral” but it is certainly not socially, economically or politically neutral. How can the Tories be proud of cutting taxes for the highest earners while freezing wages for working people? How can they justify abolishing support for families and removing vital welfare benefits for the most vulnerable while the biggest multinationals pay less and less tax, if they pay tax at all? Professor Brian Ashcroft has written an excellent article in which he points out that it is simply not true to state as fact that austerity has been good for economic recovery. In fact, many economists believe that austerity has simply stalled or delayed our economic recovery behind that of similar industrialised countries—a point made by the distinguished convener of the Finance Committee and our distinguished cabinet secretary, too. Returning to the much heralded recovery, perhaps even more worrying were the observations of the Office for Budget Responsibility on the autumn statement. As my colleague Michael McMahon said, in the opening paragraph of its report it states in an incredibly damning sentence: “We judge the positive growth surprise to have been cyclical, reducing the amount of spare capacity in the economy, rather than indicating stronger underlying growth potential.” This Government is quite simply using all the wrong measures to judge its own success. It pursues and fails to reach its own borrowing targets—by some £200 billion—and seeks the approval of credit rating agencies that we should not be asking to tell us the time of day and, yet again, fails to achieve that jaundiced approval. What really matters to people is their sense of wellbeing in economic terms: whether they have a job, what kind of job that is, whether they can pay their fuel bills and what the cost of living is. The scary thing is that after three years of a flatlining economy, working people here in Scotland are more than £1,400 a year worse off. What should we be doing? I start by praising the Scottish Government, because it is at least indicating that it wants to move to measures of wellbeing through the national performance framework. I have a lot of sympathy, too, for the language of Keynesian economic growth that Mr Swinney uses, although I am worried that the cuts to the housing budget, for example, run entirely contrary to what the cabinet secretary says he wants to achieve. Where I perhaps part company with the SNP Administration is on its cuts to colleges. Surely if there is one thing that this Government should be doing it is educating people to the best of their ability and giving them the skills and training to improve not just their employability but our country’s productivity. However, I think that Labour and the SNP have quite a similar agenda—or we certainly talk the same progressive language. The First Minister has spoken about a transformational change in childcare. Well, let us do it now. I do not associate with the paranoid tendency in the SNP. Linda Fabiani accused us of having a go at the SNP. I ask her to read the motion. In fact, I specifically ask the cabinet secretary to reply to our motion and tell us what his views are on childcare and whether we should spend the autumn consequentials on childcare. It is a specific question and we heard nothing on it in the cabinet secretary’s opening statement. I ask him to address it in his closing remarks because we in the Labour Party will give our whole-hearted support to investing that sum in childcare. Let us shed our reputation as having one of the most expensive childcare systems and have one of the best.

Many of us are using this afternoon’s debate to pay our own personal tribute to the life of Nelson Mandela, in particular his powerful and resonant message about the importance of sport, and I would like to do so, too. Both my colleague Patricia Ferguson and the minister began their speeches by referring to the speech in which President Mandela talked about the power of sport to not just change the world, but unite it. Of course, he gave that speech at the final of the rugby world cup in South Africa in 1995. He was wearing his Springbok rugby shirt at an event that helped to unify that new and yet still-divided young nation and to redeem South Africa in the eyes of the international community. Sport was clearly important to Nelson Mandela and I believe that the same feelings about sport hold true for most of us. It moves us, touches our emotions and stands out in so many of our memories and so many of our life occasions, from watching our kids at sports day to the joy of national and international sporting success. This year we had Andy Murray winning at Wimbledon, but I still remember as if it was yesterday when Ian Stewart and Lachie Stewart won the 5,000m and 10,000m at the Commonwealth games in Edinburgh. I am glad that the Presiding Officer is nodding; I think that the minister is way too young to remember such an occasion. Our lives are littered with such memories, so why—when the topic is so important to shaping us as humans and when it brings us together round our club, our team, our town and our country—do we constantly treat the subject as second class? In public policy, funding, the school curriculum and our culture, we still seem to regard sport as something that is an add-on rather than core or central to our lives. I do not doubt the minister’s good intentions or the good will that all sides have expressed today, but that is not being followed up with the action, the funding, the facilities or the drive to change the culture. I believe that “transformational” is the political word du jour. There is probably no better moment to transform Scotland’s sporting culture. We have had a series of high-profile sporting successes and, with the Commonwealth games coming up, the country is abuzz with sporting anticipation.

I absolutely welcome new facilities every time that they are opened. However, I am conscious that we are still losing parks, playgrounds and tennis courts. Just up the road from me, in East Kilbride, a huge investment was made in a big building called Playsport, but it then lay empty and was not fitted out. It is being used for recreational activities, but not for the sport for which it was designed. This is a cold, wet, dark and wintry country half the time and we face a lot of challenges if we want to play sport. Much more than the rest of the UK, we need indoor facilities, which require investment and commitment. On commitment, despite years of trying, we have still not been able to deliver something as simple as two hours of PE a week in each of our schools. Would we have taken so long to deliver two hours of maths? For that matter, what does it say when we tag on and squeeze in a short debate such as this at the end of a long parliamentary day? On the one hand, some good work is going on. Whatever we might think about our national football side or the state of the professional game, there is great work in youth football—not just the fantastic work of Jim Fleeting, Andy Gould and all at the Scottish Football Association but the unsung voluntary effort of coaches. On the other hand, how many of us have heard stories about what is happening in other sports—in badminton, tennis, wrestling, canoeing, basketball and many others—and about parents falling out with coaches, squabbles and infighting? Many good people work in sports organisations, but I do not believe that they have the governance, accountability or transparency of funding that is needed to build confidence. I am not convinced that some sports have the structures to develop a long-term strategy, never mind to deliver it. Presiding Officer, this is an incredibly short debate and I should not have taken an intervention. I want to make a big point about what happens in our teenage years.

In those years, a catastrophic falling-off occurs in participation in sport, particularly among girls. It does not have to be that way. If we take the example of the best schools, we can change our world and follow Nelson Mandela’s example.

I thank the committee for taking on this challenging and contentious subject and for producing such a thoughtful and, I hope, helpful report. Given the broad consensus across the Parliament and across all sectors about the importance of early intervention generally in improving prospects for our children, I was struck by the lack of agreement on the question of when to take a child into care. There was one particularly insightful comment in the report from Professor Eileen Munro that sums up the dilemma that faces us: “Society varies in the message that it sends. There are times when it says that a child should never be left in any danger, but it gets into a paddy when a lot of children are taken away. It is always a pendulum that we are trying not to let swing too far in either direction.” I certainly do not want the pendulum to swing wildly, but we should tip it in the right direction. We still need to be more timeous in interventions, not so much because it will prevent cases of abuse—although we always have to be watchful for that kind of deliberate and wicked cruelty—but to prevent the grinding and depressing prolonged neglect and the damage that it causes that are so much more common. I will not pretend to bring any sort of expertise to this issue when the committee has clearly benefited from evidence of so many caring and experienced professionals. However, almost all of the cases that have come to my attention—directly or indirectly, from constituents or other sources—and left me worried have pointed to the need for speedier decision making. In its interim report, the committee asked: “Are too many children left too long with parents who neglect or emotionally abuse them?” The simple answer to that is yes. As the committee has made clear, however, it is not so simple to decide what we can do about it. For example, it is encouraging to read about the strong public policy focus on achieving permanence for children more quickly. It is not so encouraging to read that the level of early intervention is more likely to reflect the resources that are available to front-line social workers than variation in need or the demand for families.

I entirely agree with Mr McArthur. Although I was highlighting acute need, I will return to that point and the need for quick support, early intervention and speedier decision making in making that support available to families. I return to the issue of resources and the way in which they shape our actions. It troubles me to see how often the decisions about children who might be in need of care reflect the facilities or options that are open to the public authorities rather than the needs of the children themselves. I would welcome the minister’s comments on the extent to which that is still happening. For example, public authorities that have access to residential care homes seem to be more likely to place children in residential care than those who do not have that option on their doorstep. Many of us will have seen the adverts, which seem to have been more frequent in recent weeks and months, asking for foster and adoptive families to come forward. Although on the one hand that might highlight a shortage of such families, I take the emphasis on recruitment as a positive sign. Again, however, it is rather worrying to hear about the experiences of families, particularly those who are looking to adopt. Those of us who have dealt with fostering or adoption cases will know that, in the majority of cases, the children who are up for adoption have a range of needs and challenges. Even when children as young as two or three are taken into care, the damage that has been caused by poor attachment in infancy can often play out in behaviours in the child’s teens or later years. There is now so much evidence that reveals the importance of the first few months, let alone the first few years, of a child’s life, but our systems for helping families who are in need seem to be incredibly slow and cumbersome. I have previously cited examples in my own constituency, in which the authorities have indicated their intention to move a child from his or her parent and have lined up an adoptive family, and the whole process has taken not months but years. In that time, what damage has been done? Removing a child from his or her family is not something to be done in haste, but neither does it help anyone to drag out these decisions. What can we do? I think that we all recognise how difficult it is to know exactly when and how far to intervene. We do not want to design policy around the worst examples, but surely we can agree that quicker decision making is more likely to produce more effective results. Families need to be more actively supported. People need to be offered help to become good parents, and not just inspected every now and then to see whether things are all right. It is all too easy for the fly and the sly to deceive the health visitor or the social worker. Those families are rarely evil; they are just incapable. When it is possible, we need to help them to look after their own children properly. Putting the child at the centre of our thinking is what GIRFEC is all about and it is a good approach. I emphasise that there are aspects of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill that are to be warmly welcomed, and I echo the point highlighted by Jayne Baxter earlier about the extension to young adults leaving care of the right to ask for support. However, I have already expressed my doubts about the named person approach taken in the bill, which could divert resources away from where they are most needed. I am not convinced that legislation by itself will do much good if we strip local authorities of the resources needed to provide the support. Is not there an irony about, or at least a contrast between, our shared agreement across the Parliament on the committee’s report and the simultaneous knowledge that social workers are so hard pressed and so stressed with their case load that they scarcely have time to make the visits or have the room to make the balanced judgments that we all seek? We should acknowledge that those working in child protection get mixed messages. The reaction to shocking cases of child abuse is often to point the finger of blame at social workers, and then to respond with many well-intentioned recommendations, but the net effect is sometimes to encourage those working in the sector to become ever more risk averse. They become more aware of the need to protect themselves from prosecution, rather than concentrating solely on protecting children from harm. There was a good and thought-provoking article in The Scotsman recently by Stuart Waiton, who argued that the bureaucratisation of adult-child relationships has undermined our ability to exercise personal judgment. I believe that the answer lies not in ever more formal procedures or processes, whether clumsy or streamlined, but in creating an atmosphere where good judgment is at the centre of decision making, where social workers and other carers are encouraged to step in to support, not to condemn, and where good examples are heralded and lauded rather than bad examples simply being pilloried. We know that we can never get it absolutely right and that there will always be examples that shame us all for their human cruelty, but if the report can tip the balance towards helping children with earlier and quicker intervention to help parents and, where necessary, to remove children, it will have been worth while.

Will the member give way?

My question is simply this: why would it be helpful for my six children to have a named person?

Will Fiona McLeod give way on that point?

I point out that, should there be difficulties in my family, we have an enormous support network, although I recognise that I am fortunate. I have a mother and I have a brother and two sisters who all have kids. My wife has two siblings with families and her own parents are alive. We have family, friends and neighbours who would help to look after us. There are all sorts of people who would intervene, support us and know if we got into difficulty. Absolutely the last person on the list of people to whom we would turn would be a social worker. [Interruption.] I am sorry, but that is the last person to whom we should turn. To go to a social worker in such a situation is a total diversion of resources when so many people need urgent help right now.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has had with the chief constable regarding the publication of crime statistics. (S4O-02672)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the Auditor General for Scotland’s recent report on police reform and her comments that the information that is provided to the new Scottish Police Authority is more selective and less comprehensive than that which was previously presented to police boards. Is he also aware of the chief constable’s comments to the Public Audit Committee that publication of crime statistics is a matter for the Government and not for him, that that is a source of some frustration for him and that it is certainly not due to reticence on his part? Will the cabinet secretary ease that frustration and assure Parliament and the public that the information will be as comprehensive as it was previously?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what additional support it can give to expand the provision of credit unions across the country. (S4O-02628)

I thank the minister for his answer and his colleague Mr Swinney for his support for ethical finance more generally. Is the minister aware—not least from the attendance of Mr Swinney’s officials at a recent round-table meeting on ethical finance—of the difficulties that many Scots still have in accessing a local credit union? Some Scots still have no credit union in their locality. Will he look at ways to expand credit union provision, perhaps through supporting rate relief, which Glasgow City Council offers, or through establishing a loan guarantee fund?

I believe that all members in the chamber today will offer broad support for the general principles of the bill, and I certainly want to express my enthusiasm for its direction of travel towards greater integration between health and social care. However, like others, I must admit to feeling slightly worried about the bill’s ability to deliver on that agenda and to feeling downright anxious about whether some aspects of the legislation will work at all. I recognise and acknowledge the good intentions behind the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. In fact, some of the language in the proposals looked rather familiar to me from previous parliamentary sessions. I remember speaking about what was then called the joint futures agenda not long after being elected in 1999. For those who may not remember that, the joint futures group was set up by the first Scottish Executive—more than 14 years ago now—with the specific aim of trying to improve joint working between social care and healthcare and to try to secure better outcomes for patients and service users. The various recommendations of that group read like the bill’s policy memorandum. They focused on joint working, the rebalancing of care between community care and acute care, how to improve the financial and management frameworks of the different agencies involved and how to establish best practice. They also examined some of the difficulties around charging. Here we are, more than 10 years on, still wrestling with precisely the same thorny issues. The reason that I mention joint futures is not to sound jaundiced or cynical or to suggest that integrated working cannot be achieved, but quite the reverse. If this was important in 1999, it is even more important in 2013, with the rapid pace of demographic change, the ever-increasing pressures on our budgets and the need to move to a preventative care agenda. I mention the work that has gone on before simply to highlight what a difficult agenda this is to achieve. As the Health and Sport Committee reveals in its report, the legislation itself is perhaps less important than achieving cultural change—getting health professionals, social workers, the voluntary sector and the myriad of people who are involved in care to work in partnership, rather than just within their own professional disciplines, funding structures or special areas of interest. There are practical difficulties with the bill, too. I was drawn almost immediately to the issue of governance. Having just read the Auditor General’s report on police reform, I suspect that no member can be unaware of how legislative confusion over roles and responsibilities can hamper the creation of a new organisation. It is strikingly obvious that, if there is not clarity about the relationship between the new joint boards proposed in the bill and their parent bodies—the relevant NHS board and local authorities—that is a recipe for conflict. As for budgets, all of us will be familiar from casework, if not from our own experience, that services tend to follow the money. One difficulty here is that there are so many competing budgetary agendas. There is an expectation that the bill will save money or at least deliver efficiencies to meet rising demand. Alongside meeting rising demand, there is a clear drive to focus on community and social care rather than on acute care, but there is a rather less specific commitment to reallocate those acute budgets. In theory, yes, reducing unplanned admissions will free up resources, but we also know that in practice the demand on our hospitals is such that those resources will immediately become reallocated—any beds that become free are immediately filled by other patients. That is before we even get into the fact that, in social work, the health service, local authorities, NHS boards, housing or the voluntary sector, there will be competing budgetary needs and not simply collaborative or consensual agreement on spending priorities. I am afraid that there is no shortage of people or organisations that think that they can spend someone else’s budget better. Most important of all, it is vital that the bill succeeds not because of organisational simplicity or budgetary accountability, but simply to make life better for patients. The committee’s report contains a particularly informative section about the difficulty of integrating the free healthcare that is available in the NHS with social care that is subject to charges and various eligibility criteria. We know from the on-going legal cases on NHS continuing care what a minefield that can be and how much anxiety it produces. Those with chronic and long-term disabling conditions or progressive neurological conditions such as Parkinson’s are particularly anxious about where we will head in the area. Before the bill has even cleared stage 1, we know that people the length and breadth of the country are struggling with 15-minute care visits. Our health and care services are under huge pressure to maintain quality and standards and they sometimes buckle under it. As the RCN and others have made clear, quality and safety of care are unfortunately not at the heart of the bill—or not yet. The briefing for the debate from Macmillan Cancer Support contained an excellent line, which states: “We believe that this debate must focus on how services will work for the cancer patient, not on how it will work for the service provider.” That applies to patients in general and I entirely agree with it. The bill is well-intentioned and I hope that it can deliver.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact it considers reduced opening times at police stations such as Giffnock will have on residents’ feelings of safety and security. (S4O-02582)

Does the minister realise that, following the loss of the local court in Giffnock and then the loss of the ability to phone the local Giffnock police station directly, the severe cutting back of the station opening hours will reassure residents of nothing other than that their service is being reduced?

I want to make a brief contribution to the debate, really in the form of an appeal about the way in which we conduct ourselves in the forthcoming referendum. Before I do, though, I want to thank all members for their work on the bill. Given the strong views that surround the referendum, it is remarkable that the process has been relatively consensual. It is perhaps the first and only consensual moment in the debate, so we should enjoy the occasion while it lasts. One of the main purposes of the bill has been to set the regulatory framework around which the referendum campaign will be conducted. In that regard, it has done a good job. In the end, though, more important is our behaviour and the example that we set. The Deputy First Minister put it best in her opening remarks at stage 1, when she called on all sides to conduct “a debate over the next 12 months that is respectful of one another’s deeply held views and devoid of rancour or abuse.”—[Official Report, 12 September 2013; c 22411.] I doubt that any of us would disagree with that statement. In turn, I hope that the minister would agree that it would not be acceptable for the Scottish Government to use its position to bully those who speak out against it. I raise that because, at the beginning of this week, there was a particularly unfortunate story about a Scottish Government minister who was accused of bullying academics at the University of Dundee because of their views on independence. I was surprised in this case, because I have always found the minister in question to be a decent person. However, the most important point is that I was not surprised to read the story. Immediately, many other similar allegations sprang to mind. Clearly, all members here, if not necessarily the wider public, are aware of the behaviour of the so-called cybernats, from Mike Russell’s infamous researcher all the way through to Iain Gray’s treatment at the last election. It is not just politicians who are subject to personal invective for daring to express their views.

I will make that point later in my speech. It is not just politicians who are subject to personal invective. The Olympic cyclist Sir Chris Hoy and the comedian Susan Calman have found themselves inadvertently in the firing line. The Government has developed an unfortunate reputation for trying to suppress or totally silence those who might hold an opposing view. For those who do not work in politics, it is difficult to deal with what can be vitriolic criticism. The chief executive of Aggreko—not someone who I would imagine is easily intimidated—complained of unpleasant attacks and said explicitly that leading business figures would not speak out on independence for fear of the SNP pouring “rains of bile and ire” upon them. Ruth Davidson reminded me of the occasion when Jim Wallace was bumped for Keith Brown at a Loganair anniversary dinner after the Scottish Government demanded a change. That last one made me laugh. If the SNP thinks that someone as pleasant and reasonable as Jim Wallace is the enemy, it really needs to get a new sense of perspective.

My point is that it is not the tone that we expect from the Government. There are people on all sides, but the Government holds power, controls the debate and sets the agenda for Parliament. It is particularly important for those who have power not to abuse that position. That is the point that I am making. I have not had to search hard for examples. Many immediately sprang to mind when I read the story earlier this week. In the interests of balance, I will not pretend that politicians and supporters of other parties are angels. We are all well aware of how easy it is to move from loyalty to one’s colleagues to tribalism and aggression. Presiding Officer, you have corrected members often enough for incorrectly using the term “you” when referring to opposition members in parliamentary debate to know how easy it is to move from objective political discussion to personal attack. The worries that I highlight matter at all times to this Parliament, but they matter particularly for this referendum because we all want it to be an inclusive discussion. There is already a huge amount of national and international interest in the referendum and the vote is expected to engage the whole of Scotland. The current estimate is that turnout will be far higher than in other elections, so we will engage with people who do not normally get involved in politics. I speak as someone who supports votes for 16 and 17-year-olds in all elections. One of the main reasons for that is that I worry deeply that so many young people no longer vote. Surely the message that we want to get across is that all views matter—that the political process is a way to engage and is not one to be decided by name calling. Here is an opportunity to engage a whole new generation in the importance of decision making and in taking control of its own affairs, whether that be through independence or, as I hope, through the powers and benefits of devolution, through the Scottish and Westminster Parliaments. It is up to all of us to ensure that the experience is rewarding and fulfilling and not one to be fearful or anxious about. If the minister addressed the point that Drew Smith made earlier, that would be one way of reassuring me. What will be the formal process through which the Parliament can engage with stakeholders, take evidence and test the contentions in the white paper in the coming months?

Despite the terms in which that was put, I actually welcome the Deputy First Minister’s comments. They imply that there will be a parliamentary process, and that is something to be welcomed. [Interruption.] I do welcome that. I welcome the fact that we will take evidence.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank colleagues and I look forward to a constructive debate over the next 307 days.

Since I met the minister when he opened the new visitor centre at Hunterston, I have never—like Murdo Fraser—been entirely sure of his views on nuclear energy. Today, he seems to have forgotten about Hunterston and Torness, and he has had a go at nuclear. He was the one who made the comparison between the strike prices, which are £92.50 per megawatt hour for nuclear compared with £100 per megawatt hour for onshore wind and £155 per megawatt hour for offshore wind. How does the minister compare the investment lifespans for nuclear and wind farms?

I am grateful for Jim Eadie’s excellent and thoughtful speech because I sometimes worry for the Scottish Government and its need not just to suppress all criticism but to constantly seek praise, even if today that praise is just from its own back benchers and, I believe, Alex Johnstone. Patting oneself on the back for roads that have not yet been built strikes me as odd when surely it is the Parliament’s job to scrutinise the Government’s decisions and question their value for money and their benefit to Scotland. This could—or even should be—a consensual debate. After all, Labour and the SNP share a Keynesian approach to the economy in their keenness to invest in infrastructure projects and a rejection of the Conservative-led UK Government’s approach that has kept us in the doldrums for four years. However, once we move beyond the macroeconomy or strategic level, serious questions that the Scottish Government needs to answer about the detail of its infrastructure programme start to arise. The minister might not recognise the hollow ring to his motion, but there is no shortage of other—dare I say—more objective observers offering a more balanced perspective. For example, the Queensferry crossing received overwhelming support from this Parliament—and, indeed, still has that support—but as the Jimmy Reid Foundation, the Community trade union, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and others have pointed out, should we not be concerned at the manner in which the contracts for steel, cement and construction went abroad rather than to local companies? It is right to highlight the Borders railway but surely in a debate on Scotland’s transport infrastructure it would simply be wrong not to talk about the strategic importance of rail links to our main airports. Concerns and questions about whether projects are on time or on budget are being raised not just by Opposition parties. The Auditor General, who recently reported on our key transport infrastructure projects, has said: “The Scottish Government considers” its spending on five key infrastructure projects “affordable in the long term, but it has not fully demonstrated the reliability of its analysis in this area.” She also said: “Reporting of the building cost estimates for three projects has also been incomplete or inconsistently presented” and “the timescale for ... completion” of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme “has increased by over two years”. Finally, she pointed out: “for the Borders Railway and EGIP projects, Transport Scotland did not ensure that business cases were complete and up to date at all stages. Consequently, at certain decision points, it had not fully demonstrated the viability, value for money and affordability of the projects.” Such observations hardly fill one with confidence in this Administration’s competence; indeed, that worry was compounded when the permanent secretary—the Scottish Government’s chief civil servant—had to apologise to the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee for failing to disclose half a billion pounds that this Government is spending on these very projects. By the way, the permanent secretary’s excuse was that the Scottish Government’s figures did not include the costs of purchasing the land necessary for the infrastructure projects to go ahead. This Administration seems to have a very strange attitude to land purchases. As we know from the Glasgow airport rail link, it is happy to pay hundreds of thousands—if not millions—of pounds to buy land, but it thinks nothing of scrapping whole projects and then selling the land off for the tiniest fraction of its cost. Now we know that it does not want even to declare those purchases to the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee. We do not have to wonder why. The minister seems to think that we should simply applaud his list of as yet unbuilt roads, but when we look in more detail at the transport infrastructure projects, rather than being reassured we see that the Government’s lack of transparency on costs and its failure to provide information on affordability raises even more questions. The motion refers to more than £4 billion-worth of work, but the Auditor General for Scotland estimated that the SNP Administration is committing us to £7.5 billion of spending over the next 30 years from the five big transport projects alone. She further highlighted that, for four of those revenue-financed projects, more than £5 billion of the estimated committed costs have not been reported publicly by the Scottish Government. Instead, we are supposed to be reassured by the finance secretary’s intention, which was outlined in admittedly slightly more detail in this year’s budget statement, to limit future revenue-financed investment—that is private finance initiative, public-private partnership or non-profit-distributing projects for the rest of us—to less than 5 per cent of its expected future annual budget. The Scottish Government has not told us, for example, why it set the level at 5 per cent. We know that repayments will be from the resource budget alone, but in calculating the 5 per cent cap the capital budget is also included, as are the non-cash departmental expenditure limit and the local government allocation, despite the fact that the local government share of future revenue commitments is excluded. That is some way to calculate 5 per cent.

Will the minister give way?

Mr Brown talks about projects as if they were already done. Which of these projects—the Borders railway, the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the dualling of the A9 and A96—has been done?

5. To ask the Deputy First Minister, in light of the recent report by the Educational Institute of Scotland, what action the Scottish Government is taking to address the use of zero-hours contracts in the higher education sector. (S4F-01658)

When will the Deputy First Minister’s Government show the leadership on the issue that Scotland expects? Her ministers continue to defend the use of, and the awarding of Government grants to, multinational companies that use zero-hours contracts. We now know that at least 8,000 people are working under those contracts in higher education and that a further 1,000 are doing so in further education. Through freedom of information requests, I have discovered that at least 27,000 people are working under zero-hours contracts in the devolved public sector, which is the area for which the Government has entire responsibility. When will the Deputy First Minister show the leadership that we demand and end that invidious employment practice?

On the UNCRC, is the minister still considering changing the wording in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill to “having due regard to” as opposed to just taking it under consideration?

I thank the minister for bringing this debate to the chamber, and particularly for her excellent timing. I do not imagine that I am the only one here who will rush home to get the kids ready to go out guising this evening. Hallowe’en, along with Christmas and birthdays, is one of the few days in the year when we truly free up our children to celebrate their playfulness and imaginations. We let them off the leash, allow them to wander the streets after dark and, heaven forbid, maybe even knock on strange doors. Of course, the day has changed over the years. For many it is now trick-or-treat rather than guising, although I should say that I am very grateful for the American habit of gouging out a pumpkin rather than the laborious and painful task of doing it to a turnip, as most of us had to do. Depending on one’s age, another welcome or unwelcome change is getting pound coins at some houses and not just sweets—the apples and nuts are just to keep the adults happy, as far as I can see. I had a big debate with one of my children—I lost that debate too, which is a familiar experience—about him buying a ninja outfit off the internet rather than dressing up as Dr Who using old clothes as his sister is doing. The point is, however, that they are both having fun. Tonight, I will probably take the wee ones—aged five and under—out, but the bigger ones, who are eight and over, want to go off by themselves with their friends. No adult supervision is required, thank you very much. It is slightly worrying that the very freedom to play like a child, as I have just described it, seems to be all too rare rather than commonplace. Adults do not have the time, and children do not have the places. As a society, we relax our guard only on one or two days a year. That makes today’s debate on the play strategy that the Government published in the summer and, more important, the action plan that was published this week so important. As every member has said so far, play is essential to our wellbeing. As the strategy makes clear, it can tackle obesity, improve health, and reduce antisocial behaviour. Most important of all, it can help to develop our inquisitiveness, resilience and personality. As we all know, all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy. The benefits of play are well known and used by some already. In the early years of primary school, for example, teachers have adapted the curriculum specifically so that there is greater emphasis on children learning through play. However, even in the field of education, the further our children and young people progress through school, the more sober and serious the curriculum becomes and the less time and attention are given to play. Two reports that were produced on successive days in the past fortnight caught my attention. The first, from the University of Strathclyde with the University of Dundee, suggested a link between taking more exercise and improved performance in exams including in English, maths and science. The second study, also from the University of Strathclyde, this time in conjunction with the University of Aberdeen, took the form of a report card on Scottish youth and it gave us an F on obesity levels and levels of physical activity. There are many reasons why our nation is becoming fatter and more sedentary. Our increased prosperity is perhaps the most obvious reason, but our changed and changing attitudes to play are also part of the picture and, to my mind, part of the answer.

I entirely agree with that point, and I might get the chance later to talk about the risk-averse culture. Yes, there are stories of people banning conkers and so on, which is clearly risk aversion gone mad. I want to digress slightly to make a point that Liz Smith might agree with. Physical education and play are clearly not the same. Most of us enjoy playing, but not all of us enjoy PE. However, organised sport and unsupervised play activities suffer from not having a high enough profile in our school curriculum. They are not ranked highly in the academic hierarchy. Even when it comes to extracurricular activity, we do not give play, sport or music, for that matter, enough time and support, and it can be done. I am not a fan of private education but it annoys and frustrates me that many state schools do not offer the same focus on sport, games and physical activity that is so often a feature of the independent sector. Even though the picture was not quite as bad in Scotland as it was across the rest of the UK, stories about the high proportion of Olympic medallists last summer who were privately educated instead of state educated still rankle with me. Sport is not the same as play, but the point that I am trying to emphasise is that both would benefit greatly from a higher profile and higher status within our schools and education system. To echo what the minister said earlier, we do not take play seriously—if that is not too much of an oxymoron. The action plan is very welcome. One aspect that jumped out at me was that the organisations on the list of consultees or of those responsible for implementation are already champions of play. In some ways, the most important actions in the plan are those outwith the play sector, which involve planners, architects and organisations such as local authorities. The strategy and action plan are very important, but I hope that we can move towards even firmer duties and statements of intent, such as a duty on local authorities to take account of play when granting planning consent or building roads. Some of our local authorities already have excellent play strategies that are making a difference, but even in that area duties are interpreted differently. I agree entirely with the point that Jayne Baxter made earlier. I would like to see more open and interesting places for play. Every time a new estate gets built there is a wee play park with a swing and a seesaw, but is that what children really want? A few years ago, my wife and I bought a wooden Wendy house for the kids to play in, but when their friends come round the kids just want to play in the tree house, which is just four planks of wood with nails sticking out of it—it would never pass any risk assessment. However, the tree house has been a palace, a castle, a bedroom and a play room—it has been filled with the children’s imagination. Seven and a half years ago, we had a members’ business debate calling for a play strategy. At the time, many of us bemoaned the risk-averse culture—the cotton-wool kids. I remember what Christine Grahame said at the time. She is not here just now, so I apologise if this paraphrasing is not quite accurate, but she said that if you hadn’t broken your arm as a kid, you hadn’t lived. Play is about learning one’s limitations and managing risk. I do not want my children to be scared of crossing the road; I want them to be sensibly aware of the risks and dangers. I hope that attitudes are changing. I could pick a few holes in the strategy around the UN convention, but I will not, because I think it is a great move in the right direction. I do not get to agree with the Scottish Government that often, but on wellbeing and play, I think that we can work together.

Is the minister adding extra funds—£20 million per year for each year to 2016—or is it simply the case that the current £20 million will be used for the fund until 2016?

I will begin with a tale of two constituents who live less than two miles apart in Newton Mearns and who both suffer from the very rare blood disease paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, or PNH, as some members might know it. One of those constituents, Mr Bill Devine, was denied access to the one drug that could have helped. He contacted me in October 2010, weak and unable to leave his house other than for blood transfusions. I wrote to the local health board, but the only route to access the drug was through the individual patient treatment request, or IPTR, system. His case was “not proven”. Mr Devine died in April 2011. The other constituent will be known to some colleagues from her evidence to parliamentary committees. Mrs Lesley Loeliger was granted access to the same drug that was denied to Mr Devine and it has transformed her life. She is raising her young family and is an active member of the local community. The drug has even allowed her the energy to campaign on behalf of others—she has petitioned the Parliament to fight for access and fairness for all patients. That same story is being played out across Scotland and across different health conditions and drug treatments. Too many families are being denied treatments that their clinicians recommend for them. Their feelings of dismay and frustration are compounded by the knowledge that others are accessing those very drugs. No one in this Parliament has a monopoly on compassion, and I certainly do not wish to portray either the current health secretary or his predecessor as cold or heartless but, for several years, we have been told repeatedly that Scotland has a robust system in place and that we would not go down the route of a drugs fund for one particular condition, as has been pursued in England. The cabinet secretary, in his response to the work of the Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee, now acknowledges that our system does not work and, of course, he has introduced a Scottish rare conditions fund. I simply seek reassurance that the system that the Scottish Government intends to put in place to approve medicines will be effective and that all patients in Scotland will have equitable access to the care that they need. At the heart of the issue is how we measure effectiveness. In a cash-limited world, how do we balance clinical effectiveness with cost effectiveness? How do we measure the quality of life? I am encouraged that the SMC is to be asked to broaden its approach to take into account issues such as the burden of illness and the wider societal impact. For the often very young patients who struggle with skin cancer, such an approach holds out the hope that the first new treatments in more than three decades will be available to them. I am pleased that the SMC is looking at the benefits of a different evaluation of end-of-life treatments. I am sure that none of us underestimates the difficult task that faces the SMC in trying to improve on the quality-adjusted life year system and set new approval thresholds. A number of recommendations have been made to improve the transparency of the process. That will help, even if it does not make a substantive difference to the number of approvals. Let us make no mistake; as the Health and Sport Committee said in its report, “The challenge is not only to improve transparency and consistency within the IPTR process but to ensure that the SMC process in the first instance better assesses the cost effectiveness of medicines.” For drugs that the SMC has not approved but which could benefit some patients in some cases—as with the two examples that I highlighted—the IPTR system should have offered at least some hope. However, as we all now know, not only was the test of exceptionality—that every case had to be virtually unique—too severe for most patients to pass but it was interpreted differently in different parts of the country. I hope that the new clinically led system will mark an improvement by moving away from decisions that are taken solely on the ground of cost. I understand that the exceptionality test is to be replaced by the criterion that all other treatments have been exhausted, which gives me hope. The drug treatment for PNH is expensive but, for the few who need it, it works. It is life transforming and does not demand an open-ended cheque from the health service, because PNH affects only up to two people in every million of the population. Where are we at the moment? Members might be interested to know that, following the Health and Sport Committee meeting at which the cabinet secretary said that patients would be turned down only if it was believed that a drug would not work and no one would be refused solely on the ground of cost, three patients who were trying to access treatment for PNH had their applications approved—two applications were approved on appeal and the other decision was reversed after the treatment had initially been refused in the week before the cabinet secretary gave evidence. We are here primarily because of patient protest, but also partly because of decisions that have been taken in Europe. As far back as June 2009, the European Council published a recommendation on rare diseases that recommended a national plan for rare diseases. We know from experience that, if we manage rare conditions only locally, there is a lack of specialist knowledge, long delays are created with on-going bureaucratic and complex referrals, and health boards sometimes refuse to share risks and costs, which leads to a postcode lottery. Scotland is one of the last countries to comply with the European recommendation on rare diseases, which insisted on compliance by the end of 2013 at the latest. Given that directive, I am still a little concerned by the guidance that the new peer-approval system is to be locally run. I ask the cabinet secretary to clarify the Scottish Government’s approach to the rare diseases drugs fund. For several years, the Government has opposed the cancer drugs fund, which I believe that it still opposes. However, we now have the rare diseases drugs fund. I have constituents who have children with cystic fibrosis and I am incredibly pleased and relieved that they have access to the drug Kalydeco to treat that terrible condition. However, none of the other health cases that I have dealt with has qualified for the fund. Eculizumab, which is used to treat PNH, does not qualify, and neither does ipilimumab, which is used to treat skin cancer. As the cabinet secretary clarified, the rare conditions fund has been extended, but only a third of the money has been spent so far. Given that, will the fund’s criteria be extended to cover more conditions until the new SMC criteria and the new peer-approval clinical system are in place? In the end, the test will be whether more patients receive treatment that is currently denied them and whether they do so equitably. Mrs Loeliger told me last night that a new PNH patient was seen at Monklands hospital last week and that she does not know whether they will require eculizumab. She said: “I want a proper system in place so I do not have to fight for each patient individually. Please do not think I minded fighting for the patients that got their drug, it just should not come down to someone shouting loudly.”

The interim report of the Wood commission that we are discussing today is an excellent contribution to the debate on youth unemployment. It makes a series of not just useful but—I hope—achievable recommendations. I welcome the commission’s report and I congratulate the Scottish Government on bringing together in the commission a range of talented individuals from various backgrounds. I will focus on two areas of the interim report: colleges and links with schools. However, before I do so, I will briefly restate why finding a solution to our youth unemployment crisis is so important. In Scotland today, a fifth of all young people—some 84,000 people—are out of work and 18 per cent of young people on out-of-work benefits have been claiming for more than a year. Of course, there are wide variations across Scotland, and a Scottish-wide youth unemployment rate of 7.2 per cent masks a level of almost double that in North Ayrshire, Clackmannanshire and East Ayrshire. There is a pressing need to use this Parliament’s powers to change course and prevent a lost generation of young people from experiencing the scarring effects of unemployment. I am aware that many MSPs are already doing what they can as individuals to address the issue, by running job fairs and workshops for example. In my constituency, I am running a work experience programme alongside my Westminster colleague Jim Murphy. We are asking local businesses to take on a young person for a period of work experience and then offer those placements to young people who are on out-of-work benefits. That is just a small contribution to the problem, but it is one that I hope will lift hopes and boost confidence. Sir Ian Wood’s report emphasises the benefits of improving employability through education and skills as well as using work experience programmes. Over the long term, that will make Scotland a more attractive place in which to do business. However, I recognise that in the short term employability cannot be the only answer when unemployment and a lack of jobs is the real problem. Of course, much of the discussion on greater collaboration between schools and further education is not new. Ten years ago, the then Scottish Executive reported on “Building the Foundations of a Lifelong Learning Society—a review of collaboration between schools and further education colleges in Scotland”, which called for taster courses, non-traditional national qualifications and access to after-school and evening classes at further education institutions as a pathway into colleges for senior school students. However, here we are 10 years on and the Wood commission repeats calls for a renewed focus on colleges in the provision of further education and linking up with schools to deliver new pathways in learning.

That is a very good point but one that I do not have time to address fully in my speech. The determined to succeed programme was all about getting businesspeople into the classroom, and the growth in the importance of small businesses to our economy needs to be reflected in our schools. I entirely agree with Ms Smith’s point. The commission has noted in particular the importance of having a range of course options, not just full-time places. That flexibility is essential to support those already in part-time work to gain qualifications or to support people with additional support needs, for example, to access learning opportunities. No matter how consensual we would like to be on the subject of today’s debate, it is impossible not to point out that the report’s approach simply does not align with the Scottish Government’s current actions. The Government’s further education agenda has resulted in 120,000 fewer students at college, and it has meant spending £60 million getting rid of college lecturers and staff, and a halving of courses for people with additional support needs.

I am trying to be consensual, so I hesitated to allow Mr Russell to intervene. I accept the point in the report, but I hope that Mr Russell and Ms Constance will accept that there are more than 100,000 fewer Scots going to college than there were just three years ago. The number of pupils with additional support needs who are now not going on to college is surely recognised by members across the chamber. I am genuinely supportive of the Government for creating the commission and bringing the debate forward. A related issue is the financial support that is available to support learning in the further education sector.

The classic example is the student who works at Tesco and studies part time at college for a higher education degree, who will receive far less state support than the student who studies full time at university for the same degree but works part time at Tesco to earn income. The NUS makes that point. Support for college students does not have the same status as university student support. The former is discretionary and is provided on a first come, first served basis. If we want to make further education a genuinely attractive and accessible option, there needs to be greater certainty around the student support that we offer. I want to make one final point. Recently, I had the chance to visit the British Airways maintenance operations at Glasgow airport. As well as being enjoyable, it was a useful visit because BA showed me how it engages with schoolchildren through the STEM subjects, encouraging particularly girls to look forward to a career in engineering. That type of collaborative work is vital as it fills in the gaps where teachers do not have the skills and experience to teach relevant subjects. There is further scope in the area to teach business and entrepreneurship, not as abstract subjects but as the practical tools that are needed to set up businesses. I thank all those who have been involved in the commission and I look forward to the final report.

Will the member take an intervention?

Could Mr Brown start by freezing energy prices?

I am at that stage in my family life when I have become a taxi driver for my own kids.

I suspect that some people will recognise the description; it is clear that James Dornan does. Other younger parents might view that with a slight sense of foreboding, although I say in mitigation that it is not that bad because it is sometimes the only chance I get to catch up with some members of the family. The big downside is cost; it cost me £98 to fill up the car this weekend. It is a seven-seater—I have a lot of kids. It does not seem so long since I was horrified when a full tank went above £50, but it is now double that. Families across Scotland are feeling the pinch in this recession. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report, research from Shelter and government statistics all tell the same story. I want, however, to highlight another report—the “Asda Income Tracker”—because it is impossible not to notice the rise in the weekly cost of shopping, of heating the house and of getting to work by bus, train or car. As I said in the debate on the economy last week, the Asda study reveals that the average Scottish household is £990 a year worse off than it was five years ago. That is bad enough, but we are considerably poorer than the UK average where the average household is approximately £870 a year worse off. It is worth highlighting a few of the other findings in the Asda report: transport costs are up £654 a year, compared with 2008, and housing and utility bills are up 25 per cent since 2008. The under-30s have been hardest hit, with discretionary income going down approximately 5 per cent over the past five years. Since 2010, wages have, on average, been growing at half the rate of inflation. Even more worrying is that the study forecasts that the cost of living will continue to rise, and will reach almost 18 per cent higher over the next five years. That means that by 2018, the average UK household could be £1,300 a year worse off. What can we do about that? The party conferences laid out pretty starkly the political choices that face. We could accept the reality that unregulated free markets do not serve any of us very well. We could intervene on the side of the consumers, the workers and the citizens of this country with, for example, a price freeze on our home heating bills, a new approach to public transport ownership or regulation, and a decisive statement of intent to support small indigenous businesses over large unaccountable corporations. Alternatively, we could, of course, listen to what is being said at this week’s Tory conference and try to find some scapegoats—some people to turn on and to blame for our communal misfortunes. We could blame immigrants and send round vans to tell them all to go home. We could blame criminals and threaten to punish them further if they dare to muck up their prison cells. Better still, why not blame the unemployed and treat them like criminals? Let us make them pick up litter or do community service for the misfortune of not being able find a job. In fact, given that it is all their fault, let us just go the whole hog and take away their human rights. It is, of course, impossible to believe that we would ever need human rights to protect any of us. Unfortunately, we do not have to wait until the next Conservative election manifesto—the damage is already being done. Child benefit has been frozen and other benefits for families and children are rising by just 1 per cent. The Child Poverty Action Group has pointed out that “currently, one in five, that’s 200,000 of Scotland’s children, are officially recognised as living in poverty”. The Institute for Fiscal Studies forecasts further massive increases in child poverty—it is estimated that 65,000 more children in Scotland will be living in poverty by 2020. I have talked previously about how devolution has given Scotland the opportunity to become a beacon for progressive policies. It has allowed us to resist market-driven reforms to our health service, to maintain equity in our education system and to support independence in retirement through free travel and free personal care. Although we spend much of our time disagreeing, we need look only at the most recent Labour and SNP election manifestos to see that there is a lot of common ground, too. I appeal to the Scottish Government to join us on policies that will deliver real and immediate benefits to the Scottish people and which will make a difference to our cost of living today—not in some hypothetical post-2016 world. For example, bus regulation and the awarding of the rail franchise are areas in which ministers have powers at their disposal right now. We could take decisions that would help to keep services running in the interests of passengers, not of shareholders, and which would keep prices down.

I will take that as an olive branch from the SNP. It gives me optimism, so I will make another suggestion to Mr McDonald and his colleagues, which relates to community ownership of renewables. Why are there so few examples of community-owned wind farms when on paper, at least, we all support an extension of the policy? Instead of just subsidising a few community initiatives, we have an opportunity to address fuel poverty directly and to take ownership of energy generation, which is responsible for one of the largest cost-of-living increases in recent years. I ask the minister to look at the role that housing associations can play in that area. What worries me is that, despite our common ground, we seem to be unable to reach common solutions. Just yesterday, the Welfare Reform Committee discussed the bedroom tax.

I will, Presiding Officer. The majority of members on the committee and the members of the expert group were united in our condemnation of the policy. My question is this: why do not we do something about it now? We have the powers, and we have the vehicle in my colleague Jackie Baillie’s proposed bill, which would make a real difference to the cost of living of some of our most vulnerable citizens.

We cannot wait until 2016. By then, it will be too late. People will have been chucked out of their houses, or worse.

I join colleagues in thanking Aileen McLeod for lodging the motion and I join her in thanking the Teenage Cancer Trust and all its supporters for the fantastic work that they do to support young people across Scotland. Cancer is a terrible disease at any age, but it can be particularly devastating when it affects the young. Prevention needs to remain a priority, but we also know that the earlier we diagnose cancer, the more likely intervention is to succeed. I have no doubt that the trust’s education programme could make a substantive difference in raising awareness among 13 to 24-year-olds and in improving detection. It is essential to highlight this evening and during October’s teenage cancer action week the need to support our young people who are diagnosed with cancer during their school and college years. According to research by CLIC Sargent, two thirds of 16 to 18-year-olds with cancer said that they fell behind in their studies or performed worse than expected. Three out of 10 said that they had to leave education altogether. When CLIC Sargent asked teachers for their views, only 15 per cent of secondary teachers said that they had enough information or guidance to support a pupil with cancer. Children and young people face many challenges and obstacles in continuing their studies while coping with or recovering from cancer, such as fatigue, problems with concentration and emotional difficulties. Even changes such as weight gain that is caused by medication can add to feelings of isolation and self-consciousness, to which Aileen McLeod eloquently and tellingly referred. I thank the Minister for Youth Employment for her answers to a series of written questions that I have submitted on the issue, but there is more that she and her colleague Mr Matheson, the Minister for Public Health, could do. That includes a formal needs assessment when young people return to school, one-to-one tuition to fill any gaps in learning and good practice that ranges from reorganising timetables to a personal expression of interest from the headteacher. One of the most interesting and important developments in England and Wales has been the introduction earlier this year of new guidance for local authorities that sets out their legal responsibility to ensure that children and young people with medical needs receive a good education. I understand that that might have been accompanied by a new system of funding for hospital education. I am sure that the minister is aware of how varied the hospital education picture is in Scotland. I would welcome his comments on whether the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill is the right vehicle to address that troubling issue. I commend the work of the Teenage Cancer Trust and the motion from Aileen McLeod.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs last met the chief executive of Creative Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02419)

Ms Archer clearly has a job to do to restore confidence in the organisation and in the artistic community in Scotland. What priorities has the cabinet secretary set Ms Archer and Creative Scotland and what milestones and targets or deadlines has she asked them to report back on?

I find myself in unfamiliar territory. I have always supported the GIRFEC approach to child protection and I continue to back the principles behind getting it right for every child. I normally find myself on the side of the children’s organisations who lobbied members before the debate, and I certainly would not say that I have a knee-jerk opposition to state intervention. However, I not only recognise but share the concerns that are expressed in the Tory motion. My instinct as a parent is to question the need for all children and their families to be allocated a named person, when it is the few who are at risk. My main worry is that despite the best intentions, the exercise could end up diverting scarce resources from the children who are most in need. I am sure that few people in Scotland, let alone in Parliament, fail to recognise the need to protect and help our most vulnerable children. The national news is too often taken up by stories of neglect and abuse and the all-too-horrific consequence that is a child dying at the hands of his or her own parents. However, I find it difficult to see how appointing a named person to look after, for example, each of my six children, the children of Gavin Brown and—dare I say it?—those of the minister will do anything to improve child protection or prevent such deaths. I fail to follow the argument that by giving a health visitor or teacher responsibility for 30 well brought up children—or even not very well brought up children—we will help them to recognise the one child who needs support and intervention. What is worse, time that is spent filling in forms for children who will never need intervention is time that would be better spent on children who are in desperate need of help. Resources that are diverted to children who are loved, nurtured and thriving are resources that are not spent on the neglected and the vulnerable.

I have no difficulty accessing my children’s teacher, health visitor or anyone else, and I do not see why they have to be a named person. The approach does not seem to offer any additional benefit. As far as I am aware, teachers already have a professional duty—an ethical and a legal obligation—to pick up on kids who are turning up late for school or who are badly fed, poorly dressed or showing other signs of lack of care. The same duty applies even more clearly to health visitors. How does seeking assurance from teachers that the vast majority of children in their care do not need help in any way assist those teachers in identifying the children who are in danger of slipping through the net? Is not there an obvious risk that we will create an administratively cumbersome and bureaucratically complex system, which has no additional practical benefit? Will there be a file for every child? Who will keep the file? What happens when staff move on, as they often do? At the very least we need to clarify what this additional duty as a named person will mean. I would put my concerns to one side if I thought that the named person approach would save one life or pick up on one example of child cruelty or neglect that would otherwise go undetected or unrecognised. If we look at all the recent cases of child abuse, as far as I can recall, every subsequent inquiry concluded that where the state had failed to intervene early enough it was not because no-one knew about the risk, but because of failure to share information. One of the main recommendations as a result has been to identify a lead professional in every case. If every child is to have a named person, is there not a distinct possibility that we will create masses of information that tells us nothing more than that most children are fine, while we potentially confuse lines of responsibility between the named person and the lead professional? The children’s charities have argued that the measures are in line with GIRFEC, but as I recall GIRFEC was originally based on a report called “It’s everyone’s job to make sure I’m alright”, not “It’s one named person’s job to make sure I’m alright”.

In May, the First Minister told me that an independent Scotland would not try to secure any opt-out from European Union pension regulation. However, in August, he told The Sunday Post that the reverse was true and that he would seek a derogation. Will the Deputy First Minister clarify which of those conflicting options is true? What is she doing to secure the best outcome?

It does not quite seem that 13 years have passed since the last time we discussed a strategy to support people with learning disabilities. I admit that that point was brought home to me in looking back through the minutes of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and our inquiry into special needs from that time. I discovered that Fiona McLeod and I are the only two members of that committee who are still here. When I read the 2001 report, I saw that another parliamentary colleague—Iain Gray, who was the minister responsible for bringing forward “The same as you?”—noted at the time that it had been 20 years since the previous strategy had been published and that little progress had been made since then. The good news—and the reason that it does not feel like 13 years since “The same as you?”—is that we have moved forward. There is a far more inclusive approach to our education system and from employers across the country, and there is a much greater focus on giving people the resources and support to get on in mainstream activities. Perhaps most important of all, the concept of long-stay hospitals for people with learning disabilities is behind us. I think that Bob Doris made that point earlier. It is also fair to say that the change has been less ground breaking than we would have liked and that some of the challenges that were highlighted then are still with us. We still have the challenges of how to give people with learning disabilities a voice in choosing their own future and greater access to mainstream services—Stewart Stevenson made that point; how to reduce the conflict or tension between families that are struggling to cope and public authorities that are struggling to meet their needs while balancing the books; how to help those with additional needs to improve themselves through access to continuous education; and how to have clearer lines of co-ordination between services and provide the physical support to make inclusion a reality. The report that we are debating is an excellent document that has already been warmly welcomed by those with a learning disability and the many hundreds of organisations that work with them. It is particularly useful because there is a clear recognition throughout the report of the need for joined-up solutions. We often call for those as politicians, but we rarely figure out how to deliver them. Crucially, a strategy will take us only so far unless the resources that back it up are aligned and all levels of the process work towards the same goals. Across the chamber, we share a noble ambition for children to be educated in the environment that suits them, be it mainstream or specialist. It may not take very much support for a young person to thrive in a mainstream setting with all the benefits that that brings, but when that support is not in place, it can become impossible to cope with that environment. In its briefing, Enable Scotland tells us: “people with learning disabilities are perhaps the most marginalised and socially excluded group in our society”. Children must feel completely isolated where help with communication difficulties is not available. A constituent recently contacted me about her daughter, who has Rett syndrome, which is a neurological disorder. She has struggled for many years to get the support with communication that she requires. That is particularly frustrating because it turned out that that young girl is cognitively much more able than any of her doctors originally suspected. She is able to communicate and has demonstrated an ability to make progress in literacy and numeracy, but she is unable to make the best use of the resources that are available because she does not have access to enough speech and language therapy. The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists estimated just last year that 250,000 Scottish children, young people and adults have speech, language and communication needs. Based on the numbers of speech and language therapists in Scotland, we can work out that there are 262 people with a speech and language need for every such therapist. My constituent wrote to say that, “Alas”, her daughter “is not alone” and that her “story is typical.” She went on to say that her daughter’s special needs school has a roll of just over 100, and that “The great majority of the pupils at the school require SLT support at some level. There are 2 SLTs allocated to the school but they attend only once a week. This means that ultimately no-one is receiving any input from them—the caseload is simply too big.” That is not only a loss for each individual who is affected or held back from making the most of their potential; we are all, socially and economically, the poorer for it. A recent study of unemployed young males found that more than 80 per cent were described as language impaired, in comparison with just 1 per cent of the UK’s general population. The minister—and Mary Scanlon—made the point that people with learning disabilities want to work. The strategy that is before us today mentions communication 35 times, but does not give any recommendations on how to improve the provision of speech and language support for people with learning disabilities. I would be interested to know what more the Scottish Government can do to support those young people. Some colleagues picked up on the point that the Scottish Government’s strategy is at odds with reality. I am grateful to ENABLE Scotland, which noted some figures that would shock all of us who believe that further education should be open to all. Courses for people with additional support needs have been halved since 2007-08. The biggest cuts have been in the past two years, with a 46 per cent cut. The amount of staff who are teaching people with additional support needs has been cut by 16 per cent in the past two years, and the number of adults with learning disabilities who are attending further education for 2.5 days per week or fewer has fallen by almost 20 per cent in the past year alone. Just last week, that issue was raised in the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on colleges and universities. I am conscious that one of the phrases de nos jours is that those with the broadest shoulders should bear the greatest burden. I have heard that expression from the First Minister, the Prime Minister and leading figures in my own party, and in every case I do not doubt the genuine intent. However, the reality is that it is not the most resilient but the most vulnerable who bear the greatest burden of the economic difficulties, welfare reforms and education cuts. It is those with learning difficulties who are displaced by greater levels of unemployment and underemployment, and it is courses for those with additional needs that have been disproportionately cut. I am proud of the fact that, through years of expansion and growth, the Parliament has improved services and reformed attitudes to people with learning difficulties. The real test, however, is how we respond to and protect those gains in difficult times. I would like to end on a positive note.

I will follow the example of Jim Eadie and my colleague Malcolm Chisholm, and mention a forthcoming event. At lunch time on Wednesday 9 October I will host a presentation on behalf of Lorna Walker, who has worked all her life with people who have learning difficulties. She has produced an online support manual on dealing with those with additional support needs, which is being used by half of the councils throughout Scotland, in addition to gaining interest from around the world. Unfortunately, there has been no interest so far from the Government, and I urge the minister to come along to the event if he can. I support the strategy and the Labour amendment.

Is control of interest rates one of the levers that Mr Swinney is talking about?

In recent days, a number of polls have been published that have been the focus of political attention. One survey that really caught my eye was last week’s five-year analysis of Asda’s income tracker. The report, which looked at how people in Scotland have fared over the past five years of economic difficulty, concluded that in real terms the average Scottish household is £990 a year worse off today than it was in 2009. That puts into perspective what most people in Scotland know from their day-to-day experience: fuel bills, food and the cost of living are all going up, while wages remain frozen. The research revealed that young people in particular have been hit, with unemployment and underemployment exacerbating the difficulties that they face. When we talk about Scotland’s economy and what we can do politically to address some of the problems that we face, that means addressing the facts that more than 200,000 people remain jobless; that, last month, 125,000 Scots put their rent on a credit card; that the number of people who desperately seek help through payday loans has doubled in the past year alone; and that hundreds of thousands of Scots simply want to be treated fairly in a job that offers respect for the work that they do and an income that allows them to pay the mortgage without panicking. People do not expect us to solve those problems overnight, but they expect us to take practical action rather than make grand but unspecific promises that we say we will not even begin to deliver for at least another year. In a moment, I will outline just some of the steps that we could be taking today, but first I mention the frustration—of which I sure you are aware, Presiding Officer—that many Scots often express about the arguments over the impact that independence will have on the Scottish economy. That frustration will not have been helped by today’s motion. People are worried not just by the lack of detail on how the SNP would use the supposedly independent powers over our economy, but by the lack of clarity of intent, even on a question as simple as whether the SNP will put up taxes or cut them. I entirely agree that we should maximise our full potential to create a more prosperous, sustainable and equal society, but if we look at one of the few policy details to which we know the SNP is committed—cutting corporation tax—it is difficult to see how that would take us in that direction. Professor Joe Stiglitz, the Nobel prize-winner who is so often quoted by the First Minister, specifically told the Parliament that such a move would be “a gift to the corporations increasing inequality in our society.”

That point takes me on to the things that we can do. I want to emphasise the actions that we can take, whether or not we are frustrated about the areas on which we disagree. My central ask of Mr Ewing and Mr Swinney is: why do not all members in the Parliament join forces to use the enormous range of powers that we have to act progressively to build that new Scotland? The starting point would be investment in the skills, training and education that will make Scotland a more productive economy and that will make us as Scots more employable. We used to talk in the Parliament about building a knowledge economy and rejecting the approach of having low-wage, unskilled jobs at any price. That means supporting a vocational as well as an academic approach to education from an early age. It means lifting further education to something approaching parity with higher education, not demoting our colleges. We need to rebuild trust and confidence in our economic institutions. We could start by making them more accountable. We could do worse than start with our transport infrastructure, by introducing a regulated bus system and a different form of co-operative ownership of our rail network. If people in Scotland who are trying to get to work are feeling squeezed by the rise in bus and train fares, we need to introduce mechanisms that reflect public concern and keep fares to a minimum, rather than have a situation in which the pockets of private shareholders are lined.

I say to Mr Crawford that the figures for Scotland show that there are about 100,000 fewer Scots at college than there were five years ago. The head count for people attending college is so dramatically down that SNP members should be ashamed of themselves for trying to identify individual colleges that might buck the trend. The cross-party group on colleges and universities heard today about the impact, not just on numbers but on our most vulnerable people. We heard that disabled people, in particular, are not getting places at our colleges. That is to do with decisions that the Scottish Government has taken, using the powers that we have now. Those are not progressive decisions and they do not represent investments in our children’s education or our young people’s future; they are populist and deliberate cuts, which affect and damage our future while Scotland is on hold.

Very well, Presiding Officer. I know that the cabinet secretary shares an agenda with some of the progressive forces in the Parliament, as the national performance framework demonstrates. I ask him to commit to work with us to use the powers that we have now, to make a difference now. I support the amendment in the name of Iain Gray.

The companies that Bruce Crawford listed are all international companies. Does he share my concern that the vast majority of the profits from the Scottish renewables industry are going abroad?

I share entirely the member’s enthusiasm for the discussions that are taking place across civic Scotland and elsewhere, but I do not recognise that they are in any way linked to independence. I think that they have been generated by the collapse of the banks and the financial crisis. I entirely support Alison Johnstone’s earlier comments. How can Patrick Harvie support those documents and yet hitch his wagon to a cut in corporation tax from the SNP?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the effectiveness of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s letter of 22 February 2013 to national health service boards encouraging them to support a culture of openness among staff. (S4O-02384)

The cabinet secretary told us about his letter in response to questions from my colleague, Jackie Baillie, about the use of compromise agreements within the NHS in Scotland. Clearly, it has not had the desired effect, as my research has found that, in the past year, the NHS in Scotland has spent £3.5 million on those secret agreements, which is more than the total that was spent on them in the previous five years. How does the cabinet secretary intend to follow up on the letter, as it is clearly not creating the transparency that we want to have?

I will say from the outset that I agree with the comment in the First Minister’s motion that “Scotland has an abundance of resources and talent” and that there are decisions that we can take and gains that we can achieve “for families and communities”. The problem, however, is that instead of taking those decisions and constantly pushing ourselves as a Parliament to utilise those resources and that talent, we are holding ourselves back with relentless debates about our constitutional framework. I find it interesting that when Scots are asked whether they want more powers for the Scottish Parliament and, if so, what powers they would be, the most common answer is powers over health and education. As we already have those powers, we should be building Scotland’s future through the decisions that we take today, not in a year's time. I want to tell the chamber about a boy in one of my children’s classes at school—without identifying him of course. One advantage of having six children is that I think that I have a good chance of no one being able to work it out. I want to give as full a picture as possible because his story illuminates a little of the Scotland that I want to see in the future. It was clear to many who knew this boy from an early age that he was in danger of going off the rails. His parents were very young themselves and had their own difficulties to overcome and, as a child, he was allowed to run wild. He was not nasty at all but one could see that, without help, he was going to end up in serious difficulties. This same boy is now thriving at high school; he might not be in all the top sets but he is doing pretty well and is enjoying life. Why? Mainly because of his headteacher at primary school. I know that there are other factors at work on his life, but I also know that his head spotted him as a bright, lively boy who simply needed to be steered in the right direction. Instead of constantly punishing him or telling him repeatedly how bad he was, the head told him how good he was at football and other activities; in fact, he probably exaggerated how good he was. At one stage, the head used the small amount of discretionary budget that was at his disposal to take the whole school year ice-skating, which the boy was quite good at. He created an environment in which the boy could shine. In other words, he helped to build up his confidence, self-belief and resilience. It is difficult for me to do justice to the whole story, but that is what I want all Scottish schools to be like. When we talk about Scotland’s future, I want all Scottish teachers to have the opportunity to be able to do that. They should be able to give our children the education that they need to develop the skills and talents that will allow them to flourish and to stretch the able and support the vulnerable, but, perhaps above all, they should be able to reach out to individual pupils and help our children to become confident and rounded citizens. The worrying truth is that, although that is happening in some schools, it is not happening in all of them. As good as our schools are, they are still not doing enough for too many children. Members may have seen a very interesting research paper that was published by the David Hume Institute this month. It was commissioned from Professor Lindsay Paterson by the Scottish Government on the subject of philanthropic investment in education, and it provoked what can only be described as an animated response. The paper recognised that Scotland is a very charitable nation, but that we are sceptical, if not entirely resistant, to philanthropic interventions in education. I will not go into it in detail, but it is worth reading. A number of Professor Paterson’s observations struck me, but one did in particular. His report identified “a sense that Scottish education is felt to be too uniform, a strength but also a constraint on innovation”. In other words, we are strong on equity but weak on diversity. Can we not have both? I certainly believe that there is much that we can do right now to maintain the fairness that is at the heart of our education system while offering a more pluralistic choice to our children. The schools of ambition programme a few years back was an excellent initiative that gave schools access to limited but direct funding to develop their own identity and ethos. We already have schools that excel at dance, music and sport, but we could do much more to encourage others to specialise in maths, science or modern languages. Like most parents, I want all my kids to achieve exam results to reflect their abilities, but I want them to have more. I want them to have greater integration with extra-curricular activities, and I want schools to build on the network of support that is already there from surrounding clubs—golf, football or drama clubs, or whatever is there. I appreciate that not everyone may share my vision for Scotland’s schools of the future, but is it not the point that we can agree or disagree about those matters now? We do not have to wait for a vote next year. Our children’s future is in our hands in the Scottish Parliament now, and we need to act now to give them something to aspire to. The motion talks about tackling inequality, but do young people really have equal choices when it comes to vocational education? We should be raising standards across the board, not forcing everyone down the same academic path. We could be promoting vocational options as genuine equal choices, but the policy and budget decisions that have been made by the Scottish Government in the Scottish Parliament have demoted Scotland’s colleges. At the very moment when we face a generation of young people being lost to unemployment or underemployment, we are shutting the door on the training and skills that they need. We are already shaping Scotland’s future through the powers of the Scottish Parliament in a devolved UK. One of our first acts was to transform nursery education. We have rebuilt the school estate and restored teachers’ pay, and we can do the same again for childcare, those with additional needs, and vocational education. We do not need permission or more powers to do that. It feels as though Scotland has been on hold for the past six years. We have lost 4,000 teachers and more than 1,000 college lecturers. We have seen empty promises on class sizes and student debt, and stalling tactics rather than action on childcare and nursery provision. The Government is not offering a vision for Scotland’s future so much as a mirage. Above all, I want Scotland’s children to look to the future with hope and optimism about the life that they will lead, the jobs that they will hold, and the difference that they will make. We have the powers for that under devolution. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague Johann Lamont.

Will the cabinet secretary provide the Parliament with further information on what is included in the 5 per cent cap on his revenue-funded investment programme? For example, would the local authority contribution to an NPD schools project be included in that 5 per cent cap?

I am sure that the minister will take heart from the fact that all members and parties will, I think, support the Government motion. Few people in Scotland, let alone in Parliament, would not wish for Scotland’s enterprise agencies to play a vital role in securing economic recovery. I am sure that we are all delighted to hear that the account management system that has been introduced at Scottish Enterprise is working well. We should say “Well done” to an organisation—and, more important, to its staff—when it does well, but given the size and scale of the difficulties that face the Scottish economy, do we want the message that the Scottish Parliament sends out today to be one of congratulation? Given that the output of our economy is still below the level of five years ago, and given the level of unemployment facing our country, particularly among young people, as well as the squeeze on nearly every family’s income through wage freezes, overtime bans and increases in the cost of living, does it not feel a little complacent, or at least a little premature, to pat ourselves on the back at this stage? I would certainly hate to think of Mr Ewing or his colleague Mr Swinney taking a leaf out of George Osborne’s book and, after five years of recession, looking at some modest signs of recovery and thinking that they are vindicated and that their work is done. If the minister is tempted to do that, he might, rather than model himself on George Osborne, take a look at the more admirably cautious Vince Cable. If he does not want to do that, I remind him of today’s news that 10,000 more Scots are out of work. I have no doubt that the staff at Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise are working assiduously to grow the economy and to help business and industry, but might not we in the Scottish Parliament play a more productive role if we were to examine more objectively the difference that those organisations make to the Scottish economy—the value that they add—and how that could be improved? A quick glance at the companies that currently receive grants from our enterprise companies reveals a number of familiar names—KPMG, Honeywell and Hutchison 4G. I am sure that those are all admirable organisations, but they are also highly successful and profitable global multinationals. Is it really right that we, the taxpayers, should give financial support that is likely to end up with the shareholders of those multinational companies? I also note that SSE received more than £1 million from the Scottish Government while simultaneously being fined £10.5 million by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets for mis-selling. I have no particular beef with any of those companies, but I wonder whether more locally based and Scottish-owned small and medium-sized businesses might be more worthwhile recipients of our support.

I will give a specific example. This very week, I received a letter from Amazon. As the minister will know, many members—as well as many people who are denied full employment by the company and many hard-pressed local businesses that are faced with closure because of competition from Amazon—are dismayed that we are handing over millions of pounds to a company that does not pay its fair share of taxes. In the letter that I received from Amazon, the company admits to having been awarded approximately £4 million of grants from Scottish Enterprise in the past five years. I am not sure whether that sum includes the taxpayer subsidy towards the cost of land, but either way it is a substantial sum of money. My letter to Amazon asked a number of questions, including specific ones such as: “How many staff work for Amazon in Scotland on so-called zero-hours contracts?” My favourite sentence in the reply was: “The vast majority of temporary associates in our fulfilment centres work a 40 hour week, and we are working with our employment agencies to guarantee all temporary associates at least 20 hours per week.” I am sure that we all know the euphemisms that are used to disguise or temper the more brutal truth. I wonder how many of those who are working in a high-security warehouse, denied recognition of their own trade union membership, think that they are employed in a “fulfilment centre”? I asked about zero hours contracts, which is in itself a euphemism for the denial of employment rights. The reply talks of “temporary associates”, but we must not allow ourselves to be sweet-talked into accepting jobs at any price—or worse, into paying for jobs that would have had to come here anyway. Given Amazon’s need to supply goods the length and breadth of Scotland, I cannot believe that it would not have pressed ahead with its so-called “fulfilment centre” without Government support. Without wishing to be critical of either agency, does the minister not share the further concern that Scottish Enterprise and HIE have, between them, spent more than £50 million on severance pay over the past five years? That is £50 million that has been spent not on hiring people, creating employment or finding jobs for the tens of thousands of Scots who are desperately seeking work, but on shoving people out the door. I find it difficult to see how that vast sum of money has contributed to the sustainability of our economy.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I ask the minister whether he heard this morning about the work of the Scottish cities alliance, and whether he will comment on the work of our local cities as engines of growth. I urge him to accept Labour’s amendment to the motion.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention on zero hours contracts?

I begin with my thanks to Graeme Dey for securing the debate and for his efforts in supporting fair trade here in Scotland. I suspect that most of us in the chamber are conscious that, above all, fair trade is a grassroots movement, which harnesses the power of each one of us, as small consumers, and turns it into a globally powerful force for change. I am particularly pleased that we have now reached the stage at which we have harnessed the power of Scotland as a country and joined Wales to promote fair trade at national level. In a moment, I will look at some of the actions that we can take at national level through the Scottish Government and Parliament. In doing so, however, I do not want to lose sight of our individual contributions. It is only a few years since fair trade was the preserve of Oxfam shops, churches, and members of a few justice and peace groups. I have had the privilege of chairing the East Renfrewshire fair trade steering group through much of the past decade and am only too aware of the fantastic efforts of the committed few. It is thanks to those enlightened, liberal-minded and socially aware citizens that companies as diverse as Cadbury, Marks and Spencer, and Tate & Lyle can now parade their fair trade credentials alongside the most important ethical trader of them all. I refer, of course, to the Co-op, which is still at the forefront of the fair trade movement and takes a more ethical approach to business, employment and community support. Although fair trade has made the jump to the commercial mainstream, it still requires our individual efforts to promote fair practices and tackle unfair and exploitative trading relationships. Many members will be familiar with an issue that still has to reach public awareness, especially the nine out of 10 whom Graeme Dey highlighted in his motion. I am talking about fairly traded footballs. It has been estimated that 70 per cent of the world’s hand-stitched sports balls, including footballs, are manufactured in one district in Pakistan, often by children. Until recently, the industry has been characterised by low pay, poor working conditions and children being forced into work because adult wages are insufficient to support a family. Now, thanks to the fair trade movement, there are a dozen fair trade certified producers from the same region, and through the fair trade premium, local people have benefited from a water purification system, from the introduction of basic health insurance, and from a new micro credit fund. I was delighted when East Renfrewshire Council, my local authority, alongside the chambers of commerce and others, earlier this year promoted a fair trade football competition for the second time. I know that my West Scotland colleague Neil Bibby has been even more ambitious and has arranged a major five-a-side competition in Paisley. I can tell members that that has, in turn, led to an even more attractive fixture: MSPs against MPs at Celtic Park this Sunday. Who says that supporting fair trade cannot be enjoyable? Anyone who has not put their name down yet for the game—I am looking particularly at the Minister for external Affairs and International Development, who I know would be a useful addition to the team—can contact Neil Bibby. I am sure that the minister’s talents will be appreciated, as well as his support for fair trade. Despite the growing success and increased awareness of fair trade, many challenges still face us. A couple of years ago, our local committee in East Renfrewshire promoted a fair trade school dinners competition among local pupils. I have to say that it was a great success, and hundreds of thoughtful and very tasty menus were drawn up by local children. The council’s school catering department was very supportive, but it also became clear early on that it was torn by conflicting official policy and guidance. As much as the department wanted to support fair trade, it thought that the higher priority was procurement policy, which in turn placed a premium on price over ethical purchasing. That is why, yet again, I draw the minister’s attention to the forthcoming procurement bill, to the Scottish Government’s purchasing power, and its role as exemplar of best practice. Yes—individual citizens can all make a difference, as can MSPs, but the Parliament can take action to promote Scotland as a fair trade country.

Further to the previous points of order, Presiding Officer. As a new member of the Public Audit Committee, I suggest that its convener was not in the slightest bit disrespectful or discourteous. Ms Scanlon is known to all members as always courteous and respectful to all MSPs and is certainly not—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would it be in order for me to move a motion to amend standing orders to allow all members who wish to participate in the debate the time to do so?

I begin by extending not just the customary congratulations to John Wilson on securing today’s debate, but my genuine thanks to him for his consistent and thoughtful contributions on tackling poverty and developing an alternative economic agenda here in Scotland. Oxfam’s “Our Economy” report makes a powerful case for challenging the existing economic model. Oxfam is just one of several organisations that are helping to shape a new and more socially just approach in this country. From the Scottish Trades Union Congress to the Church of Scotland, and from the New Economics Foundation to Joseph Stiglitz and the authors of “The Spirit Level”, there is recognition—a plea even—that surely we should not and cannot, following a banking collapse and five years of recession, allow ourselves to return to the old ways. Members may have heard me say it before, but little irks me more than thinking that our fiscal and economic policy is more influenced by the opinion of the credit-rating agencies, such as Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s, than it is by the level of unemployment in this country. The very people who gave AAA status to the derivatives and the sub-prime mortgages that sparked off the whole catastrophe now have the nerve to tell us whether we are spending or borrowing too much. I am not looking for retribution, but Will Hutton has highlighted the irony that not one of the bankers or financiers who have cost the people of this country billions of pounds has gone to prison for the offences, whereas tens, if not hundreds, of people who chose to voice their protest through the “occupy” movement have ended up spending time in the cells. The Oxfam report lays out some of the political choices that lie before us if we truly want to tackle poverty and inequality, and to promote genuine opportunity and fairness for all, but none of us should underestimate the difficulty of the challenge that is before us. Unaccountable, unregulated and untrammelled capitalism may have failed this country and may have cost many people their jobs and others their pensions, but to challenge not so much the economic orthodoxy as the hugely powerful vested financial interests that hold sway in this country and across global financial markets is very difficult indeed. As Jean Urquhart mentioned, if we just think about moving away from our common use of GDP as a measure of economic success, we can see the extent of the challenge. John Swinney has made progress in establishing the national performance framework as a set of indicators that come far closer to genuine prosperity and to focusing on our sense of wellbeing, but how many budget decisions are actually influenced by the NPF? I am proud of Labour’s achievements in office, and I am particularly proud of our efforts in tackling poverty and reducing child poverty. However, although we grew the economy, reduced unemployment and made people wealthier, perhaps—as Mr Harvie said—that economic prosperity did not make as much of a difference in tackling inequality as we thought and hoped that it would. Now, as we live through the economic crisis, we need to rethink how we do things and create a new way that will enable the benefits of growth to be felt by the many, and not just by the few at the top. There is a great deal in the Oxfam report that I would like to echo, but I will restrict myself to a couple of points. I have already referred to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth’s national performance framework, which is a definite step in the right direction. John Wilson’s motion refers to wage differentials, and I particularly welcome that section of the report. Through its procurement bill, the Scottish Government could target support for companies that make a conscious effort to narrow pay differentials between the boardroom and the shop floor. If a lack of accountability is one of the key weaknesses in our economy—if we believe that decisions around financial investment, for example, are driven more by the needs of shareholders than by those of stakeholders—different forms of ownership surely offer one way of addressing that problem. Community ownership is singled out by Oxfam, and it is an area in relation to which the Scottish Government has extensive powers. I urge the minister to use those powers, and I commend the motion in the name of John Wilson.

Dare I say that it is good to be back? The summer recess is often our only opportunity to pause, take stock and come back with fresh ideas—although I admit that I ended up with a little more time than I expected. There is much in the Government’s programme that my Labour colleagues and I welcome. Although the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill could go further, it will, we hope, make a difference to the provision of care for three and four-year-olds. The Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill will bring to the fore once again the discussion about how we deliver social care. The proposed community empowerment and renewal bill could provide an opportunity to involve local communities in their own decision making. However, that does not feel like the sort of legislative programme that will tackle the major problems that face Scotland—the economy, the cost of living and inequality—or create the sort of modern Scotland that many, if not most, members wish to see. The countdown clocks in SNP headquarters may be clicking over the 380 days to next September, but the legislative programme suggests that many have forgotten that there are still 1,000 days left in government. That is 1,000 days to modernise our education system, to get young people off the dole and into work and to rebuild confidence in our besieged college sector. It is 1,000 days to change the way in which business is conducted in Scotland, to support small businesses and not multinationals, to protect workers from zero-hours contracts and to introduce a strategic plan to create a living wage programme. It is 1,000 days to implement radical land reform the likes of which we saw in the early days of the Parliament, to promote community ownership, to encourage new co-operative and collaborative ways of delivering the rail system and to protect bus users with robust regulation. I admit to having a little laugh at my career trajectory from Government supporter to shadow minister to Opposition back bencher. However, I suggest to SNP colleagues who may believe that they are enjoying the political good times that one is never more conscious of the opportunity to make a difference than when that opportunity is taken away. By that, I simply mean that they should make the most of their time in Government. They should not put all their political eggs in the basket of independence and be disappointed when they break. There is much that we can do right here and right now to help the people of Scotland. Mr Brown, the Minister for Transport and Veterans, is currently presiding over the allocation of the Scottish rail passenger franchise. At more than £2.5 billion pounds, it is one of the biggest contracts that the Scottish Government handles, and I know that I am not alone in believing that we could get better value and a better service for that money. We can agree across this chamber that it is neither fair nor right that a Dutch or German Government-owned firm can bid for the franchise but that a Scottish Government-owned firm cannot. However, where we seem to part company is that l believe that we can do more than just rail—pardon the pun—against the iniquities of rail privatisation and an unsympathetic Tory Government; I believe that we can do something about it. The power to award the franchise lies with this Government here in Scotland and this Parliament here in Holyrood. In the next few weeks, the Co-operative Party and others, including the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen—ASLEF—intend to publish a document highlighting the many benefits that would flow to the Scottish public, rail passengers and our industry and transport infrastructure if only we were to pursue a more collaborative and co-operative approach to the running of this public service. I ask only that Mr Brown, his ministerial colleagues and the many SNP MSPs who I believe will be sympathetic look at the document with a view to shaping the way in which they award the new passenger franchise. It is a decision that is likely to be in place for the next 10 years. Once taken, it is unlikely that the referendum—whatever way the vote goes—will affect it, so why not start shaping the new Scotland right now?

Mr Hepburn emphasises the very point that I am trying to make. Why does the SNP always look at things that it cannot do rather than things that it can do? It can shape the franchise and it can promote social enterprise, community benefit and worker co-operation. All of those things are within its power. It could run a not-for-profit company in relation to the franchise, if it had the political will. We have the political will, and we would join the SNP in supporting that. Tomorrow evening I hope to join John Wilson and others in the SNP and across the chamber in welcoming and debating Oxfam’s report on the economy. Scotland often prides itself on being a more progressive country than the rest of the UK—more altruistic and less selfish in our politics and our voting intentions. Today, I am conscious that David McLetchie would describe that claim as a moot point, but it is an issue that I would like the Government to pursue and explore. Why can we not set an example in pursuing a more ethical economy? If we believe that it is morally right for people and companies to pay their taxes in order to pay for the schools and hospitals that we all need, is there not more that the Scottish Government could do to support that culture of social responsibility? The minister knows how strongly I and my colleagues feel about our handing over millions of pounds to companies such as Amazon. However, rather than excuse or explain how we ended up subsidising that immensely profitable multinational, can we not introduce a set of criteria that favours local small businesses? Government procurement is not the most radical reforming agenda but, as Alison Johnstone and James Kelly have already pointed out, it could provide an opportunity for the Government to make a statement about the economic values that it holds dear. Why not use it to promote not just small Scottish businesses but good working practices, union recognition or the living wage? People do not want to have dead-end or exploitative jobs and they do not want zero-hours contracts. This Government and this Parliament could do something about that right now. I was going to make a point about education, but I will move to my conclusion. I worry that, today, we are debating the platform of a Government with only one objective—independence—and that, in the meantime, Scotland is on hold. If this Government could see beyond the referendum, it would see that the issues that are on people’s minds are to do with their jobs and livelihoods and the education and future prospects of their children, not constitutional change. We did not need independence to deliver the smoking ban, to rebuild all our schools or to introduce free personal care and the free bus pass for the elderly. We do not need it to oppose privatisation of the NHS. We did all of those things through devolution, and it is through devolution—through the powers and the political will of this Parliament—that we can build the new, progressive Scotland.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how much Amazon has received in regional selective assistance grants in the last year. (S4O-02313)

It is helpful that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has finally confirmed a figure to the Parliament, but perhaps members are unaware that Scottish Enterprise sent monthly cheques of £143,000 in December 2011, £215,000 in February 2012 and £213,000 in March 2012. Given what we now know about Amazon, is there anyone in the country, let alone in the chamber, who believes that we should hand over hard-earned Scottish taxpayers’ money to this bunch of tax dodgers? Will the cabinet secretary not stop those payments because he cannot or because he will not?

I support Gavin Brown’s amendment 9. I accept that the cabinet secretary has spoken against such a proposal in the past, and there is a genuine concern about gaming the system and advance knowledge meaning that property deals are brought forward to reduce tax liability. However, the prospect of such activity taking place on any substantive scale must be balanced against the desire of most respectable Scottish businesses to have certainty and confidence in the system. It is notable that nearly all those who gave evidence were united on that point: Brodies, CBI Scotland, the Chartered Institute of Taxation, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, ICAS and the Scottish Property Federation all expressed concern that the rates will not be known. The fact that the cabinet secretary’s decision seems to pivot on a political date—the date of the referendum, which is September 2014—adds to the worry that he is making a political decision rather than a business-oriented one and that the decision is not driven by the needs of the public finances. It sounds as if, by not announcing a decision until September 2014, he is picking a day to bury bad news, rather than providing stability and certainty for the Scottish property market. I support amendment 9.

I, too, want to speak in support of Patrick Harvie’s amendment, which is similar to one that Malcolm Chisholm lodged at stage 2. The key motivation behind the proposal is the desire to encourage the uptake of energy efficiency measures and to help Scotland—and, for that matter, the Scottish Government—to meet its carbon reduction targets. Many of the arguments at stage 2 were evenly balanced. On the Government’s part, there is a desire not to introduce new tax relief, but to remove tax relief from the stamp duty system and to not replace it in the LBTT system. Broadly, we support that approach. However, the Government did not think that that should be applied absolutely across the board. In its consultation on the bill, the Government said: “The replacement of SDLT with a Land and Buildings Purchase Tax also offers the opportunity to support key Scottish Government priorities through incentivisation.” Clearly, meeting our carbon emission targets is a priority. The Government’s Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 requires local authorities to establish a scheme for reducing the amounts that persons are liable to pay in respect of council tax where improvements are made to the energy efficiency of chargeable dwellings. In other words, the Government acknowledges that there is a way for taxation to be used to establish better energy efficiency. Why not do so in the case of LBTT? I encourage the Government to support Patrick Harvie’s amendment.

Although we have some sympathy for Gavin Brown’s amendments, I will move against him on this issue. We know that SDLT is susceptible to a number of avoidance measures, and the evidence suggests that the existing sub-sale relief, which involves transfer of property to a third party, is a significant avenue for tax avoidance. Two of the chief aims of the bill are to simplify SDLT and to reduce the high incidence of tax avoidance. I appreciate that it is not the intention behind Gavin Brown’s amendment 70, but it seems that it would be contrary to the spirit of the bill to support amendments that could lead to tax-avoidance measures being watered down. That said, we are sympathetic to the arguments that have been put forward by the Scottish Property Federation, which has suggested that an unintended consequence of the withdrawal of sub-sale relief would be to inhibit forward-funding arrangements, which are important in the context of financing major commercial developments. It is important, in seeking to protect LBTT against tax avoidance, that we do not inadvertently introduce a competitive disadvantage that could drive commercial developments to other parts of the UK. The SPF has suggested that the Government commit to identifying a relief using section 27 of the bill; I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on that.

I support amendment 71, which is in Gavin Brown’s name. Clearly, much concern was expressed in evidence to the committee about the effectiveness of schedule 17, which has been pretty well copied in its entirety from the stamp duty land tax legislation. Amendment 71, as I understand it from Mr Brown, simply asks for a review. It will be two years before the legislation is implemented, which I would have thought is plenty of time for the minister to carry out a review. On balance, given the timeframe, it seems reasonable to accept Mr Brown’s amendment.

I indicate our support for Gavin Brown’s amendments 26, 30 and 33. Currently, property under licence will be exempt from LBTT. My understanding of amendment 26 is that it relates to prescribing certain types of property made under licence that would be treated as land transactions and would therefore be liable for the tax, and I understand that the cabinet secretary suggested earlier that he would consult stakeholders on those matters before introducing regulations. My understanding is that the amendment simply calls for consultation and suggests that subordinate legislation on licences would be subject to affirmative procedure. That strikes me as something that members would support.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. There has been very little fuss about the bill, which has broad political agreement across the chamber and broad support among home owners and businesses. However, it is worth noting for the record that, even if it is not the most earth-changing legislation, it is introducing Scotland’s first new tax in more than 300 years. The bill is another example of devolution working well, with the Scottish Parliament taking control of this property transaction tax and designing a system to suit Scotland’s needs while retaining all the advantages of working within the political, social and economic union that is the UK. Although we have agreed today on the principles of the new land and buildings transaction tax, there is still a great deal of detail to be worked out. For example, there is the practical issue of how the collection agency, Registers of Scotland, will interact with the new supervisory body, revenue Scotland; there is the rather important matter of negotiation and agreement on how much the block grant will be reduced by when the new tax is introduced; and of course there is the question that I suspect most home buyers and businesses will most want to hear answered, which is how much they will pay and what the rates at which LBTT is introduced will be. On the first of those points, alongside the devolution of LBTT, perhaps the most practical, immediate and positive benefit will be the move from an inefficient, unfair tiered or slab structure of stamp duty to the progressive, rising scale of LBTT. Stamp duty has long been broadly redistributive; in other words, a high rate of tax has generally applied to more expensive properties, with no stamp duty on properties below a value of £125,000. However, applying higher percentage rates to all the properties above a certain threshold has created highly marginal rates of tax at those new banding levels and has led to distortions in the housing market and in the application of the tax. The new system will smooth out those iniquities and ensure an efficient market that will be fairer to buyers and sellers alike. When the bill is implemented, the block grant will of course be adjusted to remove a sum equivalent to the money that we currently receive from stamp duty levied across the UK. It is worth noting, at the very least, that the UK and Scottish Governments have already offered us widely varying estimates of how much the grant should be reduced by. That is perhaps not surprising, given the collapse of the property market and the consequent drop in the number of sales on which stamp duty has been levied over the past few years, but it is important that an agreement is reached that is fair not just for Scotland but for the rest of the UK, too. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has placed great stock in the past on providing stability in the public finances, so for that reason alone I urge him to work towards reaching agreement on the block grant reduction sooner rather than later. I am certainly not asking members to rethink their support for the bill, but I suspect that there might be a marginal downside to devolving LBTT. I have not made the exact calculation but, given that stamp duty is a broadly redistributive tax and, I believe, the proportion of expensive properties is far higher in London and the south-east of the UK than in Scotland, Scotland will currently be among those parts of the UK that marginally gain from the redistributive effect of the stamp duty tax. I mention that point as it is also worth noting that, when LBTT is introduced in Scotland, many of the properties at the higher end of the scale will be in Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Edinburgh and Glasgow. At the very least, the new system will create a tension between our support for localism and local control and our belief in a nationally applied, progressive and redistributive system of taxation. One of the most important issues that are still to be resolved is the timescale for the publication of the new tax rates. I will not repeat all the arguments that we have just heard debated at stage 3 and which were debated at stage 2 in committee, but I hope that the cabinet secretary will bear it in mind that business in particular is clamouring for greater certainty. The cabinet secretary has stated that his broad approach is to try to maintain revenue neutrality, but even within that policy intention there is scope for winners and losers. I believe that, when the bill was first outlined, the cabinet secretary suggested that 95 per cent of people would be better off under LBTT. If that is the case, clearly the 5 per cent who would be worse off might be disproportionately affected. There is a particular worry in the commercial property sector that high-value commercial property might bear some of that disproportionate impact. Businesses are used to testing our words as politicians against our actions as parliamentarians or Government ministers. I urge the Government and the particular minister involved to publish his proposals as soon as possible in order to introduce some certainty. The fact that the cabinet secretary has repeated his intention not to publish the information before September 2014—in other words, it will not be published before the referendum—has not helped assuage the anxiety. His intention suggests that it is less of a priority and it begs the question: if there is nothing to be worried about and everyone will be broadly unaffected or even slightly better off, why the delay in making the announcement?

I do—but I am not sure that that is a killer point or that it answers the point about the certainty that we are looking for. We do not have certainty at the moment, and the cabinet secretary has it within his power to offer that to businesses and home owners. I turn to the administration of the new tax. The bill states that Registers of Scotland will have a role in the collection of revenues alongside revenue Scotland. Having two organisations involved in one tax creates room for complexity and confusion, and I urge the cabinet secretary to clarify their roles as soon as possible. As the cabinet secretary knows, we have given our strong support to the introduction of a robust general anti-avoidance measure. However, one of the exceptions that we made was on energy efficiency, and I urge the cabinet secretary to return to that. There are a number of issues still to be resolved, and much detail remains to be published. However, the Parliament is of one mind that today marks a major step forward in improving the tax system in Scotland. The bill reflects a number of principles on which we can agree and an approach that is both progressive and redistributive, which we believe can help to shape a modern, prosperous and socially just Scotland of which we can all be proud.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what input it will have to Creative Scotland’s new vision statement. (S4O-02273)

I thank the minister for her confirmation of a quotation that was in The Scotsman last week, in which she boldly said: “I am the culture secretary in Scotland and what I set out in the vision is what I expect from all the different bodies that receive funding from taxpayers in Scotland”. Will the minister’s vision include abandoning the current insistence on short-term support for medium-sized and small arts companies, and instead moving back to providing two to three years funding to ensure the security and artistic freedom that they need?

I thank the finance secretary for advance notice of his statement. I recognise that we share common ground in opposing the Tory Government’s approach to public finances. That said, we are here to scrutinise the decisions that have been taken by the Scottish Government. I note that a number of things are omitted from the cabinet secretary’s statement, including any mention of the £333 million underspend in his planned non-profit-distributing programme for 2012-13. I am also disappointed to hear a reference to the Scottish Government’s notorious shovel-ready programme but no update on exactly how many shovels are now in the ground. I turn to the announcements that the cabinet secretary has made. He points out that he has already committed £158 million of his £179 million underspend. Of the remaining £21 million capital at his disposal, the majority seems to come from an underspent housing budget and is being recommitted to housing, along with an additional £5.9 million, which is to be welcomed. However, given that he revisited his housing budget cuts four times in the last financial year, tried again in the budget this year and is here having a sixth attempt at putting right his original wrong, would it not have been wiser for him to have listened to those in the construction and housing industries in the first place and implemented Labour’s budget for housing? Is he content that the reality of his budget outrun for this year is the lowest number of housing completions since the great depression? Also, why is there nothing in the cabinet secretary’s statement about the impact of his budget on further education? In particular, will he explain the relationship between his cuts to Scotland’s colleges and the 700 jobs that have been lost in further education in the past year alone?

Including the minister’s four unused minutes, Presiding Officer? I suspect that many members feel, as I do, a sense of pride and achievement in Scotland’s hydro industry, and in Tom Johnston and the difference that his work made to the Highlands in particular. I suspect that we are also proud of the industry’s on-going contribution to meeting our energy needs in a low-carbon Scotland. One of my strongest memories from my schooldays in Oban is of a class trip to the Cruachan dam, above Loch Awe, to see the pumped-storage station. Although I eventually chose a different path, for many years I was drawn towards engineering, simply because of the impression that the long tunnel and the turbines inside the mountain had made on me. However, I must confess that my account of the school trip, which was written when I was nine or 10 and which I still have, focuses more on the minestrone soup that I had than on the technology that I saw in action. That said, and delighted as I am to talk about hydro’s past and future contribution, I am a little surprised that the Scottish Government would want to devote a whole afternoon of parliamentary time to a subject on which I imagine that we are in broad agreement. However, now that we are here, it is useful to take stock of the huge developments in hydro power in Scotland since the first successful project in Fort Augustus 123 years ago in 1890. In the years that followed, some of the most famous hydroelectric schemes came into being, not least the British Aluminium Company’s Kinlochleven project in 1909, which to this day remains an example of how hydro schemes could be both power generators and world-renowned architectural feats. However, it has been a slow process from those first forays into harnessing the power of Scotland’s abundant supply of water for electricity generation to the point where Scotland now has 120 installed hydrogenerating stations that range from more than 100MW down to a few kilowatts and which amount in total to more than 1,800MW of capacity or 12 per cent of our electricity demand. The House of Commons debated a bill on this issue in 1941 with a view to erecting hydroelectric works at Glen Affric and Glen Cannich. However, the bill failed and it was only through the concerted efforts of the aforementioned Labour Secretary of State for Scotland, Tom Johnston, and others from across the political spectrum that the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board and the large-scale hydro projects that came with it got on to the statute books. The 1943 act and its passage through Parliament make fascinating reading. The fact that it came in a middle of a war from a coalition Government with a Tory Prime Minister and a Labour Scottish secretary makes it all the more significant. Indeed, one National Liberal MP, Sir James Henderson-Stewart, remarked that the bill was a “hotch-potch of Scottish Nationalism and English Socialism” while the MP for Glasgow Hillhead, James Reid, remarked: “the Debate shows a new approach to post-war Scottish problems. Many ... Members on both sides of the House have approached the consideration of this Bill, leaving aside pre-war preconceptions and with the sole view of what is most practicable and likely to be most in the interests of Scotland as a whole, and of the Highlands in particular.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 February 1943; Vol 387, c 238, 253.] I am tempted to hope that just occasionally we in this Parliament could leave aside our pre-referendum preconceptions and focus on what we can do now, but I suspect that that might be asking too much. It is important that we do not underestimate how much the 1943 act revolutionised hydro power generation and, in doing so, developed large swathes of the Highlands, which had been devastated by decades of outward migration and industrial decline. In his opening remarks on the second reading of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Bill, Tom Johnston gave a powerful review of the Highlands at the time, arguing that it was necessary to introduce hydro power not to power the central belt but to redevelop the Highlands following decades of depopulation and decline. His thoughts, which are recounted in Hansard from 1943, are worth repeating: “The cruisie and the farthing dip are no doubt quaint and interesting survivals, especially to summer visitors, but as lighting equipment their place is in a museum of antiquities. For my part, I should like before I go from this place to offer some of the amenities of life to the peasant, his wife, and his family. The amenities and comforts of civilisation have largely passed by the class from which Robert Burns sprang.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 February 1943; Vol 387, c 188.] The cruisie and farthing dip were very dirty and smelly types of lamp that were used in this country right up to the war. My father was born and brought up in a croft on Skye before the war and I find it almost incredible that before hydro he was leading the sort of life that Tom Johnston described. That said, I am not sure that he would have welcomed the use of the term “peasant”. For Tom Johnston, the 1943 act was not just about providing electricity to tens of thousands across the north of Scotland but about opening up a part of the country that had largely been left behind in the industrial development that had gone before. We should continue to bear in mind that relationship between the hydro industry and the communities that it serves. Hydro power continues to play an integral role in our country’s infrastructure today. Scotland is now the centre of the UK hydro power industry, accounting for almost 89 per cent of installed capacity and 94 per cent of UK hydro output. SSE, the privatised successor to the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board, has continued to develop new hydro schemes. In 2001, the first new scheme since the 1970s, Cuileig south of Ullapool, began generating; in 2005 Kingairloch on the Morvern peninsula came into action; and new schemes are—if members will pardon the pun—in the pipeline for Loch Lochy and Invermoriston. One of the most important and encouraging developments in more recent years has been the proliferation of smaller-scale projects. The 1943 schemes were necessarily large in scale, but small-scale hydro projects—generating from around 5kW for a single household up to 10MW—are equally important. The analysis that the Scottish Government published in 2010 suggests that there is considerable untapped potential from almost 7,000 possible schemes. Almost all of those would be smaller than 5MW in capacity, but in total they would be sufficient to supply more 1 million homes. Before we get too carried away by our record and by the potential for further development, I should caution that I was contacted only this week by a constituent working in the renewables industry who struck a different note. My constituent has also written to the First Minister directly to suggest that it would be unfortunate to celebrate the hydro sector at a time when it faces a fundamental threat. As well as touching on the historical legacy of hydro power, I hope that the debate will address the challenges facing the industry, which include: how to promote further community ownership; how to address fuel poverty in rural and other communities; the employment opportunities that hydro development offers; planning difficulties; the delays in grid connections; the difficulties with securing finance; the Government’s missed emissions reduction targets; and the potential for Scottish Water to become involved in hydro power. I want to focus in particular on the issue of feed-in tariffs and degression rates, which I know have been the subject of many of the pre-debate briefings from Scottish Renewables and others. I know that the minister is aware of my constituent’s concerns on the issue, on which I wrote in May to the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Edward Davey. Alongside electricity market reform, the UK Government is proposing changes to feed-in tariffs, including the introduction of the mechanism of degression rates, which would reduce the feed-in tariff levels in line with increased levels of deployment. One of the benefits of feed-in tariffs as originally introduced is that they finally made it commercially viable to build and operate smaller-scale hydro schemes, which would previously have been financially impossible. Unfortunately, the proposed changes to the tariffs do not properly take into account the long project lead-in times for hydro. Typically, a medium-scale hydro project will take three years or more from inception to deployment—longer if there are grid-related delays. Consequently, much of the interest in hydro that was stimulated by the introduction of feed-in tariffs in 2010 has yet to come to fruition. The position for hydro is particularly harsh primarily as a consequence of the parallel introduction of preliminary registration, whereby schemes are entitled to register for the prevailing tariff up to two years before project commissioning, subject to having the necessary consents and a firm grid connection offer. In itself, preliminary registration is a positive initiative that provides comfort for investors dealing with long construction lead times. However, the sting in the tail is the UK Government’s decision that installations with preliminary accreditation will count towards degression triggers. In effect, that means that, during 2013, up to three full years of projects—those to be commissioned in 2013, 2014 and 2015—will be registered for feed-in tariffs. Even on the basis of historical deployment figures, there is a risk that that could result in the highest degression trigger being activated, whereas in reality, due to a combination of supply chain constraints and grid connection delays, there is little prospect of actual deployment exceeding 25MW in any single year. For all that there is the prospect of a significant rise in hydro deployment, even a doubling of historical levels would still result in hydro accounting for a very small proportion of overall feed-in tariff installations. Hydro schemes account for less than 0.1 per cent of all feed-in tariff installations and only 2 per cent of total installed capacity, and yet they contribute more than 10 per cent of the total electricity generated by feed-in tariff installations, thanks to average load factors in the 35 to 40 per cent range. Unlike many other feed-in tariff technologies, hydro schemes commonly have an operational life that extends long beyond the incentive payment period, with some schemes running for up to 100 years. As things stand, we appear to be heading inexorably towards a 20 per cent real-terms cut in feed-in tariffs for hydro as from January 2014. It is the widespread view of the hydro industry that such a reduction in revenues will result in a majority of potential new schemes proving to be uncommercial. I hope that the minister will join Labour and others in the Parliament in putting maximum pressure on the UK Government to address that threat to the industry. There are a number of issues that I hope to comment on later, and colleagues will undoubtedly raise them. I hope that the debate is a useful and constructive look at the hydro generation situation in Scotland. As I confided to Nigel Don earlier, I am particularly looking forward to Stewart Stevenson’s speech as I can only assume that he knew Tom Johnston personally. I end with another snippet from the 1943 debate, which today’s ministers might take heed of. Sir James Henderson-Stewart from East Fife said: “If national unity is to be interpreted as meaning that Scottish Members have got to say ‘Hear, hear’ to everything that emerges from St. Andrew’s House, then the sooner that convention is destroyed the better.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 February 1943; Vol 387, c 232.] If only that were true in more debates, Presiding Officer.

The debate has indeed been relatively consensual, unsurprisingly, and a number of members, including Rob Gibson, Liam McArthur, Malcolm Chisholm and Claire Baker, have made very thoughtful and instructive contributions. We have had poetry from Elaine Murray, flora and fauna from Mary Scanlon, and history, geography, science, engineering and mathematics from Stewart Stevenson alone. Although Stewart Stevenson did not confess to knowing Tom Johnston personally, he did not disappoint whatsoever in his contribution. I think that he told us that “the light goes on” with the formula for H2O, whereas Mary Scanlon said that the lights would go off. He and Elaine Murray told us about the origins of the Archimedes screw. I think that, although the Syrians invented the Archimedes screw, it was patented by the Greeks. Perhaps that is a lesson for all of us. We have had a few disagreements about independence today, although not many. Stewart Stevenson ended his contribution by talking about the politics of water in the middle east, and I think that that left us all feeling that our own arguments had been put in perspective. A number of substantial issues have been raised. Secure and sustainable levels of finance are clearly essential to the entire renewables industry. In the early part of the debate, a number of members and I addressed the importance of feed-in tariffs and degression rates. The current uncertainty about the Co-operative Bank, which has not been raised, is of particular concern to those who are interested in developing renewables projects. As some members will be aware, around 80 to 90 per cent of project lending for small and medium-scale renewables projects comes from that bank. The excellent Neilston community wind farm project in East Renfrewshire, which Stuart McMillan mentioned, relied heavily on support from the Co-operative Bank; indeed, it is fair to say that the bank’s funding was the crucial factor in community ownership going ahead in the village. Given the difficulties that the Co-operative Bank currently faces, many other small-scale community-driven schemes may find it difficult or impossible to get the cash that they need to get projects off the ground. I would welcome hearing from the minister about not only the Scottish Government’s own funding schemes, but how we can put more pressure on Scottish high street banks to step in to support small and medium-scale renewables projects, including hydro projects. The major strategic challenges include feed-in tariffs, finance and grid connectivity, which a number of members have raised not simply in the context of connecting our islands and the difficulties in planning for onshore and offshore wind, but, crucially, in the context of hydro. Stewart Stevenson said that SSE is still known affectionately as “the Hydro”, and I think that Rob Gibson suggested that it has kept the faith with hydro power. I am aware of those in the renewables industry who are concerned about the potentially conflicting roles of SSE and Scottish Power as providers of grid infrastructure as well as generators, and I know that a written submission has been made to Murdo Fraser’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee about the 50kW limit imposed by SSE on the size of grid connections over much of rural Scotland. I hope that the minister will also keep an eye on that issue. At times, it strikes me that there is a bit of a Mexican stand-off between the Scottish Government, the UK Government and the electricity companies on who will pick up the tab for what we all view as essential renewables investments. I think that the renewables industry, and the hydro industry in particular, are less interested in who will blink first than in securing a stable future for which they can plan. That leads me to storage, which is a related subject that a number of members raised. Like all renewables, hydro power suffers from intermittency. I think that it was Malcolm Chisholm who highlighted that, after the spring that we have just had, it might seem that water is in abundance, but the figures from 2010 reveal that, in a single year, hydro output fell by 40 per cent as a result of low levels of rainfall.

I accept that, in this case, variability would be a better term to use than intermittency, given that it relates to a factor that applied over a year rather than a period of days. However, my point is that, just as wind turbines suffer during periods of low wind, hydro is affected in a similar way. That is particularly the case with pumped storage. In answer to previous questions from Mary Scanlon on the issue, the minister has referred to SSE’s planned pumped-storage scheme at Coire Glas on Loch Lochy. If that goes ahead, it will be a good example, but a number of members have emphasised that we need clarity from the UK and Scottish Governments on the future of pumped storage. Related to that is the continuing issue of interconnectors, which allow for the sharing of renewable energy across a much larger grid and enable peaks and troughs to be balanced. Nigel Don raised that point. The “Energy Storage and Management Study” that was produced in 2010 for the Scottish Government referred in some detail to the benefits of interconnection and noted that the capital costs of interconnection were cheaper than those of large-scale pumped storage. Therefore, it was of particular concern to learn, in March, that SSE was pulling out of the Scotland-Norway interconnector project and that a cable to the north of England is now being pursued as a more viable option. I would welcome any information that the minister has on the future of that project. There is another aspect of hydro power generation that Scotland can utilise that no other part of the UK can. The huge hydro resources of Scottish Water—a public body—can be used for the generation of hydroelectricity. Scottish Water is currently the single biggest consumer of electricity in Scotland: it has an annual electricity bill of £40 million and accounts for 1.5 per cent of overall Scottish energy consumption. If nothing else, Scottish Water has the potential to utilise its water supply to reduce that electricity bill, but it also has the potential to feed into the grid and to contribute to our overall hydro generation targets. Scottish Water has a number of schemes in progress. The existing schemes generate around 18GW per annum, and proposed schemes would add an additional 23GW, but that is a fraction of the 500GW-plus that Scottish Water uses annually. As part of the Scottish Government’s plan for a hydro nation, Labour would welcome more radical plans for Scottish Water. Members raised a number of challenges; mostly, they raised them as issues of concern, rather than as criticisms. The good temper was broken only in the exchange between Jamie Hepburn and Mary Scanlon. On the report on proposals and policies 2, it is unfortunately the case that the Scottish Government has missed consecutive annual emissions reduction targets. Claudia Beamish said that it would be “increasingly challenging” to meet the 2020 interim target of a 40,717,000-tonne reduction in CO2 equivalent. Margaret McDougall and Mike MacKenzie exchanged comments on whether that was the fault of the UK Government. I simply observe that such targets are our targets and an incentive to us in Scotland to do what we can. Again, we need greater clarity from the minister, particularly on how hydro can contribute to the meeting of our targets. The issue of green jobs was raised by a couple of members; it is certainly of importance. The Scottish Government produced a study on the employment potential of Scotland’s hydro resource. I think that the most optimistic scenario would be constrained by environmental and regulatory factors. Even the more realistic forecasts rely on educational and business support to ensure that skilled hydro engineers—particularly in the micro-hydro sector—are retained in Scotland.

I am conscious that in Aberdeen, for example, where they are suffering from skills shortages, the oil and gas industry is able to poach staff by offering higher salaries. I would welcome confirmation that the Scottish Government will work with the industry to attract and retain talent. In conclusion—

Malcolm Chisholm talked about what can be achieved through a “shared agenda for positive change” in Scotland. We all support the Scottish Government’s policy direction for renewables but, as the debate has shown, we have concerns about the progress that we are making.

We support the Government for giving ROCs to hydro and others.

I did not have a chance to say this when I summed up: Rob Gibson made a good point about micro or smaller schemes that are owned by large landowners and bring little community benefit. He suggested that a community benefit level of £5,000 per megawatt should apply to such schemes.

Yesterday, my youngest son asked me why people in Australia are happier than people in this country. I am not sure how many members have heard this piece of news but, at the end of last week, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development produced a report that ranks Australia as the happiest country in the industrialised world in which to live and work. The UK, despite being the sixth richest country, comes in at 10th in that list. As in most lads and dads conversations, I of course pretended that I knew the answer and said so with authority. However, his question certainly got me thinking. Among the range of factors that might be taken into account in considering what makes for a happy country, I would be astounded if employment, and in particular work satisfaction, were not part of the bigger picture. We know from a range of studies, most recently Oxfam’s humankind index, that work is important to everybody and that even more important to our sense of wellbeing are the nature and quality of that work and the satisfaction that goes with it. That is why the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report on underemployment is a particularly welcome contribution to the debate. The effects of the current economic difficulties that this country faces have been deeply damaging to individuals and their families, but they have also been quite different from the effects of previous recessions. As the report reveals, although unemployment has been slightly lower than expected and lower than was feared back in 2007-08, the emerging problem of underemployment has been far greater. The Work Foundation and others have estimated that, over the course of the recession, the number of people across the UK who have been affected by underemployment has increased from 2 million to more than 3 million. That helps to illuminate the scale of the problem but, as Stephen Boyd from the Scottish Trades Union Congress highlighted, it also suggests that, until now, we have perhaps been too complacent about the issue. As he observed, the UK has more low-wage and insecure jobs than any other developed country apart from the United States. It seems clear from the committee’s report and from other surveys of underemployment that the burden is not evenly distributed across the population and that certain groups are more vulnerable. For example, as with unemployment generally in the current recession, women and young people are particularly badly affected. There are fewer part-time workers generally compared with full-time workers in our economy, but levels of underemployment among those who work part time are far greater. The committee heard evidence from disability groups and others that those who already face disadvantage, such as parents of disabled children, are more likely to suffer from skills underutilisation or, in other words, to be employed at a lower level. All in all, it adds up to a very worrying picture indeed. The economist David Bell has spoken about the dangers of a new lost generation and the scarring effect of unemployment on young people. The committee rightly highlights the damage that underemployment inflicts on young people—particularly those with lower skills—their capacity to be independent and their employment prospects in the future. Average household income in Scotland has declined—families are feeling the squeeze—often because of the reduction in the availability of overtime or in the number of hours worked. There is a huge increase in in-work poverty in this country, and we should be grateful for the spotlight that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has shone on that. We should also be grateful for the practical list of recommendations for action on which the committee has agreed. I hope that the Government will respond positively to all of those. First, it is clear that the Scottish Government needs to start treating underemployment at a strategic level in a similar manner to the way in which it currently approaches unemployment. The committee highlights the need to identify labour market targets for underemployment—in other words, to try to grow the number of hours that people are in work and to improve the quality, as well as just the number, of jobs in Scotland. The Government could be more active—more aggressive—in its labour market interventions. The new employer recruitment incentive and the wage subsidy with which that provides us might be a place to start. Labour hoarding has emerged from the report as an issue. It is good that firms have worked to keep their employees on in the face of the downturn but, as the recession continues and demand fails to pick up, that is proving unsustainable. On the continent—in Germany, for example—a different approach has been tried. Through good economic times, workers build up reserves of overtime and pay with their employers that are then used to tide them over in downturns. Furthermore, one particular Government intervention is directed at saving long-term employment in firms. Instead of picking up the cost of unemployment benefit, the Government has intervened to subsidise jobs for up to six months rather than see a firm go out of business for good. Those policies are worth further exploration. Zero-hours contracts are receiving a welcome amount of attention and scrutiny. The recession has undoubtedly created what one might term an employer’s market, which the less scrupulous are using to their advantage. I include in that bracket of the unscrupulous the Westminster Government, which is trying to unpick some of the employment rights that have been put in place over the past decade or more. Clearly there is no connection whatever between employment rights and the economic difficulties that we have been faced with over the past five years. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude that any moves against employees are anything other than politically motivated rather than stemming from evidence that they will somehow benefit our economy. The number of UK workers on zero-hours contracts has increased by 46 per cent over the past five years, an increase that is especially marked among the young. Such contracts are particularly prevalent in retail and finance centres, where they are used by up to a quarter of UK employers. They are also prevalent in the private care sector. A recent survey of home care workers reported that 41 per cent were on zero-hours contracts. I am sure that there is not a member present who is unaware of how stressful and disruptive such employment practices can be to family life. Aside from the fact that they do not provide a guaranteed weekly or monthly income, the short notice that people on such contracts are given in the expectation that they will turn up to work is difficult for anyone to manage and well-nigh impossible for those with childcare commitments. They also cause complications for those who try to claim income-related benefits, so the Government’s own anti-poverty measures are undermined. Labour members are certainly looking for a commitment from the Government that it will use the forthcoming procurement bill to ensure not only that the public sector is an exemplar employer but that no companies bidding for public sector work will be allowed to use zero-hours contracts. A good place to start might be the First Minister’s favourite company, Amazon. I noted the cabinet secretary’s comments a few minutes ago in answer to Duncan McNeil’s questions and was slightly disappointed by them. I hope that he will be more proactive. I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to a legal question-and-answer article about zero-hours contracts in the magazine “Personnel Today”. It talks about the unintended consequences of the new laws on agency workers driving people on to such contracts and creating a perverse incentive. It concludes, without any trace of irony, with the question: “What can I do to minimise the risk of zero-hours workers acquiring employment status?” In other words, it offers advice to companies to ensure that those who are on zero-hours contracts do not become regarded as employees.

I am very disappointed by Mr Wilson’s question. I have a huge regard for him and know how much he—like many of his SNP colleagues—cares about the matter, but how many times must we hear the constitution being used as a reason for inaction? The Scottish Parliament has many powers. [Interruption.] I am sure that Duncan McNeil and other members will talk about zero-hours contracts in the context of the proposed procurement bill. That is something that Mr Wilson’s Government has direct influence over—

The procurement bill could be used to enforce our will. [Interruption.]

I recognise Mr Wilson’s concern about the matter, but I ask him to shake off the constitutional framework for a moment and think about what we can do with the powers that we already have. I believe that there is a lot that the Scottish Government can do in a host of ways. The trend towards part-time and temporary contracts is not simply an issue for the private sector. The moving of a great number of teachers from full-time permanent contracts to part-time temporary contracts has been identified as a problem throughout the most recent Administration. The public sector generally has a duty to pursue best value, but when best value is so often measured by cheapest price, that stands in direct contradiction to some of the issues that the report that is before us addresses. One of the most important conclusions and recommendations of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was its call for Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to consider further ways to increase access to further education, training and work. The cabinet secretary has defended the Government’s emphasis on full-time education, but the whole nature of underemployment suggests that part-time further and higher education has a crucial role to play. The very fact that the head count is such that tens of thousands of Scots are now being denied access to skills, education and training that may help them—even if simply with their self-esteem—is a lamentable failure of the Scottish Government. I appreciate that the Scottish Government might not accept Labour’s entire prescription for improving our economy and tackling underemployment, but if it at least begins by accepting the work of the Parliament’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, that will have been a helpful contribution indeed. The First Minister and others are fond of quoting Joseph Stiglitz, as if associating themselves with that renowned and—I must say—thoroughly admirable economist somehow bolsters the argument for independence, but the bulk of Professor Stiglitz’s work addresses the idea of a sustainable economy and a sense of wellbeing. It is about securing good-quality, long-term and sustainable jobs. That is what Joe Stiglitz’s vision for Scotland is and it is a vision that we in the Labour Party share. We would be happy to work with the Government on it and on developing manufacturing and industrial policy, rethinking our approach to our banks, supporting credit unions, supporting community ownership and asking firms to pay a fair amount of corporation tax. We need to ask ourselves who runs our economy and for whose benefit. That way, we can perhaps restore some of the pride, fulfilment and prosperity that should be secured by employment.

When I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth yesterday why the Scottish Government was spending 10 times as much on pushing people out of the door as it is on trying to find people employment, he gave in his defence the same excuse that the First Minister has just given: the Scottish Government has a policy of no compulsory redundancies and, furthermore, uses compromise agreements only in a minority of cases. Labour’s freedom of information requests on the subject reveal that, since Mr Salmond came to power, the Scottish Government has spent £10 million on compulsory redundancies and £45 million on compromise agreements. Can the First Minister explain that?

What can the minister do to encourage bidders—either co-operative bidders or mutual or not-for-dividend bidders—to come forward and bid for the franchise?

This week, we have enjoyed our usual robust debate on Scotland’s future. Much of the discussion in the newspapers and in the chamber has focused on our approach to tax—in particular, on whether our shared vision of a progressive Scotland is compatible with a race to the bottom on corporation tax. I suggest that that is a fairly straightforward question to address, although the First Minister managed to avoid doing so earlier. The answer is clearly no—the two are not compatible. A more contentious issue is whether we need to become an independent country to pursue progressive policies. I believe that the debate on transforming Scotland’s railways can shed some light on that question. We could bemoan the political settlement and blame the constitution for our inability to reform the way in which we run our railways, or we could set about using the powers that we already have to make a difference now. I understand that the minister and his colleagues were initially quite sympathetic to the idea of establishing a not-for-dividend operation to run the Scottish rail passenger franchise. I am not entirely sure why that sympathy has, so far, not been translated into action. I appeal to the minister and the SNP to join us in a new approach to rail in Scotland. There is quite strong public support for reform of the overcomplicated, expensive and downright inefficient rail system that we currently have. The recent collapse of the bidding process for the west coast main line franchise, which the minister mentioned, has highlighted just how farcical the franchise structure has become. The Scottish Government’s motion mentions some of the improvements that we have made in recent years, including a welcome increase in passenger numbers through prioritising this form of public transport, but I believe that we could do more. The previous Labour UK Government commissioned a review of rail from Sir Roy McNulty to establish value for money. His report found that the cost of operating the rail network throughout the UK was around 30 per cent more than the operating costs of its counterparts on the continent. He identified a number of additional costs that account for the discrepancy, such as interest payments on Network Rail debt and the expense of managing the relationship between the train operators and Network Rail. What also emerged were the extra costs of the profit taken by train operators and the dividend payments to shareholders. We can address that issue when the minister puts the current Scottish passenger franchise out to tender by insisting that the successful franchisee operate on a not-for-dividend basis. The Labour Party has secured legal advice that has confirmed that the legal powers to do that exist. If the minister and his SNP colleagues wished to do so—he would have our political backing—the Scottish Government could insist not just that any tender include various community benefit clauses, which I hope that he is already doing, but that the service be run on a not-for-dividend basis. Section 26ZA of the 1993 act allows ministers to stipulate that only a not-for-dividend service will be considered by them to be sufficiently economic and efficient. That would not require any expansion of the devolution settlement and the franchise would still go out to tender.

It is absolutely the case that a number of hurdles would need to be overcome in putting together a credible bidder. However, models already exist. For example, the fact is that, in the absence of a successful franchisee, the Government currently takes over the operation of the franchise, as happened with the west coast main line. Such things are possible, but, given the huge bond that is required of the companies, we cannot even get to the stage of putting together a successful bid if the Government will not indicate its political support. I think that there would be an appetite among various bodies, such as Strathclyde partnership for transport and some private sector organisations, to form a co-operative to operate the franchise on a not-for-dividend basis. However, we need to show political leadership. We should not use the constitution as an excuse for inaction; we need to show what we can do now.

I want to make some progress. At the moment, rail services in Scotland enjoy around £800 million of public investment. The rail franchise accounts for the lion’s share of that, with last year’s £447 million rising to more than £511 million in the future. Tackling the issue of the ownership of businesses and services goes to the heart of how we rebuild a successful, sustainable and progressive economy in Scotland. I have talked recently about how we should pursue a community ownership model for wind farms, and I believe that a co-operative rail franchise would be a similar step. The minister would enjoy not only Labour’s political support in this Parliament but the partnership of the Welsh Government in Cardiff. The Welsh franchise is not up until 2018, but the Welsh Government has already indicated in its consultation that it wishes to pursue such a model. We could offer a similar proposal to that put to the people of Wales. Our proposal offers value for money not just to the devolved Government but to rail passengers and the wider community. The ethos of the new organisation that ran the service could reflect co-operative principles of social responsibility, accountability and equity—

There are many significant benefits, which I clearly do not have time to go into now. This is a once-in-a-decade opportunity, given that the franchise will be awarded for 10 years, so we cannot wait for the referendum. We certainly do not need to wait for the referendum, so let us act now. Let us not put Scotland on hold, but let us act together to ensure that the franchise operates on a not-for-dividend basis.

The Audit Scotland figures appear to be even worse than those in Labour’s freedom of information investigation. It seems that the Scottish Government is spending more than 10 times as much putting people out of work than it is on getting them into work. The Audit Scotland report specifically criticises early departure schemes that are driven by short-term budget cuts. What are the finance secretary’s long-term plans for the public sector workforce?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage a mutual, co-operative or not-for-dividend organisation to bid for the Scottish rail passenger franchise. (S4O-02160)

The Scottish Government rightly talks about promoting community benefit clauses in procurement contracts. Will the minister consider doing similarly with the tendering process for the Scottish rail passenger franchise, given that, this year, the subsidy for the franchise is rising from less than £450 million to more than £511 million? Does he not believe that that would help to secure better value for passengers and communities?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to ensure that its grants are awarded only to companies that pay correct levels of tax. (S4F-01407)

I am unclear from that answer whether the First Minister is defending the award of more than £10 million of our taxpayers’ money to a successful multinational such as Amazon, given its apparent unwillingness to pay correct levels of corporation tax in this country. Is it credible to talk about a socially just Scotland while extolling a race to the bottom on corporation tax and handing out millions of pounds of Government grants to companies that dodge tax and avoid recognising workers’ rights?

I apologise for misunderstanding the timing of the start of the statement. I welcome the update from the minister and thank him for the advance copy of his statement. Given that more than 600 jobs are directly affected by the collapse of SRG, our first concern must be for those individuals, and for their families and others who are indirectly suffering as a result of the job losses. Will the minister assure members that maintaining the maximum number of jobs will be at the forefront of his efforts and those of Scottish Government agencies? In relation to those efforts, I am led to believe that support for training for people who are affected might be limited to £200 per person. Is that the case and, if so, is such a sum sufficient to enable people to access the courses and reskilling opportunities that they might require? From an answer that Margaret Burgess gave to Neil Findlay, I understand that the support that the Government is offering does not include any new money. Will the minister confirm that that is the case? I understand that the liquidator, KPMG, is applying to the Court of Session to divest itself of the responsibility for the clean-up or restoration of sites that are rejected by a potential buyer. Which authority will end up with the responsibility for such mines, should approval be granted? The minister mentioned the Scottish Government’s grant to the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. The grant had been running at more than £1.5 million for each of the past eight years, at least. The Scottish Government has reduced that funding to just over £500,000 this year and next. Given the impact that that is bound to have on already deprived and hard-hit communities, will the minister reconsider his support for the excellent work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust?

As the First Minister rightly says, the offshore wind deployment centre is important for the future of Scotland’s offshore industry. If Vattenfall cannot sell its shares, will he step in to secure the centre’s future?

I am asking the question.

This has been a relatively thoughtful, consensual and constructive debate, all of which is to be welcomed. I admit that, like Murdo Fraser and Malcolm Chisholm, I was slightly surprised to see the terms of the motion. As expected, the motion lauds the efforts of the Scottish Government, but it also praises the efforts of the UK Government and welcomes the UK and Scottish Government’s working together not once but twice. In his speech, the minister talked about “continuing and enduring joint working between the Scottish and UK Governments”. The only phrase that was missing was “better together”. All that mutual back-slapping and talk of securing the best outcomes seems slightly misplaced at a time when the industry is clearly worried about delay and uncertainty. There is a lack of clarity about renewables, in particular, with a consequent lack of investment. The minister himself used such language when he talked about concern about capacity and security of supply. The back-slapping seems particularly misplaced at a time when families are struggling with growing fuel poverty. People are angered by the profits and bonus culture of the big six power companies and anxious about a bill that might bolster those companies’ dominance at the expense of independent renewables companies, leaving community ownership untapped and undeveloped for the most part. Scottish Labour thinks that Scotland will benefit from an energy policy that balances our energy needs with our climate change and carbon reduction targets and in which the interests of consumers are central to the process of reform. Although we support some of the measures in the UK Energy Bill, we think that the bill lacks ambition and that there has been a remarkable lack of progress, as Rhoda Grant said. A number of factors in the background to EMR are worth highlighting. The big six energy companies are responsible for 99 per cent of household energy bills. Household bills have increased by nearly £300, just in the past three years. Security of supply is an increasing concern, as several members said, and Ofgem has projected that the UK’s spare capacity will fall from 14 to 4 per cent in two years. It is purported that the Energy Bill will increase investment in low-carbon and renewable energy, but the bill does not set decarbonisation targets. Although Labour supports the principle behind contracts for difference, there remains a lack of information on vital details, most notably the process for setting strike prices. In addition, concern has been expressed about the ability of community renewables and small independent electricity generators to access finance under the new regime. Margaret McDougall made a particularly useful contribution on that point. Many members who have spoken in the debate will have heard from the independent generators group, whose members operate more than a fifth of UK onshore wind generation and are responsible for some two fifths of proposed projects. To secure financial backing, independent generators must secure long-term contracts with credit-worthy partners—in practice, one of the big six. Already, due to the uncertainty over EMR, fewer energy companies are offering terms to independent generators. That could prove a threat not just to the independent generators but to our chances of meeting Government targets. There will be an impact on communities, too, which I will return to. There is also uncertainty about the impact of the emissions performance standard. Malcolm Chisholm made the point well. The EPS imposes a limit on the level of carbon that is emitted by new power stations, but the limit has been set fairly high and will be grandfathered until 2045. The lack of ambition on the target has led to concern that it will provoke a dash for gas. It is not clear whether the Scottish Government will have unilateral power to alter the EPS in Scotland without recourse to the Westminster bill, now that we are in the process of agreeing to a legislative consent motion. I think that the minister was asked about that in committee; Rhoda Grant asked him about the issue during the debate. Will he clarify the point? The minister, Liam McArthur and other members mentioned the recently published report, “Scottish Islands Renewable Project”, which confirmed the sizeable potential renewables capacity in the Scottish islands and identified the significant socioeconomic benefits that could be unlocked. Sufficient investment could secure up to 400 jobs in the Western Isles, more than 400 jobs in Orkney, more than 400 jobs in Shetland and an additional 3,000 jobs in the rest of Scotland or elsewhere in the UK, over the next seven years. However, the report concluded: “further renewable generation on the Scottish Islands will not be developed on any scale ... under current policy”, primarily because of lack of funding and the high costs of transmission. That is a matter of urgency. Just before Christmas, Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission announced delays to every upgrade project in Scotland associated with renewables except for the Beauly to Denny power line. SSE has said that it has already missed its window for having the high-voltage connector to the Western Isles in by 2016. My colleague Rhoda Grant commented that the company could lose its procurement contract on new cable. We back the islands report’s conclusion that “a co-ordinated policy and regulatory response will be required urgently”. I welcome the minister’s opening remarks, which talked about proposing a CFD uplift and the joint underwriting of subsea cables, but what will he do if further support from the UK Government is not forthcoming? I turn to two important points that a number of members raised. The first is fuel poverty. Hanzala Malik talked about his concern about rising household electricity bills. Graeme Pearson and Mary Scanlon also talked about that. Dave Thompson in particular highlighted the unacceptable regional variations, and John Wilson made typically thoughtful comments on the impact of fuel poverty on families in Scotland. Energy Action Scotland estimates that there may be more than 600,000 families in fuel poverty. As members know, Labour set the eradication targets for fuel poverty. We introduced the winter fuel allowance and free central heating for older people, so members will not be surprised that we want further measures to be taken. I hope that members will also not be surprised at our disappointment at the Scottish Government’s apparent backsliding on energy standards in new buildings. Those who can afford to will fit small-scale renewables to their property or insulate their homes, but those who cannot afford those measures will fall further into fuel poverty. The Association for the Conservation of Energy sent a letter to Mr Swinney and Mr Mackay last week warning that, if they water down and delay energy standards for new buildings, it will have a severe and damaging effect on energy efficiency.

I will not, if Mr MacKenzie does not mind. I hope that the minister will raise the issue with his colleagues, because there is clearly a cross-party and cross-parliamentary consensus in support of further measures. Alison Johnstone, Rob Gibson, Dave Thompson and virtually all the Labour members raised a very important issue: community ownership. I was delighted to be present for the official opening of the Neilston community wind farm earlier this week. Nicola Sturgeon came to open it. It is jointly owned by the local community and is now beginning to generate substantial income for the village. However, community ownership models such as that at Neilston are the exception. It is fair to say that up to 90 per cent of profits from wind farms are exported, along with 75 per cent of the expenditure on the industry. We are in danger of repeating the mistakes that we made with the oil industry. There was an interesting article in The Scotsman today in which Alison Elliot highlighted the fact that, even in the tenth of the industry that may be more locally owned, wealthy landlords are more likely to benefit from public subsidies than local or fuel-poor communities are. It is probably safe to say that as little as 3 per cent of renewable energy is owned by communities. We need to be more strategic. The Scottish Government needs to show more leadership on funding, risk and planning. The use of Forestry Commission land is welcome, but what about using more Scottish Water resources? We could also explore the potential of some of our housing associations, which have the land and the communities. That would not only help the communities but help us to reach our targets. I am conscious of time. I have not had a chance to mention hydroelectricity, which is still important and could be affected particularly by the feed-in tariffs. I urge both Governments to tackle the uncertainty and lack of clarity around EMR with real urgency. I support the amendment in Rhoda Grant’s name.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports bus services. (S4O-02098)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will be aware of the bus reorganisation by FirstGroup in Glasgow and the surrounding area. Is she aware of the impact that that is having on many vital services, which are now being cut for communities in places such as East Renfrewshire? First’s motivation seems to be to prioritise services that make a profit while abandoning the rest. Does the minister now believe that it is time for tougher regulation? Will she give her support and the Government’s to the member’s bill being introduced by my colleague Iain Gray?

When my colleagues and I saw the terms of the motion for today’s debate, we were torn about whether to offer our support. On the one hand, as members can imagine, all of us in the Labour Party welcome the opportunity to keep employment at the top of the political agenda, not just because of unemployment’s damaging effect on individuals and their families, but because of its divisive effect on society as a whole. The flipside of that argument is that, by creating or working towards a full employment society, not only do we rebuild the self-esteem of those very individuals, but we increase the prosperity of our society and improve our national wellbeing. That is how to tackle the many problems that ail our country. The downside to the motion is that it reads in a rather self-congratulatory style. That is a weakness that all Governments are prone to. There is a risk that the Scottish Government has latched on to one good set of quarterly employment figures and read into them perhaps more than it should. Everyone who deals with statistics is advised to look at the long-term trend; they should not overreact to one set of figures, particularly if they look anomalous and should therefore be treated with caution.

Indeed they do. The minister will be well aware of the caution with which we should treat all figures. Although there is a clear trend, I was worried about the use of the 29,000 figure in the motion. If the minister bears with me, I will expand on my comments. What worries me is that the minister may infer—she has not done so in the motion, but she did so in answer to my question last week—that somehow the fall in unemployment is directly due to actions taken by her Government rather than the cumulative effect of a number of factors. I will return to that point. However, on balance, we agree that any fall in unemployment is welcome, even if we are not entirely sure what is behind it. Similarly, the employability measures that the Government has outlined, although by themselves not necessarily transformative, are to be welcomed. We have had several debates on employability. Employability measures are important, but when the problem with our economy is employment and not employability, we must be careful not to put the problem back on to individuals and to blame them for their misfortune. I will return to that point, too. I make those remarks partially to put my speech in context and partially to appease what I call the paranoid tendency on the Scottish National Party’s front and back benches, which I suspect assumes that Labour starts every debate on the basis that it wants to prove the SNP wrong no matter what it says. I assure SNP members that that is not the case. [Interruption.] I see that the paranoid tendency has just woken up. We simply want to test which policies are working and which are not. I will put the unemployment statistics in context. We welcome the fall in the most recent employment figures. However, it is interesting to note that the fall in one set of figures in the previous month was unfortunately offset by another increase in the number of long-term unemployed, particularly in long-term youth unemployment. I am sure that I do not need to tell anyone here, let alone the minister, about the scarring effect that a prolonged period of unemployment has on people when they are young. It is equally sobering to look at the performance of the Scottish economy in relation to employment and unemployment over the course of the recession in the past four or five years. Between 2008 and 2012, Scotland experienced a fall in unemployment significantly worse than in other regions in the UK. Similarly, Scotland’s growth in unemployment over that same period was far greater than that in any other UK region, with only Northern Ireland coming close to the problem and the levels that we are experiencing here. If we look at economic inactivity, we see that levels have increased in Scotland, whereas they have reduced across the UK.

I am not making that point at all. I thought that I was explaining myself quite well. I am trying not to blame the Government; similarly, I am anxious that the Government does not take praise when it is not due. It is difficult to see evidence of Government interventions making a difference. That is clear in the way that the Scottish Government expresses itself. Just yesterday, it put out a press release that led with new sets of statistics that showed that youth employment was down again. However, it did not highlight the figure of 33,000 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment or training—an increase of 1,000 in a year—which those statistics also contained. Stephen Boyd from the Scottish Trades Union Congress has provided an excellent analysis of the Government’s claims that youth unemployment has fallen by a third. He highlights that, within those figures, there is a very worrying increase in unemployment among 16 to 17-year-olds, which is much higher than in the rest of the UK. Stephen Boyd’s point, which I repeat here, is that, if the Scottish Government wishes to take the credit when things are going well, it must also take responsibility when the figures do not reflect so well on it and tell a different story.

That would be a good point, but I did not want to go into the difference between the annual population survey and the labour force survey because the minister’s motion is based on the labour force survey. I was not going to raise that point, but the minister has now raised it by giving an example that is against the labour force survey. For information, those figures have to have the word “experimental” added to them when they are quoted. I am not trying to do down that trend, but we should be wary. The whole picture is not a rosy one. The difficulty is that we are not in a period when we can relax—or, for that matter, take credit—and assume that everything that the Government is doing is working. There is very little evidence to show that it is working, and it is difficult to know what is making the difference. I assure every Scottish National Party back bencher that I want Scotland to outperform the UK on every measure. I have no wish to see the Scottish Government fail on those measures, and I want Scotland to do better. We simply need to know the facts so that we can work out which interventions work and which do not, what more we can do, and what pays dividends for the Government, the private sector and the third sector. It is clear that the world is suffering from an economic downturn, and Europe still has its own difficulties. On the UK economy, I may find some common ground with the SNP back benchers, although perhaps not with the Conservatives and Liberals in the chamber. I hope that we can agree that we are suffering from the wrong-headed austerity approach of George Osborne and the Tories.

I was offering consensus, but I am not sure that my offer was responded to. It is clear that I do not agree, and interestingly the yes campaign does not seem to agree either. Half of the members of the yes campaign want control of some of the levers of power, and half of them want to give the power back to Westminster and have no control over it whatsoever. I have never quite understood that—they want control of the levers of power, but they want to give that control to the Westminster Government and the Bank of England. That is a bizarre policy, if I may put it that way. However, there are some points on which we can agree, such as the backdrop against which we are asking the Government to intervene. In some ways, I am asking the Scottish Government to be more realistic about the difference that it can make, and to focus its attention on the measures that are making a difference. I welcome the certificate of work readiness, which is a focus of today’s debate and which could, by all accounts, provide some young people with useful work experience. It is good that we provide employability at its best, and those programmes can give confidence and boost young people’s preparedness and esteem. However, as I mentioned earlier, there is a downside. The focus on employability can give too many young people the impression that their lack of employment is their own fault and that their employability, rather than the lack of available jobs, is the problem. Such programmes should never be viewed as an alternative to real and substantial investment in youth unemployment, and more concrete action is needed if we are to address that problem in the short and the long term. The First Minister was keen to bring up Wales today. I mention in passing that just last week the Labour Administration in Wales announced a £75 million investment package to support jobs and growth in the economy. That is the sort of measure that I would welcome from the Scottish Government. We need to be mindful of some of the decisions that the Scottish Government has taken that are contrary to the focus on employability and will be detrimental to young people’s chances of getting the training that they require to enter work. To refer to the most obvious example of those decisions, the minister may think that further education is an easy target for cuts, but £25 million of cuts this year and the same next year will have a real impact on colleges’ ability to deliver training and education, and a lasting effect on the young people who will miss out on a college place as a result. I look forward to discussing what further measures we can take to tackle the very real problems facing young people in Scotland today. I move amendment S4M-06493.2, to insert at end: “and, while welcoming any support that can be given to those finding themselves unemployed, recognises that youth joblessness remains too high; cautions against any complacency at the difficulties faced by young people seeking work in Scotland; notes in particular the extremely worrying continued rise in the number of long-term unemployed, and is concerned that a further £25 million cut to colleges will restrict opportunities for many to gain skills or retrain”.

Although I am anxious that the debate does not descend into an exchange of statistics, I cannot let Jamie Hepburn’s picture of the Scottish college scene go unchallenged. Does he recognise that there has been a huge drop, measured in the tens of thousands, in head count—the number of people attending college in Scotland—over the past five years? Is he aware that part-time students have lost their places, a third of people with learning difficulties have lost their courses, and people are queueing up to get into Scotland’s colleges? Mr Hepburn makes a virtue out of stability of funding, but that stability is a £25 million cut this year and another £25 million cut next year.

I happily join Mike MacKenzie in paying tribute to young people and their efforts to secure work. Six months ago, unemployment among young people in Scotland was higher than in the UK, and it is currently lower than the UK average. What intervention has the Government made in the past six months—which did not exist six months ago—that has made the difference?

Like Mary Scanlon, I acknowledge that it has been a relatively good natured and consensual debate in which there have been some good speeches. I thought that Liz Smith and Iain Gray opened the debate in the right tone in recognising that we all view the subject as being tremendously important, and with a shared agenda to tackle youth unemployment. There were a number of strong individual contributions. Patricia Ferguson talked about what has been happening in Royston at work. The fact that the DWP rules are still working against young people who are claiming benefits needs to be examined, so there is a chance for joint working to be put into practice. I was intrigued by Clare Adamson’s reference to the horse head nebula. I think that most of us will be flying to our computers later to see what it looks like.

Thank you very much. I suspect that, when it is done in starlight, it is a little bit more glamorous than that. The Al Capone books that my colleague has been reading probably have a different reference. Clare Adamson acknowledged the inequality that women still face in the workforce and the difficulties that we have in tackling segregation, which are important issues. I would not say that the debate has been a statistical battlefield, but a number of members—including Jayne Baxter, Jamie Hepburn, Liam McArthur and Rod Campbell—referred to the merits and demerits of different statistics. Iain Gray and Stewart Stevenson were helpful in explaining the difference between the labour force survey and the annual survey. Like Mary Scanlon, I thought that, with the honourable exception of Mike MacKenzie, most members came to a balanced view about the strengths and weaknesses of different statistical approaches.

I will not. I took an intervention from Mr MacKenzie earlier, so I do not feel guilty. The most important part of the debate was when we talked about the different programmes that have been put in place regionally and nationally. We are all looking to see which programmes have been effective, which are working, what the reasons are behind the fall in unemployment that we are seeing now and where we could invest more money and political energy. The apprenticeship programme was mentioned by a number of members. I think that all Labour members welcome the apprenticeship programme. A bit like the way that we feel about the minister’s Cabinet position, we take credit for it and believe that the only reason why there is such a large target is that we pushed for it. We welcome the 25,000 target and the fact that the Government is achieving it, but we think that there are weaknesses. Iain Gray and other members spoke about the fact that, because 10,000 of those apprentices are already in jobs, although the programme is very helpful in upskilling and offering training it is not in itself tackling unemployment.

I will take an intervention from the minister.

My answer is no to both questions. The modern apprenticeship programme is good but it could be improved; it has weaknesses. The fact that 10,000 of those people were already in work is a weakness. The fact that many people on the apprenticeship programme are now at level 2 rather than at level 3 is a weakness. The fact that the Government spends £1,000 per apprentice is a weakness. I am just pointing out that the apprenticeship programme is a very good programme that could be improved and could offer more. It is a way of improving training and education; it is not, in itself, a way of addressing unemployment. Several members—Jayne Baxter and Margaret McCulloch, in particular—talked about the success of wage-subsidy programmes. That is not just about the previous Labour Government’s future jobs fund, but the current community jobs fund, which has been very successful and has achieved a 40 per cent permanent job retention record among its participants. However, before I go on to that—the issue was raised by Margaret McCulloch and others, including Iain Gray—I point out that we had a consensual debate last week in which we talked about the joint agreement that was reached by the Government, local authorities and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations about securing three-year funding for the voluntary sector. Here we have a good example of a fund that should be supported over three years; I have no doubt that the success of the community grants scheme would improve if it had that certainty. Given the difficulties that face training providers, which Margaret McCulloch highlighted, if the Government was to translate its talk in last week’s debate into action, it would certainly get our support on that. Having repeatedly pushed for further support for wage-subsidy programmes over many years, we were delighted last September when the cabinet secretary announced the employer recruitment initiative. However, it is disappointing that we are now in May and have yet to see any details. My latest understanding is that a subsidy of £1,500 will be provided. Perhaps the minister can expand on that. More than six months on from the announcement, we still do not know how much the subsidy will be. The £1,500 that has been suggested falls a long way short of the £6,000 that was offered through Labour’s future jobs fund. At the very least, we should have some debate in Parliament about this very important matter that would make a concrete difference. We know that such programmes work. There are many other steps that we could take, such as specific actions to improve entrepreneurial activity in Scotland. For example, Denmark encourages unemployed people to start up their own businesses. There is much that the Government could do without reinventing the wheel, given that Scotland currently underperforms on entrepreneurial activity relative to the UK, which in turns underperforms relative to adjacent European countries. The University of the Highlands and Islands has a programme called create a business, which has been very successful. Mark McDonald also mentioned the Prince’s Trust, which operates in a different context but is a voluntary sector provider with a very good record in promoting entrepreneurial activity. Another fantastic scheme is the Entrepreneurial Spark, which has been promoted in Glasgow by businessmen such as Willie Haughey and has been very successful. However, it is notable that although that programme has three offices in Scotland, it does not have an office in Dundee, Aberdeen or Inverness. The Government could do more to build on the success of such programmes and to support them. Several members mentioned the numbers of young people not in education, employment or training. The youth guarantee that is provided through the opportunities for all scheme is good as far as it goes, but we can see that the programme has not actually reduced the numbers in that category. Perhaps we need to re-examine whether the programme might be extended to include people who are under 25 or under 30. Without wanting to go back over the unemployment statistics too much, I think that it is clear that, if we just improved all the regions of Scotland to the standard of employment in the best region, that would make a huge difference. Over the past year, for example, the unemployment rate has decreased in 19 local authority areas, but it has gone up in 12 local authority areas, with there being no change in only one. Mark McDonald, Kevin Stewart, Stewart Stevenson, Jayne Baxter and Jenny Marra all highlighted good performance in their regions, particularly in Aberdeen and the north-east where the oil economy is booming and unemployment is low—although I acknowledge that several members mentioned that there are pockets of deprivation. However, we know that in Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire, Ayrshire and elsewhere, whole communities are debilitated by joblessness. Surely there is more that we can do simply in the way of providing affordable transport. At one point, I actually thought that consensus might break out between Kevin Stewart and Jenny Marra on that issue. Kevin Stewart made a welcome contribution, but I was disappointed that he did not take an intervention from Iain Gray, who would have offered him the opportunity to back the proposed bus regulation (Scotland) bill. I would be happy to take an intervention from Kevin Stewart now if he wants to offer his support for that.

Presiding Officer, I am conscious of the time. This has been a consensual debate, but we need to focus on what works. We welcome any improvement in the employment statistics and some programmes are making a difference, but it would be good to know exactly what difference they make, particularly to youth unemployment, and what more we can do to tackle the intractable issue of youth unemployment, which is clearly heading in totally the wrong way. We may not be agreed on the market interventions, but I hope that we can unite today on the importance of helping our young people. We should emphasise that we are here to help rather than to blame them.

5. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the European Commission regarding an opt-out from pensions regulations should Scotland become independent. (S4F-01345)

What are the Scottish Government’s plans for meeting the much more stringent European Union sovereignty requirements that would apply to the thousands of Scots in pension schemes that operate across the United Kingdom? Specifically, does he agree with the comments of his financial secretary on Sunday that Scotland would seek either longer timescales or exemptions from the EU directive?

I thank Gavin Brown for persuading his colleagues to use their time for this useful and important debate. We will be supporting both the Conservative motion and the Government amendment. At the risk of appearing too cosy with Gavin Brown, I also thank him for hosting in January the round table on strategic funding and the third sector. It was a very worthwhile meeting that brought into stark reality the chaos that single-year funding and delayed funding decisions bring to third sector organisations. We can all testify to the work done by the third sector and by charities in Scotland. Their efforts often go unnoticed and unappreciated, yet they are a vital cog in our society—dare I say, they are one of the hallmarks of the genuine big society: a community that cares. We should also recognise that third sector organisations provide essential services. They do not simply top up existing services or provide recreational activities; rather, they are the care providers and the addiction services and the ones on the front line dealing with unemployment, homelessness and offending. We need to stop treating the third sector as an addendum to state provision and start thinking of it as an equal partner. Multiyear funding must be an integral part of that approach. At the round table in January, we heard at first hand from several major organisations which, at that stage—a matter of weeks before the new financial year—still had no clue about which projects they could run, which staff they could retain, which buildings they could continue to rent and even where they would be operating from. The motion highlights action that could be taken by local government and health boards, but it is worth noting that the Scottish Government’s employability schemes, delivered by Skills Development Scotland, are also awarded to training providers on one-year contracts. Multiyear funding not only gives security to organisations that are in receipt of contracts, but provides stability for specific projects and, crucially, for service users. In turn, that provides continuity for local authorities, which do not then have to pick up the pieces when voluntary organisations’ funding is cut. It allows third sector organisations to focus on long-term outcomes, rather than just short-term funding considerations, and allows time and room for innovation in a sector that is often best placed to be the innovator of public service delivery. As I said at the outset, we will support the motion, but we feel it necessary to amend it to raise the wider issues of third sector funding. Reorganising funding towards a strategic funding approach is an important step and one that I hope the Government will act on today, but the issue of funding the third sector generally is also important. At a time of reducing income for third sector organisations, their workload is heavier than ever. With welfare reform comes increased pressure on advice services, support for the homeless, food banks and care providers. With more than a fifth of all funding for the third sector coming from local government, it is no surprise that the more than £200 million of cuts to local authority budgets over the next year will have a knock-on effect on the funding that is given to organisations. Many charities are supported in one way or another by local government, whether through direct core grants or the provision of services, such as transport to and from activities. All of them will feel the strain as the cuts begin to bite. One direct fund that the Scottish Government administers is the third sector early intervention fund, which replaced two existing revenue streams. It is worth noting that, despite the rather panicky additional interim funding of £10 million that the Minister for Children and Young People rushed out, the new fund is still worth less than the support that was previously available. Even more worrying is the fact that the fund was four times oversubscribed, with more than 400 groups applying and a total of £73.4 million requested. Many organisations reported their concern about not being given enough notice of whether they would receive funding, with the result that no long-term planning could be completed and staff were put on redundancy notices. On 2 April, The Herald reported that many organisations are leading an “uncomfortable hand-to-mouth existence”. That is no way to support our third sector and it is the reason why multiyear funding is necessary. It is needed to remove the threat of projects ending precipitately and to end the morale-sapping practice of organisations, of necessity, issuing annual redundancy notices, despite their then finding that the funding is renewed. A practical suggestion that my colleague Richard Simpson MSP has pursued is to make it a requirement that funding decisions be made at least three months prior to the secession of funding, or to insist on three months of funding after a decision to terminate a contract so that staff are not necessarily threatened with redundancy. I hope that the cabinet secretary will reconsider that. I look forward to the rest of the debate and, I hope, to our coming to a consensus on multiyear funding. Labour will support the motion and the amendments. I move amendment S4M-06405.1, to insert at end: “; further notes that the Third Sector Early Intervention Fund was oversubscribed, meaning that many organisations missed out on core funding and is concerned that the interim funding to support those organisations will shortly run out; acknowledges that the third sector is operating under extreme pressure, providing essential services with limited resources, particularly as a result of decisions taken by the UK Government on welfare reform and the Scottish Government on local government spending, and praises all those who work and volunteer in the third sector.”

In two weeks’ time, the residents of East Renfrewshire will have the good fortune to welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities to open the Neilston community wind farm—they are probably cutting the bunting as I speak. On the face of it, the Neilston community wind farm is just a small, four-turbine wind farm on the outskirts of the village but, to my mind, it is a hugely significant and hugely encouraging project, as the venture will be jointly owned by the local community and the private company that will operate and manage it. Community ownership of renewables offers us the chance to make a real difference not just to our carbon reduction targets, but to our relationship with the big six power companies and to the needs of those people in this rich country of ours who are suffering from fuel poverty. It is an approach that I believe can help us to address some of the conflicts that exist in the planning system. Significantly, it offers local communities an income stream of an entirely different magnitude from that which is provided by even the most generous community benefit agreement. I will return to the Neilston example, but first I welcome this Conservative Party debate. Although I will move an amendment on behalf of Scottish Labour, there is much in the motion with which we can agree. The multibillion pound investment in our oil and gas industry is already bringing huge benefits to our economy, and although the costs of developing offshore renewables are still commercially daunting, the potential is clearly there. The motion also alludes to one of the more worrying developments in recent years—the increasing number of Scots who are suffering from fuel poverty. Families across the country are feeling the squeeze. Energy Action Scotland estimates that, this year, up to 900,000 households could be in fuel poverty and could struggle to afford adequate warmth. It is particularly galling that the hike in our heating bills has been accompanied by the posting of 11 per cent and 14 per cent increases in profits by Scottish Gas and Centrica respectively. Leaving aside the rather unconvincing assertion that the Tory Government has deliberately put in place a tax regime that is favourable to the oil and gas industry, I believe that all parties are agreed on the need for a balanced energy policy. The disagreement at the heart of the motion seems to be on the issue of how renewables can help us to strike that balance. On the face of it, we all agree that support for renewables is a good thing, but the Tory motion contains a carefully worded expression of concern about the dash for wind farms and the reaction that it has provoked. I recognise that, across Scotland, there have been some pretty badly planned and executed wind farm projects. We know of some where the turbines are too close to people’s houses and some where they cause flicker, noise and disruption. We also have examples of cases in which the initial approval of small wind farms has been seen by some communities as a Trojan horse for the addition of more turbines. However, the trouble is that I get the impression that, instead of trying to address those genuine concerns, the Tories are riding on the back of that political reaction.

I refer Mr Gibson to the consultation on the Government’s planning guidance. The point is that objections are coming in all the time. I make it clear that I am not against wind farms, but I recognise that some communities have genuine concerns about them, which we must address. I hope that the new guidance will do that. On the other hand, the Government’s language is sometimes highly gung-ho. The First Minister makes it sound as if the country is awash with renewables. We have plenty of potential, but so far the cost of developing offshore wind has been extremely prohibitive. We have very little offshore wind—of the 2.3GW of electricity that is generated by offshore wind farms in the UK, only 180MW is generated in Scotland. I mention that not only as a gentle reminder that the wind does not stop blowing at the border, but to flag up the gap between what is planned or promised in the way of renewables and what is being achieved, which in Scotland is almost entirely reliant on onshore wind. I am pleased to see the Government’s new guidance. That is a positive sign. It is clear that we need a more strategic approach that balances our need and desire to continue to develop onshore wind with a mechanism that allows communities to express themselves. That is where community ownership has a clear role to play—and I mean community ownership, not simply community benefit. Even at £5,000 per megawatt, community benefit can sometimes have the feel of a trade-off. Community ownership is a completely different approach. When a joint ownership approach is adopted, as is happening in Neilston, communities have far more control and are far less likely to feel exploited by commercial organisations. Such an approach fundamentally alters the perceived them-and-us relationship. From the point of view of the income that is generated, there is a world of difference. For example, the four turbines in Neilston are expected to generate for the local community an income of hundreds of thousands of pounds—or the same amount as is generated by the massive Whitelee wind farm. Unwanted wind farms that are owned by remote multinationals that enjoy huge profits while we struggle to keep our houses warm is not a model that will sit comfortably with the Scottish people.

Community ownership offers us the chance to control and share in the benefits that stem from our natural resources. I move amendment S4M-06407.3, to leave out from “, which is underpinned” to end and insert: “and the potential of offshore renewables; recognises the importance of developing a balanced energy policy using a mixed supply of energy sources; supports the further expansion of the renewables sector, with greater focus on achieving Scotland’s decarbonisation targets, and believes that the growth in renewables offers a once in a lifetime opportunity to develop community ownership, with all the benefits that brings to towns and villages across Scotland in terms of tackling fuel poverty, creating green jobs, addressing tensions in the planning process and generating substantial income streams for local communities.”

The question that I was trying to ask was simply whether the Government made the decision to introduce that favourable regime out of choice or whether it was forced to introduce it after the outcry and outrage that followed the previous year’s tax increases.

I, too, welcome the recent fall in the number of young unemployed people in Scotland and any addition or improvement to the apprenticeship programme that the minister can offer. Does the minister share my alarm at the almost 300 per cent increase in the claimant count for young people who have been unemployed for more than two years? Is there anything specific that the Government can do to help that particularly vulnerable and disadvantaged group?

The land and buildings transaction tax is, I believe, Scotland’s first new tax in 300 years. It stems from the conclusions of the Calman commission, established by Wendy Alexander and other party leaders, and it marks the first transfer of substantial fiscal power from Westminster to Holyrood under the Scotland Act 2012. The bill makes provision for a tax on land transactions in Scotland and is scheduled to replace the UK-wide stamp duty land tax from April 2015. I make it clear from the outset that Scottish Labour broadly supports the principles of LBTT as outlined in the bill and that we believe that the bill is an example of devolution working well. Given the political contention surrounding the whole issue of tax-raising powers and devolution, concern over rampant tax avoidance and worries over a lack of support for the housing industry, it is worth remarking on the level of cross-party political agreement that has been reached on the bill. The bill affords Scotland the opportunity to design a tax that suits our own needs, redresses some of the current taxation system’s flaws and frees the Scottish housing market from the market distortions of London and the south-east. No one will be surprised to hear that Scottish Labour supports the principles of a progressive approach to taxation. We believe that replacing stamp duty’s tiered or so-called slab structure with LBTT’s gradual rising scale or progressive approach is a welcome change to the existing tax system. The current slab taxation approach creates disincentives and marked inequities in the level of tax paid, particularly around the tax thresholds, where a difference of £1 in a selling price can lead to an extra tax burden that is measured in thousands of pounds. Not only will changing to a progressive scale lead—I hope—to a more equitable tax structure, it will help to eliminate the market distortions around tax thresholds and simultaneously facilitate the sale of properties that are valued at marginally above the thresholds. It should also mean that the tax applied to transactions will be more reflective of the total value of the property being sold, which it is hoped will result in a more robust and competitive Scottish property market. It is worth commenting that, as well as our reaching political agreement, witnesses from the public, private and voluntary sectors all broadly supported the principles underpinning LBTT. However, it is worth highlighting that ministers have yet to announce one of the most important matters of all, which is what the new tax rates will be. We know that there will be a 0 per cent band and at least two other higher bands, but it is far from clear when the cabinet secretary intends to make that information public. We are also led to expect the effect on the tax take from the change from stamp duty to LBTT to be broadly neutral, but that still leaves quite a deal of uncertainty. The Confederation of British Industry, among others, noted that a new Scottish system should take UK tax rates into account when setting banding levels, as any substantial difference between UK stamp duty and Scottish LBTT rates could have a direct effect on Scotland’s attractiveness as a place in which to work, live or invest. Several witnesses raised concerns—which the cabinet secretary and Mr Gibson, as convener of the committee, echoed—about the important judgment to be made when announcing the new rates. Particular sensitivity was expressed about the length of time between the announcement of the new tax and its implementation. Many recognised that that period must be short enough to prevent people from delaying or bringing forward transactions in a bid to game the system and therefore benefit from the time lag. Others suggested that that must be weighed against the need to prevent uncertainty in the market. The cabinet secretary suggested in his evidence and confirmed this afternoon that he might not announce the new banding levels even by as late as his budget of September 2014. Of course, it could be that the cabinet secretary believes that he will be too depressed in September 2014 to make any such decision. I hope—

I hope that Mr Mason can demonstrate a sense of humour.

Indeed. I was just about to suggest to the cabinet secretary that, if he indicates to the committee and to Parliament when he has agreed on a date, so that we can have some clarity on the matter, that will help. Every bit as important as the new taxation rates will be the agreement that is reached with Westminster on the consequent reduction in the block grant. I hope that the cabinet secretary will accept our assurances that we will support him in securing a good deal for Scotland. I should emphasise that a good deal for Scotland is one that is fair and is accepted by both sides as just. Basing agreement on figures from the Office for Budget Responsibility could be successful. I would want an agreement as robust as that secured by the no-detriment principle in the Calman commission’s other recommendations on tax. The Finance Committee fully agreed with the Government that the bill offers an opportunity to tackle the susceptibility of stamp duty to tax avoidance. The cabinet secretary and I have disagreed in the past over the Scottish Government’s support for tax dodgers such as Amazon, so I was very pleased to welcome and support the bill’s general anti-avoidance rule. We hope that the GAAR will minimise the exposure of LBTT and the forthcoming landfill tax to abusive tax arrangements and we believe that the rule should be robust and rigorously enforced. We support the bill’s general approach, which is to do away with most tax reliefs—again, in the hope that that will help to prevent tax avoidance. There has been much discussion and lobbying on the removal of sub-sale relief. The committee has—rightly—highlighted concern about that. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s earlier comment and his statement in response to the committee that the Government will work with key stakeholders to ensure that forward-funding arrangements are not subject to double taxation. Above-board transactions should not be unnecessarily punished or stifled by the new tax system. It will be even more important for the cabinet secretary to look long and hard at what he can do to promote more energy-efficient homes. The fact that zero-carbon homes relief has not been successfully applied for in Scotland does not merit the Government backsliding on the climate change cause. Measures to incentivise energy efficiency need to be re-explored, particularly if the Government is serious about making energy efficiency a more significant factor in home buyers’ priorities and if we are to cut carbon emissions by 42 per cent as planned.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s approach. I have sympathy for the non-renewal of a scheme for which there were no successful applications in Scotland. However, I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to a proposal, prepared for the UK Green Building Council, that has been circulated in the past couple of days by the Association for the Conservation of Energy. It proposes “an energy efficiency modifier which would be fiscally neutral ... but could be applied to LBTT relatively simply.” The proposal has emerged since Mr Booth and Ms Waterson addressed the committee. I urge the cabinet secretary to consider that, because it could give the Government an opportunity to address that priority.

Mr MacKenzie raises an interesting point about our desire as a country to reduce carbon emissions. If carbon emissions on larger homes are greater, we need to put greater emphasis on reducing them. It is an interesting dilemma; all that I would urge at this stage is that the cabinet secretary—and, perhaps, the committee members—look at the proposal, as the bill offers an opportunity to make progress on an issue on which I do not think that we are making much progress. We are doing very well on new-build houses, but we are not doing so well on retrofitting existing homes, and the matter is important. The Scottish Labour Party similarly welcomes the charities and charitable trust relief, which states that tax relief from LBTT will be offered only to charities that are registered with OSCR. As with other measures, we wish to clamp down on potential abuse of the tax system. However, great care must be taken to ensure that legitimate charities are not excluded from relief. Regarding the administration of the tax, Scottish Labour notes that the tax management bill proposes the creation of revenue Scotland as a non-ministerial body for the “care and management” of devolved tax receipts. The bill states that Registers of Scotland will also have a role in the collection of revenues. We echo the concern of witnesses that the division of duties between revenue Scotland and ROS should be clearly defined and that both organisations should be appropriately staffed and resourced. I echo Mary Scanlon’s comment that particular focus should be targeted at the IT systems that revenue Scotland and ROS will use for the delivery of LBTT. There is already widespread unease about the readiness and effectiveness of ROS’s IT system, as well as the current stamp duty online system, which has been described as overly complex. It is essential that adequate time and investment are directed into ensuring that the systems for LBTT are effectively designed, tested and proven fit for purpose. Scottish Labour broadly supports the principles of LBTT, as outlined in the bill. The bill is a clear indication that devolution is robust and effective, as it allows the Scottish Government the opportunity to design from scratch a new tax system that addresses many of the flaws in the existing stamp duty system. The new tax will be responsive to the markets in Scotland and will not be skewed by economic circumstances elsewhere in the UK. We await the two vital announcements—on tax rates and on the adjustment to the block grant—but we are happy to support the new measure.

It is none.

Will the cabinet secretary say what initiatives he has put in place to tackle long-term unemployment in Scotland and why they have so far been spectacularly unsuccessful?

The cabinet secretary is very happy to tell us about record numbers of applications to higher education. Will he tell us exactly how successful he has been with applications to Scotland’s colleges and further education institutions?

It is great to be back after the Easter recess— Members: It is great to have you back. I thank members on the Scottish National Party benches for that warm welcome. I believe that the SNP has secured this debate not so much with a view to taking a rigorous look at the public finances as with the express aim—or, I should say, the hope—of trying to embarrass the Labour Party. I will be honest though. Far from making any political capital, the embarrassment is that of the SNP. The subject of universal services has been considered in depth by the Christie commission, in the Beveridge report and, of course, by the Scottish Labour Party. It would appear that the only party that has not taken the issue seriously is the SNP, and yet it is the party of government. Even the language that the SNP uses says more about its mindset than it does about the Labour Party’s approach. It is always talking about cuts rather than about the values of our public services or the needs of people in our community. The very reason why it is important to look at how we deliver public services in this country is to protect those services. Many changes are taking place at the moment, not least those driven by the austerity agenda of the Tory Government at Westminster. Even if the SNP Government was to do or say nothing—although let us not kid ourselves, as it is already cutting all kinds of public support that is vital to so many lives—the shape of our public services would change, simply because demography and the nature of our society are changing. We want people to live longer, happier and healthier lives. To do that, we need to change the nature of how we deliver our services. The Scottish Labour Party has tried to generate a public debate on public services, but we have not come to any firm conclusions yet as we review our stance on policy. That said, I hope that if I give my thoughts on one policy, concessionary travel, that might illustrate why it is important to have an open and honest discussion. First, let us remember that free travel for older people was introduced not by the SNP or the Tories but by the Scottish Labour Party. It is a Labour Party policy, delivered by a Labour-led Government, with huge benefits for older people in Scotland. It still ranks as one of our most important achievements. At the last election, it was in fact SNP candidates who threatened the bus pass for older people throughout the country. Members: No! That is my recollection. Some of the loudest protesters are the ones who challenged the bus pass—[Interruption.]

What is happening in practice? While on the face of it, the SNP Government remains committed to keeping concessionary travel, in practice it is drastically reducing its support for bus transport. It has already reduced the bus operators grant and, crucially, the level of subsidy for the concessionary pass—from 67p in the pound to 58p in the pound. As all of us in the chamber and certainly all the people in our constituencies know, the net effect is that bus services are being cut. If they are honest, SNP back benchers know that, too. Just this week in my area, one of the most important routes has been cut from three times an hour to two times an hour. Several communities are entirely isolated in the evenings. That picture is repeated throughout the country. The trouble with the SNP’s approach is that essentially it is making a political calculation that it can foist the blame on to someone else: it can blame the bus companies, local authorities or the Tory Government. I am not saying that each of those bodies does not have a role to play, but the key decisions are being taken by SNP ministers. The cuts to the bus operators grant and in the level of subsidy from 67p to 58p are hugely significant and are directly the responsibility of Scottish Government ministers. The SNP is cut, cut, cutting all the time. In those circumstances, its supposed commitment to concessionary travel becomes a mask to hide behind rather than a genuine policy.

If Mr Hepburn would allow me to finish my remarks, he will see where I am heading. If he has not been listening, he may have conveniently forgotten that it was us who introduced the policy. There is no question about our commitment to the free bus pass—[Interruption.]

The question is about the SNP’s commitment to decent public transport and decent services for older people in this country, which are being cut by the SNP. The danger in not having an open and honest debate about the matter is that cuts will still happen, as they are happening now, but the agenda will be shaped by others. The language of the debate, for example, will be entirely that of the Tories—of reducing the supposed burden of the state. I do not have to look far to illustrate my point. We have just seen the introduction of radical changes to disability living allowance predicated not on the basis of need but on the basis of cost to the public purse. The Tory Government claims that there will be a needs-based assessment, but the policy started from the basis that the department wanted to make cuts of 20 per cent and was then designed to deliver them. It is little wonder that people are so sceptical and that there is so little trust in the Tory Government. If the SNP does not join the Labour Party in having a genuine discussion about how public services are shaped, we will not have services that reflect our values. We will not have services that liberate older people, give us independence in later years and allow people to live longer, healthier lives. We will have public services that are seen entirely as a drag or a burden on society, not as something beneficial. It is already far too easy to fall into the trap of saying that all taxation is bad and that the duty of Government is to keep spending to a minimum. Yes, public spending must be controlled, because it is too important to how we live our lives to treat irresponsibly, but taxation is the mark of living in a civilised society. I cannot say what the conclusion of our review will be, but I will be astonished if it does not allow us to reaffirm the Scottish Labour Party’s support for concessionary transport for older people that is delivered on an affordable and sustainable basis and which, in other words, secures bus services for older people rather than cutting them, which is what the SNP is doing. Of course, the same argument that is made about buses could be made about education. The much-vaunted SNP commitment to free tuition, which I heard the minister repeat, is totally undermined by the fact that 120,000 fewer Scots are attending college. What sort of party trumpets access for some to higher education while slamming the door to further education for so many others? All the work that we did in the first decade of the Parliament on narrowing the gap between the vocational and the academic is being undermined by an elitist approach that seems to consider Scotland’s colleges as a second-best option. Precisely the same argument can be made about prescription charges. While ministers brag about free prescriptions, thousands of Scots are being denied access to medicines that are available throughout the rest of the United Kingdom. Scotland used to be at the forefront of making available new treatments for patients, but under the SNP we now enjoy the worst reputation in the UK. We are in the farcical and almost certainly unsustainable position of having a health minister who, instead of sorting out a robust and fair system for accessing drugs, is sitting here responding to bad headlines by finding £21 million from somewhere in his budget. Goodness knows, the money is welcome, but what would be far more welcome would be an individual patient treatment request system that actually works. I do not want the SNP to boast to me, the Parliament or patients across Scotland that it is providing free prescriptions for all when the price of that policy is no prescriptions for the few who desperately need help.

The Labour Party is in the middle of a policy review. We will be more than happy to contest elections on the basis of policies that we think the Scottish public will find attractive—genuine policies that will provide care for our older people—and, at the same time, to reveal the hypocrisy of an SNP Government that pretends to the Scottish public that it is protecting services while all the time it is undermining them. The system of free personal care that the Labour Government introduced is being undermined; it is now reduced to 15-minute care visits. I genuinely believe that the hallmark—the defining characteristic—of this SNP Government will be the 15-minute care visit. That is not genuine care for older people but a system that strips away respect, dignity and genuine warmth. The SNP is hiding behind the front of alleged support for universalism, but all the while it is cutting those very services. However, there is something even more cynical, which is that we know that SNP ministers are having this very same debate but are keeping it secret from us. How do we know? Because the cabinet secretary, John Swinney, tells us so in the gift that keeps on giving—the leaked Cabinet paper with which John Swinney briefed his colleagues in secret. I will quote from a number of paragraphs. Paragraph 27 says: “there are also inherent real terms cost pressures within public sector budgets ... We will need to be mindful that these pressures could reduce the resources available to provide additional public services.” Paragraph 29 says: “All things being equal this means that some budgets will have to rise in real terms simply to ensure that demand for existing public services can be met.”

In private, John Swinney and front-bench colleagues are having this debate—[Interruption.]

They are having a debate about the real pressures that are facing the Government. What remedy does this same minister offer his colleagues? He says that we should “consider the affordability of State Pensions”. That has silenced SNP members. That has hit a nerve, has it? Considering the affordability of pensions is a bit more drastic than considering some public services. I quote exactly:

He says that we should constrain total increases in pay-bill costs “through management of the size of the workforce”. What does that mean—managing the size of the public sector workforce? It means public sector job cuts. We have here a Government that is basically saying that public sector jobs will go to save the political face of SNP ministers. That is not fair, it is not just and it does not protect the services or values of the people of Scotland. I urge Parliament to reject the minister’s cynical motion and to accept Labour’s amendment. I move amendment S4M-6225.3, to leave out from “and supports” to end and insert: “; notes the conclusions of the Independent Budget Review Panel and the Christie Commission on the Future Delivery of Public Services and several comments by John Swinney in a Scottish Government Cabinet paper, including recognising that ‘there are also inherent real terms cost pressures within public sector budgets’; considers that the Scottish Government has presided over a postcode lottery in care services, a rise in care charges and cuts to local bus services, decisions that have had a severe impact on people across Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to engage in an honest and constructive debate about the future of public services to ensure that Scotland’s future public spending is both fair and sustainable.”

Can Mr Coffey explain why, on headcount, the number of students in further education has dropped from just under 500,000 in 2007 to 320,000 today?

Those are Scottish Government figures.

Will Mark McDonald give way?

That is very convenient.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

What about cuts in college places?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I thank the cabinet secretary. When Mr Swinney said “the Scottish public sector may be able to limit individual pay increases over the short term and constrain total increases in paybill costs through management of the size of the workforce”, what does Mr Neil think that that meant?

Political consensus has been missing from the chamber over the past few days. I am not sure for how long it will last this afternoon, but I thought that I would begin, at least, by highlighting some of the areas on which we can reach agreement. Scotland is a strong and prosperous country. John Swinney ended his speech by listing a number of Scotland’s virtues. I point out that every area of strength that he listed for an independent Scotland is an area of strength for Scotland as part of the United Kingdom; it holds true that those are strengths for Scotland within the UK. We pull our weight within the UK and I believe that, with the right policies in place, we can look forward to the future with optimism and hope. This is a strong country, financially and otherwise, but it is clear that we can do more so that all in Scotland can share in that prosperity. We can tackle the inequality of wealth, health and happiness that in the past has been one of our greatest weaknesses. Where I begin to disagree with the Government motion—I have reached my third paragraph and I am already beginning to disagree—is that I believe that we will be even stronger if we work together within the UK and that we would be weaker apart from our neighbours and partners. I have always viewed our relationship with the rest of Britain as one of shared prosperity and shared risk; I do not take the rather odd view of it as being one of colonial dependency or look at it through the prism of subjugation, as some in the Scottish National Party do.

Stewart Stevenson has virtually proven the point that I am making, which is that the SNP views Scotland as some sort of colonial dependency. We are no such thing. We formed a union with the UK. We are part of a union and not a former colony. We are not subjugated by the UK; we are an equal partner in the UK. Stewart Stevenson approaches our membership of Britain in an absolutely bizarre way. The cabinet secretary quoted the recent GERS figures approvingly, but I would argue—as, I believe, would all the Opposition parties in the Parliament—that they entirely support my view that Scotland’s strength lies in our being part of the UK. If we look at the various tables that describe the Scottish economy, they often show that our figures are very much in the median in the UK as far as employment or economic growth is concerned. We are neither the richest nor the poorest part of the UK. I may occasionally talk the SNP down, but I have no interest in talking Scotland down. What I object to is the rather distorted interpretation of the GERS figures that they somehow show that we are staggeringly wealthy compared with the rest of the UK or that we are particularly hard done by. In fact, the way in which the SNP presents the GERS figures borders on the financially illiterate. Yet again, in the motion before us, the finance secretary takes the percentage of UK revenues that we generate, compares that with the percentage of UK expenditure in Scotland that we receive and somehow concludes not only that Scotland is better off than the rest of the UK but, bizarrely, that we should therefore be independent. However, Mr Swinney is not, of course, comparing like with like. By comparing percentages rather than the figures themselves, he conveniently ignores the fact that far more is spent in Scotland than we pay in revenue. At best, the SNP’s claim should be something like, “Our overdraft is not quite as bad as your overdraft,” but that is hardly the picture of financial strength that the SNP would like to portray. The sad fact is that Scotland has run a financial deficit for the past 25 years, and that is not something to be proud of. Earlier today, the First Minister said that Scotland would be better off by “£800 for every man, woman and child.” Then he said that we did not have the ability to invest or save that money. That is because it is a deficit. It is not surplus; it is a deficit. The SNP portrays it in entirely the wrong way.

I still entirely fail to see how we can save money that is a deficit; that would be an interesting choice. It borders on the misleading for the finance secretary not to reveal his projection that, within three years, we will—to borrow his language—be worse off than the rest of the UK. Paragraph 14 of the leaked document—the cabinet secretary’s paper to his Cabinet—says: “Including a geographical share of North Sea revenues, both Scotland and the UK are expected to run a net fiscal deficit in each of the years to 2016-17. Before 2016-17, Scotland is projected to have a smaller deficit”— having a “smaller deficit” means that we will be better off— “as a share of GDP, than the UK. However, in 2016-17, OBR forecasts suggest that Scotland would have a marginally larger net fiscal deficit than the UK.” In other words, in less than three years’ time, we will be worse off—not better off—than the UK. That is the time when we will supposedly be going independent. At that point, we will not have the “surplus”; we will be worse off.

Yet again, the cabinet secretary calls the figure a surplus. We are talking about a deficit, not a surplus. He looks backwards rather than forwards. The motion says that we will be better off and that we should base our future on that projection. If we are talking about Scotland’s future, his projections—which have been kept secret and shared with his Cabinet colleagues but not with the rest of Scotland or with the Parliament—are that we will be worse off than the UK in a matter of years. The notion that independence will make us somehow a more prosperous country is an assertion, and it is debatable. I know that it is debatable because John Swinney recognised that in his Cabinet paper. He clearly recognises the uncertainty, the risk and the volatility and unpredictability of oil prices that accompany independence, yet he chooses to airbrush that entirely out of the rose-tinted vision of independence that he portrays to the Scottish public. As a country, our largest trading partner is the rest of the UK. Scotland’s financial sector—our banks, investment companies and insurance companies—is a vital part of our financial strength. Those companies are united in recognising that we are better together. That fact was demonstrated in spades when some of those banks were threatened with collapse. It was the strength of the UK economy and the UK tax base that allowed us to work together to ensure that they survived.

We need only look at Cyprus today to remind ourselves what happens if confidence in banks disappears. I do not want to hear about the never-never land policies that will never be implemented in Scotland or to hear assertions about how everything would be wonderful if we controlled the levers of power. I want to know what would be done with that power. The Government has power over colleges now and it abuses that power. The country’s real strength is our people—their ingenuity, inventiveness and entrepreneurial spirit—but what happens? The Scottish Government sends the message to those people that it will not invest in their education unless they are going to university—into higher education. [Interruption] The cabinet secretary pretends that he does not know what happens because of his decisions.

The cabinet secretary has cut college budgets. As a result, there are 120,000 fewer Scots in college now than there were when the SNP came to power five years ago.

The SNP is telling Scots to go to university and not to go to college, because it is not worth investing in narrowing the academic and vocational divide. I want to know what the Scottish Government will do now, with the powers that it has, to improve and invest in our economy and to invest in small businesses and our people. It should not talk about some future that is based on the distorted figures that the cabinet secretary presents. I move amendment S4M-06016.2, to leave out from “(GERS) report” to end, and insert: “which, it believes, provides further evidence that Scotland is better off as part of the UK; recognises that the UK is Scotland’s main trading partner, and that, according to the latest Global Connections Survey, total sales from Scotland to the rest of the United Kingdom were worth £45 billion in 2011 alone; further notes John Swinney’s admission in a recently published Cabinet paper that, ‘in 2016/17, OBR forecasts suggest that Scotland would have a marginally larger net fiscal deficit than the UK’, and that in an independent Scotland there ‘would be more volatility in public spending than at present’; is concerned that, according to the Scottish Government’s Draft Budget 2013/14, projected investment in infrastructure projects through the Non Profit Distributing model has been reduced by £333 million in 2012/13, and will be reduced by a further £348 million in 2013/14; believes that the Scottish Government could strengthen Scotland’s economy by supporting colleges rather than cutting their budgets, investing in Scotland’s housing supply, making full use of their own NPD capital investment programme, and ensuring a level playing field for Scottish businesses bidding for public sector contracts.”

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to hear Mr Swinney’s comments. Has he changed his mind since writing his Cabinet paper? In that paper, he wrote: “The OBR forecasts set out alongside the UK’s March budget have not been seriously challenged by the industry or by independent commentators”.

11. To ask the Scottish Government when it will launch its consultation on the use and administration of the resource that it will receive as a result of the United Kingdom Government’s decision to close the independent living fund in 2015. (S4O-01935)

Will the minister indicate his thinking at this stage on the Scottish Government’s intention for the fund and on the consultation questions, including on whether the fund will be open to new applicants? If he is not able to answer that question, will he at least give us the fundamental assurance that the consultation will start from the premise that no current recipient of the ILF will be disadvantaged—in other words, no one who currently receives ILF will lose it?

It is customary to begin parliamentary debates by saying how pleased one is to be participating. However, I will not repeat that sentiment this afternoon. In fact, it is difficult not to be deeply sceptical about the SNP’s reasons for and motivation behind calling today’s debate. There are some in the SNP, as there are in Labour and other parties, whose politics have been shaped more by the cause of nuclear disarmament than by any other issue. Some might view the renewal of Trident as having such importance that it should at all times have precedence over any other pressing matters. The commitment of members such as John Finnie and Jean Urquhart is such that they were prepared to leave their party over its equivocation on the issue. The timing of today’s debate, however, seems to owe as much to the difficulties in which the SNP has found itself in recent weeks as it does to the topicality or otherwise of Trident renewal. The revelation that John Swinney and other senior figures in the SNP are aware of the uncertainty that surrounds Scotland’s finances post-independence, the recognition of the unpredictability and volatility of oil prices, and the worries over the risk that independence potentially poses to jobs and pensions are just the latest in a series of setbacks to the independence cause that have put the SNP on the defensive. That appears to be at least part of the reason why we are having an entirely spurious debate on Trident this afternoon.

I will take the minister, or Stuart McMillan.

If a question could sum up the pointlessness of this afternoon’s debate, that one from Mr McMillan would take the biscuit. I point out to Mr McMillan that this is not the only place where Scotland has representatives. I object to the line that, somehow, the members of the SNP sitting here have entire moral authority or the authority of representative democracy on the matter, when that is not the case whatsoever. Keith Brown rose— In a minute, minister. If I was one of the many people who have devoted their lives to campaigning to rid not just this country but the world of nuclear weapons, I would be worried that my cause was being hijacked and used to further the SNP’s political ambitions. I would be concerned that today’s discussion of Trident is simply a proxy for a debate on independence, rather than a debate in its own right. Few members, if any, do not wish Britain to help rid the world of its nuclear weapons. Most of us will have given serious thought to how Scotland and Britain can set an example and take a lead on the matter, as we are conscious of the need to promote stability and lessen the chances of nuclear weapons being used in any context around the world. The United Kingdom is one of the most important signatories to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, which has more signatories than any other weapons treaty and is arguably one of the most successful arms limitation and disarmament agreements in history. By working with others, the UK has helped to make significant progress in reducing nuclear weapon stocks. Since the end of the cold war, the combined arsenals of the UK, the USA, Russia and France have been cut by 75 per cent. The previous Labour Government reduced the number of warheads in each Trident submarine from 96 to 48 and the number of operationally available warheads from 300 to fewer than 160. At least partly as a result of such actions, my children are not growing up in the shadow of an imminent nuclear strike or facing the cold war threat that would have been familiar to some in previous generations.

The minister has introduced a new line of argument, on the cost of Trident. The interesting thing about that argument is that that is not a question of moral leadership. If we get rid of nuclear weapons because we want to make a statement, that is one thing; if we get rid of them because we cannot afford them or because we choose to spend the money on something else, that is a morally ambiguous statement. [Interruption.]

That sums up the ambiguity at the heart of the SNP. The cold war may be over, but democratic accountability has yet to take root in China. Russia and America still hold large numbers of nuclear weapons, and I need hardly remind members of the developments in North Korea and Iran. Those are serious matters, and it is clear that many in this country hold strong and conflicting views on how we can best address them. I do not claim to hold a monopoly of wisdom on nuclear disarmament, and I fully recognise that it remains an issue that provokes serious consideration and discussion in the Labour movement, but the purported unanimity of the SNP on such a heated issue, until recently at least, always struck me as slightly implausible at best. I was not surprised to see the fracturing of that brittle façade at the party’s last conference. I understand the claim, or at least the hope, of many campaigners that disarmament by Britain would give our country additional moral authority but, as the SNP has discovered, abandoning our nuclear deterrent while hiding behind the nuclear umbrella of NATO is an altogether more ambiguous signal. I simply quote the SNP’s former national secretary Duncan Ross, who said that the NATO plan “undermines our position as a party of principle and integrity. It is fundamentally dishonest that we could join Nato and then get rid of nuclear weapons.”

This week, Johann Lamont highlighted that there are any number of debates to be heard on issues over which the Parliament has authority, including the implementation of the Leveson findings, and agreed to swap time with the SNP and bring back the issue of Trident at another time, but the SNP did not agree to that. That says everything about the SNP’s motivations today.

I certainly did not think that the SNP was joking—independence is a deadly serious matter. However, how does the SNP’s desire to get rid of Trident square with its desire to remain as a member of NATO?

Those views were laid out to the SNP in a letter, which offered to give up our debating time to debate Trident if the SNP would debate an issue of the day—the Leveson report. Why did the SNP not use its time to debate Leveson this week?

Was the cabinet secretary present at the recent meeting of the Scottish Cabinet at which John Swinney presented a paper on the finances of independence, which has miraculously found its way into the hands of the better together campaign? On the subject of oil and gas revenues, does he agree with the following statement from Mr Swinney: “This high level of volatility creates considerable uncertainty in projecting forward Scotland’s fiscal position”?

I quoted John Swinney’s paper. [Interruption.]

I thank the cabinet secretary and the Finance Committee convener for their opening remarks. Last month, three separate families wrote to me or came to see me at a surgery to say how worried they are about a particular care home in East Renfrewshire. Their concern was not about the standard of care, nor about the level of staffing or the support that is offered to their loved ones—quite the reverse, because on all counts it was clear that the care for adults with learning difficulties that is provided by those who work at Netherlee house continues to be first class and warmly appreciated by the residents and their relatives alike. Instead, the concern was about the prospect of losing that model environment without knowing exactly what will replace it. I will not go into all the details, but the move to self-directed funding coupled with our greater emphasis on independent living has meant that local authorities will no longer fund new placements in that communal setting. The home will have to change, but the housing association that owns the property has no money to make the adaptations. The home is used by three neighbouring local authorities, but all of them are struggling with fixed or declining social care budgets. Rehousing the current residents of Netherlee house is unlikely to save the councils money. Moving the residents to separate flats will almost certainly prove to be a more expensive option. There is no particular villain of the piece. The partners that are involved are caring and well intentioned, and the policy objectives are desirable—certainly over the long term—but the net effect is to create huge anxiety and upset. In the context of the demographic changes that the Finance Committee highlighted in its excellent report, that example illuminates at least some of the challenges that our public authorities face. We need to adapt our housing stock to meet our population’s needs, but the housing budget was cut last year and will reduce again next year. We support preventative spend, but the savings might not be realised for decades to come and, in the meantime, the process of change might involve greater cost, not less. All of that is taking place against a backdrop of austerity and an attack by some on the whole ethos of state-run public services. Those reforms might result from policy directives, but they are not planned in any co-ordinated or joined-up manner. The Finance Committee’s report is a welcome contribution to one of the most important public debates that our country faces. It can sometimes be difficult even to discuss demographic change and an ageing population without on the one hand hearing scaremongering or posturing or on the other drifting into what can sound like ageism. My starting point is simply that the problems that our society faces are caused not by age distribution but by uneven wealth distribution. The issues might have been thrown into stark relief by demographic change, but they are not burdens—they are simply choices, difficult though they may be. To be honest, I found parts of the report genuinely encouraging. Since I was born, my life expectancy seems to have increased by more than 10 years. Living as I do in East Renfrewshire, my expectation is that the quality of my life will be excellent, as it is the part of the country in which people spend the lowest number of years in poor health. If only I was prepared to go the whole hog and change sex, who knows what the future might hold? I hope that most of us will look at demographic change in a similar fashion—I do not mean in relation to changing sex; I mean as something that is to be celebrated rather than feared. Unfortunately, the flip-side of the statistics is that to be born or brought up in some parts of Scotland is to suffer from health inequality of the most invidious kind. The economic adviser to the committee, Professor David Bell, vividly reminded the committee of the train line in Glasgow, along which life expectancy for men declines by two years and for women by a year and a half with every station between Jordanhill and Bridgeton. In fact, the Finance Committee noted that “not only does Scotland have one of the lowest life expectancies in Western Europe but, according to the Scottish Government, ‘the gap between life expectancy and healthy life expectancy has, for men, actually been widening.’” I was pleased that the committee went on to ask “what, if any, comparative research the Scottish Government has commissioned to explain the reasons for this” and concluded that it “supports the recommendation of Audit Scotland that the NPF”— the national performance framework— “is updated to include national indicators to specifically monitor progress in reducing health inequalities.” It struck me that there is clearly a broad sense of agreement across the parties on how we approach many of those potentially thorny issues. That is not, or certainly should not be, unusual in the Parliament. However, there is far less consensus about how we translate that supposedly shared agenda into action. For example, we are all anxious not to portray older people as a problem and instead to welcome the many ways in which our society could gain from the shifting pattern of age distribution. We recognise the benefits of independent living and supporting older people in the community, including the fact that it helps to reduce hospital admissions. We are trying to place greater emphasis on quality of life, not just life expectancy. We agree about the desirability of integrating health and social care, and there is widespread support for the preventative spending agenda. However, our political dialogue rarely reflects any of that agreement. The Christie commission, the Beveridge report and now the Parliament’s Finance Committee have all considered the changing demography of Scotland and reached broadly similar conclusions about the need for a serious and informed debate about the way that we deliver public services, but when the Labour Party mentions the subject it is caricatured as some sort of attack on universalism. The section on housing in the committee’s report highlights the paradox of a Government that identifies the investment that needs to be made in adaptations but does not then will the means to make the change. I refer not simply to budgetary constraints—I agree with what Bruce Crawford said on that—but to the lack of a delivery mechanism. In fact, the report “asks why there would appear to be a lack of specific measurable targets within the housing for older people strategy and on what basis the effectiveness of the strategy will be measured.” The report is excellent on health inequalities, housing and planning, but I am slightly less convinced by the section on pensions. Some of the pension changes that are coming from Westminster are driven by demographic change. Others, including the bulk of the increase in contributions to the public sector schemes, are more to do with the current chancellor’s approach to Government finances than long-term pension planning. However, it is important that we continue to have a shared public debate on the matter, and I welcome the fact that the committee raised the issue. As the committee points out, there is simply not enough long-term planning taking place in our public authorities. It is difficult to break the short-term political cycle but, if those of us who are part of supposedly social democratic parties cannot agree on a long-term strategy to help our public services to adapt, we will find ourselves descending into a cycle of cuts and crises. To quote from the report again: “The Committee notes that shifting the balance of care will require a shift in resources which may not always be popular and recommends the need to build a political consensus around this issue which will require strong leadership from both the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament.” To my mind, strong leadership means moving on from reports such as this that highlight the extent of the problem to the Scottish Government laying out what it sees as the potential solutions. At the report highlights, if the City of Edinburgh Council can draw up plans suggesting where we might want public services to be in 10 years’ time, there is little or no excuse for the Scottish Government not to do so. The care provider, the housing association and the three local authorities that support residents in Netherlee house in my constituency have agreed to work together and, crucially, to involve the families concerned to find the best way to continue to care for some very vulnerable individuals. That does not mean that everything will automatically be all right—to be frank, the families remain apprehensive and slightly sceptical—but the Scottish Government could do worse than take a leaf out of their book, take a similar practical approach and recognise the responsibility for leadership and planning that rests on its shoulders. I commend the committee for its report.

Does Mr Swinney accept that looking at such issues is a way of reaffirming our support for those policies? [Interruption.]

I am glad to see that we are having the open debate that was mentioned. That is a way of reaffirming our faith in concessionary travel and the benefits that it provides to the community. I remind the chamber that the policy was introduced by Labour, so our support for it is not in question. Mr Swinney says that he presented a balanced budget to Parliament, but all over Glasgow—and, I believe, across Scotland—there are cuts to bus services. There is a specific link between the support that is given to concessionary travel and the cuts to bus services. What is happening is that we are losing support—

10. To ask the Scottish Government, in terms of headcount, how many college places for learners aged 25 and over have been lost in the last three years. (S4O-01838)

I am surprised that the minister does not recognise that there is a place for headcount, given that it shows the number of people who are going to college and are benefiting from a college education. Let me come to my supplementary question. Even though it is important that we put an emphasis on providing places for younger learners—particularly in light of the difficulties that they are experiencing in the current recession—does the minister recognise that an unintended consequence of such a focus could be to have a displacement effect on older learners, unless there is a policy to provide supplementary or additional places to what is currently available? Given those concerns, does the minister recognise that it is important that we put in place policies to support older learners and do not allow them to be unduly squeezed in this manner?

The committee’s report and the debate have revealed a tentative consensus. Mary Scanlon said that she welcomed the tone of the debate “so far”. Marco Biagi said that “consensus” was perhaps too strong a word; he was right to say that the committee reached a “common position”. He then went on to dwell on the divisions, which I hope that I will not do too much. The report reveals agreement on the direction of travel but a surprising level of disagreement on how to get to where we are going and on the scale of the obstacles in the way. I will start with planning. It is clear that there is general support across Scotland for onshore wind, but the committee accurately identified the concern among some local communities about being overwhelmed by development. It would be unfortunate indeed if, in our genuine desire to promote renewables and tackle carbon emissions, we created an incentive for small landowners to overpopulate the countryside with single or small numbers of highly visible but environmentally unhelpful wind turbines. On behalf of the committee, Murdo Fraser highlighted the need for spatial plans to be developed in every area of Scotland. In an excellent speech, Iain Gray flagged up the problems that are created when democratically accountable local authorities reject applications for wind farms only to find those decisions being repeatedly overturned by the Scottish Government. As he concluded, the net effect of central Government seeming to approve every application, regardless of the circumstances, is to undermine confidence in the system and to provoke greater resistance to wind farms generally.

I think that Mr Gibson points out that such decisions are not easy, but surely we should trust the local authorities to work in harmony with developers and the Scottish Government instead of working against one another. For the Scottish Government to come in heavy-handed and pretend that it knows better than local communities does our shared objectives no good whatever. There is room for planned development in Scotland, but I would not have thought that overdevelopment was something that any of us would wish to see. In the past, the Parliament has united on the need to ensure a fairer system of transmission charges to and from our islands, and the committee did so again. Liam McArthur and others have pointed out that the development of not just onshore wind farms on our islands, but offshore wind and potential future wave and tidal energy projects depend on the establishment of island connections to the grid with sufficient capacity to cope. The charging regime has yet to be finally agreed by Ofgem and industry, and our message that the Scottish islands must not be disadvantaged is a clear one. I welcome the fact that the minister said that he was keen to work consensually to resolve the situation. However, I have a slight concern on the issue, which follows on from the publication this week of the Scottish Government’s supplementary response to its consultation on the renewables obligation banding review. As the committee recommended, if the transmission charging regime cannot be amended, there is still a duty on all parties, including the Scottish Government, to find a remedy to the problem. The ROC system could have been part of the remedy, but this week’s paper failed to address the issue at all. In fact, a number of the Government’s conclusions on ROCs left me worried, particularly on biomass. I welcomed Alison Johnstone’s comments on the role of heat but, like my colleague Rhoda Grant, I was slightly unsure about where the committee was heading in its conclusions on renewable heat. I thought that the minister agreed with Labour and many others that there is a role for small-scale biomass and potentially for good-quality combined heat and power generators, but his announcement this week gives the green light to develop plant that operates at 35 per cent efficiency, despite the European recommendation of a 70 per cent efficiency rate. In the past, the minister’s excuse has been to highlight a 10MW cap on power-only plants, but he now appears to have raised that by 50 per cent. I hope that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will give the matter further consideration when the regulations on that come before it. Several members raised the importance of securing community benefit, and there is an excellent section in the committee’s report on that. As Rhoda Grant highlighted, the Scottish Government could do more to promote community ownership—rather than just benefit—by tackling the costs and red tape that get in the way. Perhaps the most important issue that is raised in the report is the skills shortage. Witnesses to the committee were unanimous in flagging up the seriousness of the problem, with several stating clearly that we will not meet the renewables targets without an appropriately skilled workforce. Evidence to the committee identified some of the problems that stand in the way of building the workforce, such as competition from other industries and the failure of workers to transfer from the oil and gas sector. The committee went on to talk about how we might promote the science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects at an earlier age and challenge the gender segregation that still puts many young women off a career in engineering. I agree with Margaret McDougall that the Scottish Government’s actions in clearly favouring higher education over further education and in funding universities but not colleges send out a pretty negative message. All the work that we did in the first eight years of the Parliament to break down the academic-vocational divide and to build the knowledge economy is undone with that decision to cut college funding. I had to laugh, or at least give a wry smile—I would not laugh at the report—when I read the committee’s conclusions on electricity market reform. It is not that I disagree with the concerns that are raised about the complexity of introducing the new contracts for difference and the potential destabilising effect that that might have on securing investment in renewables; what made me smile was the contrast between the report’s constant references to the damaging effects of uncertainty created by EMR being followed, a matter of paragraphs later, by the admittedly dissented conclusion that apparently there is no such uncertainty over the impact of the referendum. My colleague Iain Gray clearly also saw the same unintended ironic contrast. The committee is willing to flag up the uncertainty of EMR, but rejects all other uncertainties or risks, despite having much evidence on them. Presiding Officer, I want briefly to mention—

I do not have enough time, so I suggest to the minister that the words are fine and, if words were all it takes, we would be there already, but we need action. I will support the Scottish Government if it actually follows through with actions that overcome the obstacles.

I think that the debate will be generally consensual. The Labour Party certainly wants the UK Government to take action, but I do not think that there is anything in our amendment that calls on the UK Government to take action. The amendment is limited to actions that the Scottish Government can and should take.

The Daily Record has served us well this week by revealing the deeply troubling extent of Scotland’s debt problem. As part of an investigation, alongside Citizens Advice Scotland, it uncovered that we are “drowning in ... debt” to such an extent that “nearly 400 Scots a day are seeking help” to deal with their debt worries. The people quoted by the Daily Record had contacted a citizens advice bureau, and many said that they had gone without food or fuel because of the severity of their debts. This is the Scotland in which we live—a Scotland of debt spiralling out of control and of the working poor choosing between paying off what they owe and putting food on the table. Last week, we had a useful and constructive debate on the cost of living and on payday loans. There was almost universal acknowledgement of the shameful practices that are being used to exploit people who are in debt and have run out of other options. In that debate, the minister and other members rightly highlighted the cycle of debt in which individuals become trapped when they are unable to pay back the loans that they have accrued, often taking out one loan to pay off another. The scale of the debt problem in Scotland is staggering. There were 3,855 personal insolvencies in the third quarter of 2012. During the same period, just over 1,000 new applications were approved for the debt arrangement scheme—an increase of 21.5 per cent on the same quarter in the previous year. I can just about recall the debate in 2002 in which my colleague Richard Simpson and the then Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace introduced to Parliament the bill that created the debt arrangement scheme—I hate to remind the minister, but the Scottish National Party abstained on the vote. However, then, as now, it was recognised that debt management, rather than a simple focus on enforcement, is the important factor in dealing with debt. As a minister notes in his foreword to the DAS review, the scheme is now entering its ninth year as the only statutory debt management tool in the UK. As with any scheme, it is right that it is being reviewed. We support many of the Government’s proposals. The extension of the scheme to couples was a welcome step forward, as were the proposals to increase the length of the payment holiday. Today’s proposal of a moratorium on interest payments—in other words, the freezing of interest and debt from the moment someone applies for a debt arrangement scheme, and not just from when it is approved—is similarly welcome. We hope that that will prevent the DAS from inadvertently driving some people into the arms of payday lenders. Given that the suggestion initially came from Mike Dailly of Govan Law Centre last year and was whole-heartedly endorsed at the time by my colleague Kezia Dugdale, I am delighted that the minister was listening and has taken the idea forward. Other proposals came out of last year’s DAS review but there will not be a huge amount of detail available until we have sight of the Government’s proposed bankruptcy bill. I understand that the Government may take forward other issues, such as a single Scotland-specific common financial tool, and that it may propose increasing the minimum debt level to £3,000 for most individuals. We look forward to seeing the detail in due course. In his opening speech, the minister talked about what he cannot do, but as my colleague Kezia Dugdale noted last week, there is certainly much more that the Government can do here and now. I hope that the Government will support our amendment, which sets out a number of measures that could curb high-interest short-term lending. One such measure would be the use of the Government’s social advertising spend, which was almost £1 million last year, to highlight the options that are open to people who are teetering on the edge of the debt cliff. Only £23,000 pounds of that spend was used to highlight debt issues in 2011-12. In the meantime, Wonga, which is undoubtedly one of the most cynical and predatory of the payday loan companies, has grown its advertising budget from approximately £22,000 in 2009 to £16 million in 2011. I would welcome clarification of where the minister stands on the suggestion about social advertising spend. He showed us a copy of the Daily Record in which the Government has advertised. However, in replies to my colleague Kezia Dugdale, he seems to suggest that there are barriers to action in that area. A guarantee loan fund for credit unions would offer them the security and sustainability to expand into new communities. They would be able to carry out far more outreach work to ensure that people are as aware of the availability of credit unions as they are of payday loan companies. I recognise that we would have to find a way to finance such a loan fund, but we could start with the Government simply underwriting a relatively small amount, allowing credit unions to serve a section of the population that is not just underserved but vulnerable to exploitation. Alternatively, if the assistance or guarantee took the form of a loan, which could be repaid, that would be another good and affordable starting point. I am sure that I do not have to point out that a measure that stops people falling into greater debt and prevents bankruptcy, homelessness or family break-up is very much in keeping with the preventative spend agenda of the Christie commission and others. Such a measure would stop people having to take out debt arrangement schemes in the first place, because they would not have fallen into debt. We need to do more to point people in the direction of financial advice. On that note, I am still a little baffled as to why it took the Government more than a year to pass on the debt advice money that was made available across the rest of the UK to citizens advice bureaux but which was not made available in Scotland until recently. There are other practical steps that we could take, some of which were outlined in the parliamentary debate last week—in fact, some of them were outlined by SNP back benchers. For example, we could prevent payday loan shops from even opening up, as some local authorities are doing; we could use local trading standards teams to clamp down on the mis-selling of payday loans; we could stop payday loan companies advertising loans on publicly controlled computers or websites; and we could emulate the action taken against the sale of tobacco and cigarettes and begin to treat the sale of high street high-interest loans in a similar manner.

I am not sure that the minister’s question reveals a very consensual way of working. This is not a specific budget ask. We are suggesting that we would be willing to sit down with the minister and representatives of money advice bureaux across the country, Citizens Advice Scotland, Govan Law Centre and others—particularly the credit unions—to work out how we could fund the scheme that we have proposed. We would work with the minister in a consensual manner. I made two suggestions about how our proposal could be funded: one related to underwriting and the other related to the provision of a loan. The point that I am trying to make is that both methods are extremely affordable. We would give the minister our support if he was willing to explore that area. Having said earlier that I was pleased to hear that the minister had followed Govan Law Centre’s advice in making today’s announcement, he could follow its advice again. The centre has made further suggestions, as part of a fast-track debt arrangement scheme that would further clip the wings of the payday loan companies—for example, treating interest and capital separately would be worth exploring. At present, for the purposes of establishing a debt payment plan, those with payday loan debt have all the penalty clauses and the rollover interest payments accumulated into one, unlike credit union debt, for example, which is restricted to the original capital and a relatively small interest charge. There are still access problems, which my colleague Kezia Dugdale alluded to, and I welcome the minister’s comment that he will take action to follow those up. We will support the Government’s motion. I hope that the minister will support our amendment and our practical and affordable measures to alleviate the scourge of short-term high-interest lending. I move amendment S4M-05586.1, to insert at end: “; believes that more can be done by both the Scottish Government and local authorities to curb high interest short-term lending including warning against the dangers of high interest lending through social advertising spend and money advice networks; accepts that there is a demand for credit but a lack of affordable solutions, and believes that credit unions should be supported with a guarantee loan fund to offer affordable and accessible alternatives.”

It is difficult to find the words to respond to John Swinney’s budget bill. [Interruption.]

It is difficult to do other than use the word “disappointing”. John Swinney’s reaction is disappointing. A few announcements have been made, but if he expects the country to be grateful for the fact that he has not quite fully restored the cuts that he made last year, he has another think coming. Anyone who is looking for something that will revitalise the Scottish economy, get businesses growing again, shake the lethargy out of the country, provide the jobs that we need and create the opportunities for young people that they are crying out for will have greeted John Swinney’s words with dismay. There is nothing new—nothing fresh—in what he has said. We are stuck with the same prescription that the Scottish National Party has offered us for two years running. For two years running, the SNP has promised jobs and growth, yet there have been no jobs and no growth. We know that the Government’s approach is not working because its own statistics tell us that it is not working. We know that it is not working because construction is in decline, the economy is flatlining and Scottish families across the country are feeling the squeeze. Even if we look at the budget simply as a way of ameliorating the worst of the Tory cuts rather than as an engine for growth, we find that it is doing nothing to protect the Scottish people. The most painful decisions have been left to be taken by public servants working on the front line in our health services or local authorities. The net effect will be the same: cuts to public services; fewer classroom assistants; carers with less and less time to spend with vulnerable elderly patients; and working families who are struggling because their pay has been frozen and the cost of living is increasing. Scottish Labour did not ask for the earth. We did not indulge in backroom political horse-trading or make unattainable demands. We had three simple asks on colleges, housing and rail. We had straightforward and affordable demands that we believed would make a difference to people’s lives and to the economy. On colleges, in the midst of a recession that has seen Scotland return to unacceptable levels of unemployment, by which the young have been hit particularly badly, I do not think that it is too much to ask the finance secretary to restore the £35 million in cuts that he has inflicted on further education. Is it too much to expect our colleges to provide places for those people who are seeking to retrain and reskill to make themselves more employable in a difficult jobs market? We know that 70,000 fewer students are attending Scotland’s colleges than was the case when the SNP came to power. Despite the denials of the cabinet secretary and the First Minister, we know that thousands more are being turned away from the college places that could help them. John Swinney used the word “additional” to describe the £10 million that he has provided. It is not additional; it simply represents an attempt to ameliorate the cuts for which he is responsible. He dresses it all up in the language of reform, but it is not reform to turn people away from colleges or to shut the door in young people’s faces.

Mr McDonald should pay a little more attention to what I say in the chamber rather than make up his own press releases. [Interruption.]

We have a Scottish Futures Trust that was supposedly going to spend £500 million on capital projects but has spent £20 million. [Interruption.]

Scottish Labour has made it clear that the cabinet secretary has the capacity—the powers and the finance—at his disposal to fund all those commitments and more. On housing—one of the most important sectors in the economy for sparking growth, creating employment and getting a country working again, as well as addressing a pressing social need—why does the cabinet secretary not use the full £350 million of net capital available to make a real difference and inject some real energy into the market? Mr Swinney clearly recognises that he has got it wrong because, in the past year alone, he has reversed his cuts four times. Today’s announcement makes it five times. He has revisited the matter five times. How many times does he have to admit that he is wrong? Why does he not just stand up and say sorry? Why does he not do something more: work with colleagues in this party and across the Parliament who have ideas and will make the economy work?

Mr Swinney tries to make a virtue out of the fact that he fulfils his legal obligation to balance the budget and then has the nerve to talk about stewardship of the economy when he has presided over a country that has gone into recession twice and is in the middle of the worst unemployment and a budget—[Interruption.]

The SNP members clearly do not like to hear the truth when it is given to them. They clearly do not like to recognise the failure of their own actions. [Interruption.]

We have a cabinet secretary who has promised a budget for jobs and growth and not made one shred of difference to the Scottish economy. The Scottish economy has not improved and is exactly the same as the rest of the UK economy but the cabinet secretary says that he is making a difference with his choices. I suggest yet again and remind the SNP that all it has to do is deliver on its manifesto promises sometimes. It was the SNP that suggested that it would spend £1 billion on rail infrastructure delivering the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme. All we are suggesting is that it deliver on that promise and spend that money delivering jobs, growth and infrastructure to get people into work and to their jobs. That is a simple ask and, yet again, there is no more—

Mr Stewart should sit down. [Interruption.]

If I thought that any answers would come from the SNP back benches, I would be absolutely delighted to hear Mr Stewart. We had three simple asks—on colleges, housing and rail. They have not come out of the blue and we have not sprung surprises on the cabinet secretary. We have argued the case for more than a year and have not been alone. We have been joined by the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, the Scottish Building Federation, the Confederation of British Industry, Shelter, colleges and the National Union of Students. We are not trying to create artificial or fictional divisions with the SNP. The point is that the SNP and Labour can agree that they disagree that there should be an austerity approach. However, Scottish Labour believes that the finance secretary has the powers and finance at his disposal to make a difference but is making the wrong choices with those powers. Instead of concentrating on the economy and unemployment, John Swinney is content to sit back and blame Westminster for the cuts. Meanwhile, he fobs off the worst excesses of his decisions on local authorities and lets our councils take the blame. I will give one example of Mr Swinney’s approach: the huge increase in the amount of severance and redundancy payments over which the Scottish Government has presided since it came to office. It has emerged that, since the SNP came to power, it has allowed more than £600 million to be spent getting rid of people in the public sector. It has spent £600 million pushing people out the door when it should have been finding employment for them.

One of the most important policies that Labour has been promoting is a Scottish future jobs fund—a flagship wage subsidy programme. We were delighted when we heard John Swinney’s announcement in September that he might be heading in that direction. It was not asking a lot to expect some detail on that programme between September and now, but what have we found? Instead of £15 million on a wage subsidy programme, that figure is totally dwarfed by the amount of money that John Swinney is paying out to get rid of people from the public sector. On colleges alone, when we were asking for £35 million for the restoration of revenue cuts, we found out that he spent £41 million on getting rid of staff and lecturers in our colleges. All that the Government does is make a series of announcements and reannouncements on projects that are not happening. Instead of shovels in the ground, we have the laughable sight of the First Minister reading out project after project, none of which is actually being built, except possibly in his imagination.

If the SNP cannot make a difference using the powers of the Parliament, the budget is truly disappointing not only for us as politicians, but for every family that is looking for a job, every business that is looking for growth, and every unemployed person who is looking for help.

The illusion of independence has blinded the SNP to what it can do here and now. I urge members to reject the choices that Mr Swinney has made.

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Gibson accept that if the SNP Government did not spend anything on its Scottish futures fund programme last year and has only spent £20 million out of the £353 million that it was due to spend this year, there is abundant capacity in its NPD programme to make up that shortfall?

Why is exactly the same trend evident across every public sector organisation in every area? Why has there been a huge increase in redundancy and severance payments in every area under the SNP Administration?

Will Jamie Hepburn give way?

Instead of grossly distorting the—[Interruption.]

Instead of grossly distorting my colleague Rhoda Grant’s measured contribution on housing and sitting back with his complacent attitude that the Scottish Government is doing everything it can when it clearly is not, will the cabinet secretary recognise that although putting additional money into housing would not ameliorate everything it would make a difference and that putting in £350 million would make a bigger difference?

I thank Dave Thompson for lodging his motion and giving the Parliament an opportunity to discuss this important issue. I also thank Paul Holland, who is a trading standards officer in my area, East Renfrewshire, for alerting me to the serious nature and extent of the issue, and Brian Smith and Brian Wilson, from the Society of Chief Officers of Trading Standards in Scotland, who helped to make this a national campaign. Scams in general are on the increase. It is difficult to put a financial value on them. In 2005, the Office of Fair Trading estimated that mass-market telephone and mail scams were costing consumers about £1 billion every year. Doorstep cold-calling crime is not on the same financial level, but its psychological impact is far more serious. As members said, it is underreported, for many reasons, including the embarrassment and humiliation experienced by individuals who have been left feeling foolish. In some cases, residents are frightened to report offenders. That is not surprising when we consider who is targeted. The typical vulnerable resident might be an 84-year-old woman, who lives alone without the support of family or friends. Traders quickly establish the situation and prey on the person’s vulnerability. Residents say that they feel coerced into agreeing to work that is not what they requested or is completely unnecessary. The trader persists in using excuses to visit the resident to extort more cash. Such persistence can leave consumers feeling confused and distressed, and they can agree to almost anything in the hope that they will be left alone. If work is carried out, the workmanship is often shoddy, and more often than not the original problems are not satisfactorily repaired, so the consumer has to contact the trader time and time again. The trader becomes aggressive and abusive and refuses to rectify the problem. It can get even more serious. Sometimes the trader insists on cash payment and accompanies the resident to the bank, to ensure that cash is paid on demand. It is a frightening ordeal for someone to be taken in a vehicle with people that they do not know. The impact on the consumer is devastating. They are often left feeling mentally and physically unwell, with little or no support. We have all but agreed on the extent of the problem; the important point is that we recognise that there are many things that we can do about it. I will give an example from East Renfrewshire, where simple methods were used: 20,000 no cold calling stickers and 6,000 no cold calling leaflets were issued. That simply gave residents information and the confidence to say no to such callers. More interesting steps were also taken. East Renfrewshire trading standards service provided training materials to banks in the area in the form of a training video called “The Bank Job” on spotting suspicious withdrawals. East Renfrewshire Council is also working to put in place formal support procedures to identify vulnerable residents with dementia. We particularly need to target that group. Even more proactively, the trading standards service worked with the police to target the tradesmen themselves. They used the law on the right to cancel contracts, identified hotspots, tried to check on benefit fraud and identified whether vehicles were suitably insured, taxed and roadworthy. In other words, they took a number of steps to clamp down on the traders. The abuse of vulnerable residents by cold callers can currently be treated as fraud or a consumer protection issue. As the Trading Standards Institute has highlighted, it can also be treated as a community safety issue. The point is that we can, and must, do more if we are to tackle the crime. I congratulate Dave Thompson once again on securing the debate and look forward to the minister’s reply on behalf of the Government.

I had a serious question about digging holes, but the First Minister seems to be the only person who is digging a hole around here. The First Minister—or, at least, his Government—has confirmed slippage in the programme of at least £300 million this year and at least £300 million next year under the general headings education and health. Will the First Minister promise to tell us specifically in which projects there has been slippage? I understand that they include half the projects on the list that he read out, including Wick high school and James Gillespie’s high school.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, welcome many of the speeches in the debate. Opposition day debates are usually more combative affairs—if I may put it that way—but it is clear that there has been a strong measure of agreement in all the speeches across the chamber on the extent of the problem, if not on what we can do about it. Many members asked how many Scottish families are struggling to make it to the end of January. How many who were already stretching to make ends meet were pushed to the edge of financial breakdown by Christmas? Some people will have received their salaries one or two weeks early in December, which will have left them with six weeks without income, until the end of January. For others, the rise in gas, electricity and petrol prices will have been the final straw. Just this week, we have heard about the increasing number of families who are being forced to rely on credit cards to pay for the essentials of living. Today’s Herald front page talks about families dipping into their savings to put food on the table, to take kids to school and to meet mortgage payments. How many more have been driven not out of choice but out of necessity into the avaricious arms of payday lenders? How many more are cutting back on the essentials of food, heating and housing to pay off those exorbitantly expensive short-term loans? As my colleague Rhoda Grant said, that is the alarming reality for many families. The struggle with debt is not a new problem. I do not want us to move away from the here and now, but many of us were educated and brought up with the works of people such as Charles Dickens and are familiar with the difficulty, misery, hardship and humiliation of debt. Two hundred years after his birth, and with wealth all around us in this country, why are we still talking about debt in such terms? Even more worrying, why is the problem getting worse? I do not wish to make personal comments about the speeches by Alex Johnstone or Jamie McGrigor, but I feel that the Tories were in denial in the debate. They might not think that a problem exists, but I point out that Wonga—one of the most notorious payday lenders—although it made a loss of £1.9 million in 2007, has provided a total of 6 million payday loans in the UK up to 2012 and has made profits of more than £45 million. The problem is growing and getting worse, and we need to address it. Many speeches have helped to describe the scale of the problem. I pay tribute to my colleague Kezia Dugdale, who not only painted a vivid picture of the problems and the hardship for families, but came up with a number of constructive suggestions about what we can do about that. The most recent research from Shelter, which was published earlier this month, revealed that one in five Scottish families is struggling with their housing costs. More worrying is the fact that the number who are resorting to expensive payday loans to cover rent or mortgages has risen to 3 per cent of the population. Those figures are very much in line with figures in other studies of personal debt in this country. It is becoming increasingly clear that we need to take action at all levels of government now. The recession, increased unemployment levels, frozen wages and more people moving into part-time working have affected household incomes. In the most recent year for which figures are available, the average household income in Scotland had declined by £1,200. If we add to the rising cost of living exorbitant rises in fuel prices, we can see why people are driven to despair. What appears to be turning those difficulties into what most of us agree is a payday loans scandal is the lack of affordable borrowing, whether it is because of the withdrawal of credit facilities or the tightening of credit from more mainstream institutions. One of the most detailed analyses of the problems has been provided by R3, which is the trade body for insolvency practitioners. R3’s “Personal Debt Snapshot” reveals that the most important reason for resorting to a payday loan is to pay off other debt—particularly credit card loans. People who are already struggling with debt are being sucked into a downward spiral of relying on short-term borrowing with ever-increasing and extortionate repayment levels. As the minister recognised, recovering from that spiral is very difficult. I agree with much of what the minister said. However, I want to pick up on two remarks. It was helpful to identify who is suffering, but unfortunately, the minister talked about people in bookies sometimes resorting to loans. Also, John Mason—in an otherwise quite useful speech—talked about the most vulnerable people being those who are furthest away from access to the internet. That is not a particularly helpful way of looking at the problem, because it implies either a degree of vulnerability or—in the case of the minister’s remark—a hint of feckless or irresponsible behaviour. However, the vast majority of those people are not the poorest of the poor; we are talking about people who are working, who nearly always have a home and a mortgage, who certainly have a bank account and who nearly all have an income of sorts. The minister was right that there is a generational split. In fact, although the minister said that more men take up payday loans, more women are worried about debt. There is also a generational split in respect of who is worried about debt. Younger people—the 25 to 45-year-olds—are most worried about debt; three quarters of them are anxious about their current debt, compared with only a third of people who are retired. It is younger people who are turning to payday loans to “rescue” them from their difficulties. Kezia Dugdale also highlighted particularly well the fact that the situation could be about to get much worse. The welfare benefits changes that are coming through seem almost to have been designed to exacerbate the situation. Tens of thousands of Scots who have not had bank accounts and who therefore could not previously access payday loans, are being forced to open bank accounts. With a similarly enforced move to monthly budgeting they will, as Kezia Dugdale said, instead of getting paid their benefits two weeks ahead be paid them four weeks behind. It is widely predicted that many families will find themselves with even more acute short-term cash-flow problems. Yesterday, my colleague Malcolm Chisholm commented that it is the hallmark of a civilised society that we look after the most vulnerable people. I believe that most of us in this chamber would agree with that comment, but in my darker moments I sometimes worry that the hallmark of our supposedly sophisticated society is that we find ever more ingenious ways of extorting money from the people who can least afford it. That is what payday loan companies are doing. I simply do not accept the arguments that payday loan companies are operating legally, that they are meeting a need, that financial regulation is reserved to Westminster and that is the end of the matter. The very fact that the market in payday loans has increased fourfold in as many years and now runs into billions of pounds should set alarm bells ringing at every level of Government. Those companies are making millions out of human misery and we are not mere spectators watching from the sidelines. Particularly helpful—certainly from my Labour colleagues’ contributions—are the number of positive actions that have been identified. They are actions that we can take now and that will make a difference. I say just to make it clear to members on the SNP back benches that we agree that Westminster should take action and we agree with capping interest rates and with limiting roll-over of such loans, and we particularly support the work of Stella Creasy and others in Westminster. However, it is not simply a matter for Westminster to deal with. In fact, among all the calls for powers to be brought to this Parliament to deal with the issue, my understanding of the nationalist position on independence is that financial regulation would remain with Westminster. Perhaps the SNP would like to clarify that point, because that is my understanding.

The minister may wish to talk to the leader of his party, who is sitting on his right, just to clarify where the SNP stands on the transfer of fiscal responsibility. My understanding is that financial regulation will remain with Westminster under the new plans. The point is that that is an excuse for inaction, rather than a reason for inaction. We have identified so many possible activities today. Members have been united in their agreement about the role of credit unions. The minister has identified a £6 million export guarantee enterprise growth fund. I ask the minister why he will not use some of that fund to support credit unions. So far, not one of them has made a successful application. We could set up a loan guarantee fund to expand the work of credit unions. It would be expensive; it would cost money, but we would be willing to work with the Government to find ways to fund that. The Government could take so many actions on this matter. For example, Stuart McMillan talked about what the Government could do and then highlighted the good example of Dundee City Council’s not allowing access to payday loan company websites on its computers. We can stop the mis-selling of payday loans, use trading standards and tackle wealth difficulties using the same type of action that we take to tackle health difficulties. The Government has the power and the social advertising budget and we would be willing to work with it. We will support the SNP’s amendment because we believe that there is consensus in the chamber and are happy to work with it to find a way forward. I look forward to the minister’s announcement next week and urge members to support the motion in my colleague’s name.

One of the welcome announcements in the September budget statement was the announcement of a weighed subsidy programme. Is the cabinet secretary able to give us any further details on how that programme will work to counteract unemployment? If not, can he tell us when those details will be forthcoming?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, can I confirm that this is questions to the finance minister and not questions to the shadow finance minister? I am not entirely sure how Mr Swinney can answer—incorrectly—on behalf of the Labour Party if we are not—

Why has the cabinet secretary’s NPD programme, through the Scottish Futures Trust, been cut by more than £300 million in successive years?

It seems that each time I speak in a debate with Mr Swinney, I begin by acknowledging that there is—on the face of it, at least—more that unites us than divides us. In this case, we acknowledge that the cabinet secretary has had to deal with a difficult financial settlement from the coalition Government and an unwelcome backdrop of international economic uncertainty. Unfortunately, however, as much as we are united in disagreeing with the wrong-headed austerity economics approach of George Osborne, we are divided on Mr Swinney’s mistaken assumption that there is nothing he can do, we are divided on the notion that this Parliament cannot make a difference and, fundamentally, we are divided on the Scottish National Party’s claim that this is a budget for jobs and growth when all the evidence points to the contrary. I remind members that, 12 months ago, the cabinet secretary pledged that his budget would “accelerate economic recovery, support economic growth and improve public services in Scotland”—[Official Report, 8 February 2012; c 6149.], but what did it really achieve? It brought a £66 million cut in the housing budget, which further crippled the Scottish construction industry, and a £52.5 million cut in the colleges budget, which led to fewer places for tens of thousands of students. The overall impact of that so-called budget for jobs is that 30,000 public sector jobs have gone, one in four young people is out of work and long-term unemployment is rising more quickly in Scotland than it is in any other part of the UK. In the face of that evidence about his handiwork, this year offered the cabinet secretary at least the opportunity to revisit his thinking. But, no. Mr Swinney—sure enough—has again promised us a budget for jobs and growth when he is doing little more than tinkering around the edges of George Osborne’s austerity plan. It is nothing more than a convenient soundbite. Even in this Parliament, where there is an in-built Government-supporting majority on every committee, the Finance Committee refused to endorse the suggestion that it was a budget for jobs and growth, which is exactly what we need. Two weeks ago, Parliament united in recognising the scale of the problem of youth unemployment and the scarring effect that it has on young people. Just this weekend, another constituent came to one of my surgeries with a familiar story of frustration bordering on despair at his inability to secure a job. What frustrated me, alongside his practical difficulty in accessing college training or reskilling courses that would boost his confidence and employability, was his experience of a system that left him feeling even more vulnerable and, indeed, feeling that he is somehow to blame. The cabinet secretary has pledged again and again that unemployment is his Government’s priority, but it is not just that he has failed to make a difference; it is that his actions simply do not match his words. Last year, despite his being forced into an 11th-hour U-turn on cuts to college funding, the colleges budget was still slashed by £52 million, with the result that there are 70,000 fewer people at college this year than there were three years ago. Quite frankly, that is a staggering indictment of Scottish National Party policy. As the cabinet secretary so often reminds us, government is about choices. This year, the SNP’s choice is to hammer colleges yet again. Let us be in no doubt—that choice has not been forced on Mr Swinney by Westminster; it is a decision that was made in Scotland. The result will be the denial of further education to thousands more Scots of all ages, and yet longer college waiting lists. We believe that the £35 million that is needed to reverse the cuts to further education can be found from a combination of forecast underspend, efficiencies and savings on, for example, the 16 referendum work streams or profligate Government vanity projects such as the Ryder cup junket or the Scotland House fiasco during the Olympic games. [Interruption.] If this were truly a budget for jobs and growth, the Government would be investing in colleges and our young people’s future. Scottish Labour believes in investing in those young lives, and we call on the Government—even at this late stage—to reverse its cuts to colleges and to support our beleaguered further education sector. I give way to Mr Crawford. Mr Crawford is clearly happy to make interventions from a sedentary position, but when he is challenged—[Interruption.] Oh. Mr Crawford wants to make an intervention.

I identified areas in which the Scottish people would be delighted to see the Scottish Government make cuts, which included the trips to the Ryder cup, and spending on Scotland House in London. Many of us will have joined Shelter just before the Christmas recess, when it asked us to support its campaign to find a home for the 5,500 children who are without that basic essential of life. Housing need is reaching crisis levels; across the country, almost 200,000 households are on council housing lists and almost 335,000 are on housing association lists. On top of that, 62 per cent of Scotland’s social housing currently falls beneath the new Scottish housing quality standard. That qualifies as a serious problem now, and is one that the Government has the powers to fix now. Following the UK Government’s autumn statement, Mr Swinney was given capital consequentials of £331 million over two years. Labour believes that that money should be allocated in its entirety to Scottish house building. The allocation of such a sum would not only address a pressing social need, but would help to get the construction industry working again. With sensible procurement policies, it would help to provide jobs and apprenticeships and would boost Scotland’s small businesses. We believe that it could also help to fund an expanded retrofit programme, and to fund mid-range as well as affordable housing. Evidence on that was given to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and to the Finance Committee by Shelter, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, the Scottish Building Federation and the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians. The argument was convincing and persuasive, which is why not only we in the Labour Party supported it, but the Finance Committee reached a similar conclusion.

It would mean nothing of the sort. [Laughter.] If the cabinet secretary had listened—[Interruption.] The cabinet secretary might be in denial about the cuts that he has made to his NPD programme—[Interruption.]

Just to be quite clear for members, I say that these spending priorities are the ones that Mr Swinney outlined in the commitments that he made in December to additional spending that will use the autumn consequentials. I suggest that the Scottish Government’s own Scottish Futures Trust’s NPD programme, which clearly has the capacity to fund such capital programmes, should be used for that purpose. It has had that capacity, because a mere few months ago, it was cut by £300 million. The cabinet secretary talks rather proudly about how he has revisited the housing budget four times this year. In most people’s books, trying to correct themselves four times in one year would be a frank admission of failure. Despite those corrections, the net result—rather than Mr Swinney’s grandiose and overblown claim to be kick-starting a housing boom—is that the SNP is still choosing to cut £42 million in real terms from the housing budget. The partial restoration of what he had cut confirms the impression of a half-hearted attempt at stimulating the economy. I move on to transport and infrastructure. The Government often seems to be unembarrassable about the gap between its election manifesto promises and its record in office. One of the most shameless broken promises in this session has related to the slashing of the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme’s budget by at least a third. That is the sort of infrastructure project around which those of us who purport to believe in a more Keynesian economic approach were united. I thought that John Swinney counted himself in that number, but it appears that he does not. The EGIP investment would not just deliver jobs and help commuters, but would provide good public transport, which is yet another way for a Government to support people back into the job market. All that we in the Scottish Labour Party ask is that the SNP deliver on its election promise that Network Rail would fund the investment from the regulatory asset base. I have set out three proposals that are fair and affordable and which would make a genuine difference in stimulating the economy and improving the employment prospects of people across the country. I have not had time to do justice to all the areas in which the cabinet secretary could make a difference, which also include childcare, procurement and a properly funded flagship wage-subsidy programme. To be frank, I am astonished that we have yet to see the detail on such a programme, which the cabinet secretary promised in his statement back in September. My colleague Helen Eadie has built on the European and External Relations Committee’s work to identify hundreds of millions of pounds in untapped support that could be available through the European Union. I have hardly touched on the fact that the budget does nothing for our hard-pressed high streets. Shop after shop is closing, yet the Government insists on providing millions of pounds of support to tax-avoiding companies such as Amazon. In the budget, the Government also proposes a hike in business rates of an eye-watering £172 million in cash terms.

If Mr Swinney’s only crime was to be found guilty of making exaggerated claims, our reaction might simply be disapproval. However, the more serious charges are about the failure to use the powers that are at his disposal and failure to follow through on his economic analysis. He has the opportunity to revisit the budget. I urge him to take that chance.

I am glad that Mr Gibson hangs on my every word. Mr Gibson said that there would be no chance of Labour supporting the SNP, this year or any other year. Does Mr Gibson believe that the Scottish Government should meet our demands on housing, rail and colleges? If so, does he take my assurance that, if the Government accepted those demands, we would support the budget?

By cutting the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme, how has the Government delivered on its promises to the commuters of Stirling, Dunblane and Alloa?

Is Mr Beattie claiming that over the spending review period the housing budget has increased rather than suffering a real-terms decrease of £42 million?

I remind Mr Swinney that borrowing against the rail regulated asset base was the SNP’s election manifesto promise, not Labour’s. We are simply asking him to deliver on his election manifesto promise. I ask him this: has the NPD budget been cut, or has it not been cut? Has it not lost more than £300 million in each of two successive years? Could not that money be used to fund the long list of projects that Mr Swinney said could not go ahead if our demands were met?

17. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to prevent reductions in the availability of college courses for students with additional needs. (S4O-01695)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply, although I am concerned that he does not recognise the scale of the problem facing young students. The Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability conducted a survey in which it found that a third—in fact, more than a third—of all part-time courses for students with learning disabilities were cut last year. In the face of such figures, is the minister able to tell me exactly what powers he has and what his role and responsibilities are with regard to addressing the needs of young students with additional needs and why he is not intervening effectively to stop this situation?

I do not know whether it was because of the festive cheer or our communal new year resolutions, but the two debates that we have had in our first week back—on employability and, yesterday, the oil and gas industry—have been characterised by a remarkable display of consensus across the chamber. We have managed to put more emphasis on that which we have in common than on that which divides us. I assure members that we in the Labour Party stand ready to make common cause with colleagues from all sides in the face of the economic difficulties that we face. Perhaps few of those difficulties are much more formidable than that of mass unemployment. Unfortunately, just as the attractions of the 1 January pledges to eat a little less and take a little more exercise begin to wear off with each successive visit to the gym, so our enthusiasm to reach out across the chamber yet again this week is waning. It is not that we doubt the minister’s intent to tackle youth unemployment, but that the motion is too complacent to capture either the scale of the challenge or the political energy and drive that are needed to overcome the problem. More worryingly, the Scottish Government’s actions simply do not match its words. I am not trying to pretend that the Scottish National Party does not care about unemployment and that it is, for example, in the category of those who believe that unemployment is a price worth paying. Far from it. My frustration results from the lack of delivery. Where exactly is the action that is spoken of in the title of the Government motion? My fear is that we are seeing a return to the party that talks a lot about its good intentions, but does very little to make them happen—to the party of broken promises, which promised so much on class sizes, school meals and the writing off of student debt, but has failed to deliver on any of those pledges.

Mr Gibson makes a couple of serious points. He has reminded me that, as a father of six children with an income of between £50,000 and £60,000, I absolutely have not been happy about the child benefit changes. Mr Gibson is right to identify the fact that long-term youth unemployment was rising before the current recession and therefore cannot be put down entirely to that. However, it has been exacerbated by the recession. That reinforces my point that we should all be taking decisive action. We are absolutely willing to stand shoulder to shoulder with the SNP in tackling the problem, but we do not see enough evidence of action from the Government.

Mrs Scanlon is less charitable to Mr Gibson than I was prepared to be, but she is absolutely right. The difficulty is that I find the gloss that the SNP constantly puts on figures and its selective quoting of statistics to be simply misleading. That demeans the seriousness of the problem and the situation, and stands as a barrier between us and concerted action across the Parliament.

I am sorry. I normally take all interventions, but I want to make a little progress. I assure members that we believe that full employment should be the Parliament’s overriding ambition. One way to start is to agree on the scale of the problem that is before us, because I was slightly worried by the gloss that was being put on it by the minister in her opening speech. More than 20 per cent of all young people who are eligible to work are officially unemployed. Unemployment has risen remorselessly since 2008. We have in effect returned to the mass unemployment of the 1980s and 90s, but this time with a particularly devastating focus on the young. As we have heard in our constituency surgeries, in evidence to parliamentary committees and in the experience sometimes of friends and family, youth unemployment is not just emotionally debilitating, with an immediate impact on individuals and their families, but it has a long-term scarring effect on many. As described by economists David Bell and David Blanchflower, unemployment “while young, especially of long duration, causes permanent scars rather than temporary blemishes”. People who experience long-term unemployment in their youth are more likely to experience unemployment later in life and less likely to earn as much over the course of their careers. The worrying fact is that alongside mass youth unemployment we have growing long-term unemployment. The unemployment figures are striking—they have risen every quarter except for two since the middle of 2008. Of particular concern to me, despite the minister’s figures, is that long-term youth unemployment appears to be worse here in Scotland than it is across the UK. A further worrying feature of this recession, compounding matters and adding—

I am delighted to hear the minister talk about transparency and figures, particularly given the budget process that we are all going through, in which we seem to have to wrestle in every committee to get level 4 figures—to get any information—and in which, to be honest, this Parliament is sometimes on the verge of being treated with contempt by the SNP with regard to access to information. I am not sure whether to mention this, but Danny Blanchflower, I believe, is a former football manager—a great one—of Chelsea and of Northern Ireland and David Blanchflower is the economist. I think that the First Minister confuses his football managers and his bank managers sometimes, too. Another feature of this recession is underemployment. I am delighted to see that the Parliament’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has established an inquiry into underemployment, although Professor David Bell’s evidence this week that the youth unemployment figures underestimated the extent of the problem was disconcerting. According to Professor Bell, the number of part-time workers, including those who are self-employed, has risen by more than 70,000 since 2008 and that has been matched by a dramatic fall in the number of hours worked by full-time staff. The experience of so many individuals in this situation is not revealed in the official unemployment statistics, but the reduced hours, the move from full-time to part-time work and the loss of overtime are felt in increased hardship. That has been backed up by research carried out by Citizens Advice Scotland that highlighted invisible underemployment—young people withdrawing from the labour market altogether or working in jobs where their skills are not adequately utilised, displacing others. Women in particular are on the receiving end, both of the increase in unemployment and of increased underemployment. Women are more likely to be in low-paid work, more likely to work part time and less likely to have savings. They face a greater risk of immediate poverty should they lose their jobs. What that means for families is revealed by the Scottish Government’s own statistics, the most recent of which are for the year 2010-11. They show that the average Scottish household income fell by almost £1,200 per year. I hope that we can all agree on the extent and the seriousness of the unemployment situation in Scotland. I acknowledge that there are steps that the Government has taken that we can agree on. The appointment of a Minister for Youth Employment was something that Labour called for and certainly supports. The allocation of additional resources, with £36 million of funding announced last year, is also welcome. However, it is difficult to see much evidence to demonstrate the overall effectiveness of Scottish Government interventions and we have a deep concern at the Government’s lack of consistency in tackling the employment challenge. For example, even in today’s motion I am unclear whether the Government is claiming that the supposed decrease in youth unemployment of 25,000 last month was due to actions that it had taken. If so, which specific actions can the minister point to and what evidence does she have of their impact? I am not suggesting for one second that the SNP caused the problems that we are facing, but I question whether it is doing enough to counter unemployment and whether its delivery matches its oratory. Most SNP and Labour members are united in opposing the UK Government’s policies on the economy, and the SNP is lined up behind Labour in resisting austerity economics and calling for a more Keynesian approach. However, there is little evidence that the SNP is backing those words with actions here in Scotland. Rather than mitigating or trying to counter the austerity approach, John Swinney simply appears to be passing on the Tory cut, and sometimes making it worse. I find it particularly depressing that, while the Tory Government has a target of reducing the public sector by some 500,000 posts, John Swinney is doing exactly the same here in Scotland. I direct members to the recent article by Dave Watson of Unison, which points out that we have already lost 50,000 posts in the public sector throughout Scotland. The majority of those are in local government—cleaners, caterers and carers—but they are also midwives and nurses, because of the real-terms cut to the national health service budget. That is not just affecting vital services, but sucking demand out of the economy.

Shall I take another intervention, Presiding Officer?

Very well, Presiding Officer. I had a lot more to say, but I will conclude by pointing out to the Government that its cuts to the public sector, and to colleges at a time when young people need opportunities and skills, are absolutely the wrong steps to be taking. Cutting the housing budget has had a dramatic effect on the construction industry and has depressed demand at a time when we should be increasing it. There are actions that the Government could take now on colleges, housing, rail investment and childcare that would not cost any money and would make a difference. It is time that the Government woke up from its complacency and realised that fine words and good intentions are not enough. Scotland’s young people need action, and they need it now. I move amendment S4M-05319.2, to leave out from “the Scottish Government’s” to end and insert: “an ‘all-Government, all-Scotland’ approach at the centre of Scotland’s Youth Employment Strategy; notes with concern that, according to the December 2012 labour market statistics, more than one in five young people eligible to work are officially unemployed and that long-term youth unemployment is higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK according to the latest claimant figures; further notes the comments of Professor David Bell to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that youth unemployment figures underestimate the problem; believes that the 24% real-terms cut to college funding between 2011 and 2015 threatens to exacerbate rather than improve this situation and that cuts to Scotland’s housing budget similarly threaten growth and apprenticeship opportunities; is concerned that current efforts to tackle youth unemployment through the modern apprenticeship programme are falling short of the needs of young unemployed people in Scotland; believes that the Scottish Government could do more, for example, on investing in transport, improving childcare and better use of government procurement to tackle Scotland’s unemployment and underemployment crisis, and agrees that all MSPs have a role to play in their constituencies to actively encourage local employers and other partners to do more.”

The SNP has full control over college budgets and further education. Can the member therefore tell us how exactly the 24 per cent cut to college budgets has helped our young people?

You don’t have full control over your budget?

There are a number of interventions in housing, rail and colleges that we were happy to describe in our budget contribution. However, specifically, why have we not seen action on childcare and procurement, neither of which necessarily has to cost much money and both of which the Government is supposed to be committed to? The childcare intervention, in particular, was in the SNP manifesto and would make a real difference in getting people back into the workplace.

Will George Adam give way?

Will the member give way?

The point that I was making, which Mr Mason perhaps can address, is that Westminster has a particular agenda, which is to cut the public sector, but there is absolutely no need for the Scottish Government to follow the same agenda. [Interruption.] Why is the Government cutting the public sector and not protecting public employment in Scotland?

I have two suggestions, the first of which regards the rail improvement programme. The Government could borrow from the rail asset base and I would like to ask the SNP why it is not doing so. Secondly, why has the SNP cut its own PFI by more than £330 million? What is wrong with using that money to get shovel-ready projects off the ground?

The debate has been enjoyable. The clear message that we in the Labour Party want to send out—and which most parties in the chamber have united around—is that the Parliament values the oil and gas industry and recognises its importance to Scotland and the UK. It is a simple message, but it is important to say it because political discussion of the oil and gas industry is often framed around the political debate about separation. The discovery of North Sea oil and the rise of Scottish nationalism have gone hand-in-hand. While resisting the arguments about independence, the Labour Party wants to make it clear that we see the industry as having a viable future and staying a key part of the Scottish and UK economies. It is also an important message because the industry needs whatever certainty we can supply. That theme was developed by several members, including the minister. In fact, I found myself agreeing with virtually everything that the minister said, which was very pleasant, for me if not for him. I am intrigued to see whether the minister uses the same tone when he is winding up, but the conclusion to his opening remarks was that we need long-term certainty and we want to continue to work with the UK Government to support the industry. The Labour Party can certainly agree with that sentiment. Whether it is in the waters around the UK or in international waters, oil and gas often suffers from breaks in production, from political disruption across the globe, and from wide variations in price. In an unpredictable world, political reassurance is of importance and value to the industry. It is also an important message because it is clear that the industry itself does not enjoy the most favourable public profile. On the whole, oil companies are viewed with suspicion and many of us deeply resent the rising prices we constantly have to cope with, whether at the petrol pump or when paying our domestic heating bills. If we add to that mix the recognition that we will have to move away from carbon-based sources of energy if we are to protect and preserve our global environment, the overall impression can be one that often comes across as quite hostile to the industry. In its briefing for today’s debate, Oil & Gas UK made the point that one of the problems it foresees for the future is: “Poor public and political perception of the continuing importance of the industry and of oil and gas in the UK energy mix” Of course, I do not expect many people to shed tears for Chevron, BP, Esso, Shell, or whoever. I certainly do not wish to diminish the importance of the move to renewables, but even if we are to expand our use of renewable energy sources, as I hope that we will, we will still have to rely to a huge extent on carbon-based fuels. At the moment, the industry estimates that oil and gas provides more than 70 per cent of our primary energy needs and in 10 years’ time that will still be the case. Whatever sympathy members might have had with Patrick Harvie’s case, many of us feel that he took his argument too far. Most members were far more realistic about the challenges that are facing us and what we need to do in response. That point was made by Rhoda Grant, Claudia Beamish, and the minister himself when they talked about the importance of developing CCS technology.

It is interesting to note that, in his amendment, Mr Harvie talked about the warnings from the International Energy Agency but he did not finish the quotation. He finished it in his speech when he talked about making sure that we do not go beyond the 2°C rise in temperature “unless carbon capture and storage technology is widely deployed”. It is interesting that that quotation was missing from his amendment but was in his speech. That is very important. Most members emphasised our important role in helping to develop CCS technology. I return to the importance of the industry. Many members repeated the key facts about the industry. I did not agree with everything that Maureen Watt and Kevin Stewart said, but I agreed when they highlighted the fact that the oil and gas industry is the single most important industrial sector in this country, employing more than 400,000 people, 200,000 whom are based here in Scotland. Despite the fact that production has declined in recent years, there are still confident expectations that the industry will continue to produce substantial volumes of oil for many years to come. The minister talked about much of the welcome investment, and I echo his comments about the vibrancy of the sector during these challenging times. I would also add a caveat—which Lewis Macdonald did very well when he quoted Professor Alex Kemp—about the challenges and obstacles facing us in ensuring that we make the most of the industry in future years. We have an ageing infrastructure and exploration is important. That relies on a high oil price. Despite the successes of the industry, it faces major challenges, health and safety perhaps being the most obvious. With the exception of Mike MacKenzie, there was unity throughout the chamber on that point. Lewis Macdonald and Maureen Watt made the point very well that although the helicopter ditchings and the suspension of flights have cost the industry millions, there is a commitment within the industry to ensure that, before the flights resume, we resolve the issue successfully. Historically, the oil and gas industry has suffered from a reputation for being a macho as well as a dangerous and high-risk place to work. Many in the management and the workforce have worked hard through trade union representatives to overturn that attitude. I hope that the industry is right when it claims to be on course to establish the UK as the safest place in the worldwide oil industry. Despite the industry’s success, a further challenge lies in skills and training—an issue raised by many members today. Although the industry has a record of innovation, entrepreneurial spirit and discovery, it still suffers from skills shortages. That is another reason why the industry needs to take the lead, not just in selling itself as an occupation of the future but specifically in recruiting more women, breaking down gender stereotyping—Nigel Don and Rhoda Grant both made that point—and challenging its macho image. Richard Baker made a particularly important point, which was that while we welcome the energy academy, we need greater clarity on its location and long-term funding. A similar challenge lies in decommissioning. I was intrigued to hear what Fergus Ewing would say today on decommissioning, given his difficulties before the House of Commons recently. However, I found myself agreeing with his remarks on decommissioning and the challenges that face us. Tavish Scott made an important point that decommissioning itself is a business opportunity, of which many, including those in Lerwick, can take advantage. We will vote for the Government’s motion today, and we hope that most parties, if not all, similarly support our amendment. We purposefully did not mention the independence argument in our amendment, although it was raised by many on the back benches. I end simply with the observation to my nationalist colleagues that, just as resting our nation’s future on one finite commodity seems remarkably short-sighted, to rest their political hopes on such a fragile argument also seems risky. I particularly enjoyed Mary Scanlon’s speech, when she highlighted that, despite price fluctuations and declining reserves, the First Minister’s optimism knows no inflationary bounds. I do not wish to end on that note. This is not about the neverendum, but a vital UK industry, which, although facing many challenges, has a clear and important future at the heart of our economy. I hope that the Parliament can send it a message of some certainty.

Will the member take an intervention?

For yesterday’s statement on the budget consequentials, the cabinet secretary cast himself in the role of Santa Claus dishing out goodies from his sack. It may simply have been too much festive cheer, but in preparing for today’s debate I began to see Mr Swinney in a different light: a man haunted by spirits of budgets past and budgets yet to come. Yes, we have Ebenezer Swinney, the man who in his budget of Christmas past claimed to provide us with a budget for jobs and growth, which actually delivered unemployment and recession. He is the man who now claims in his budget of Christmas present that more of the same—cuts to public services, colleges and housing—will somehow alleviate the hardship faced by thousands of households around the country. Of course, he is the man whose only promise for the budgets of Christmas future is an illusory land of milk and honey only a referendum’s vote away—not so much a vision as a cruel mirage, which is already fading under even the most cursory scrutiny. Of course, as I have pointed out in nearly every debate over the past year, Scotland is not the only country in economic difficulty. However, that does not let the finance secretary off the hook entirely. He still has choices—yes, hard choices, but his choices nonetheless. Both last year and this, it was the cabinet secretary who promised a budget for “jobs and growth”—his words, not mine—and on both criteria he has singularly failed. On jobs, we have heard the Scottish National Party crowing again this month that Scottish unemployment is below the UK average, but for the previous three months it was above the UK average. In other words, over the piece, it is the same as the UK average. The SNP has made no impact on joblessness in Scotland whatsoever. On economic growth, we have a finance minister constantly praised by the First Minister—at least—for his competence but who has been in post while Scotland has gone into recession not once but twice.

The next line in my speech is: “‘It’s not all our fault!’, I can hear the SNP protesting”, but Mr Mason has taken the words out of my mouth. I am simply measuring the SNP against its own criteria of “jobs and growth”—Mr Swinney’s words, not mine. In the Dickens tale, Bob Cratchit and his son Tiny Tim are struggling to make ends meet because Scrooge will not pay Cratchit a decent wage—there are eerie similarities in our budget of Christmas present. The budget simply passes on Tory cuts, and in some cases the SNP makes the cuts even worse, as in housing. In evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee during the budget process, Shelter, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and the Scottish Building Federation all pointed out the impact of the SNP’s cuts to the housing budget. That is not a Westminster decision; it is an SNP decision, the effect of which has been to devastate the construction industry in Scotland.

The SNP thinks that it has been clever by reducing the housing assistance grants from £70,000 to £40,000, but all that is happening now is that housing associations are unable to borrow on that level of funding to build social housing. In response, of course, the SNP just recalculates and describes mid-market rents as affordable housing. One area for which there is no doubt about who controls all the levers of power and all the public spending in Scotland is education. It is one area in which we know the Scottish Government can make a real difference through investing in skills and training and the knowledge economy, and yet what do we find? There are huge cuts to college budgets that result in a vast drop in the numbers of people attending college, with a particular impact on adult returners. Let us take the plans to improve our rail system: the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme was cut in half. That money should be reinstated now so that we can get Scotland working again. I add that, when the contracts are awarded for such programmes, we should have a proper procurement process in place so that apprentices are taken on, there are local jobs, local small businesses benefit, and we do not simply send the contracts to China, as is the SNP’s wont, for the cheapest prices and unsustainable practices.

I have no idea what the first part of Mr Gibson’s remarks refers to, but on the second part: it should come from the rail regulatory asset base. I do not understand why the Government has not done that. It should restore right away the money that was cut. There was a particularly revealing quote in John Swinney’s evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee: “My strategy was based on the assumption that, by 2010-11, the private sector would be recovering and therefore the consolidation of public sector finances could be done reasonably. I have freely and openly conceded that that assessment and that assumption were wrong. I do not think that I was wrong to make that assumption, but my assumption and my prediction were wrong.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 25 October 2012; c 701.] That is some apology—“My policy hasn’t worked, but I wasn’t wrong”—but the real revelation is that John Swinney put all his eggs in George Osborne’s basket, swallowing the notion that cutting the public sector somehow allows the private sector to fill the gap. That is where the real crime has been committed: John Swinney has cut and cut and cut, and the effect on the Scottish economy has been devastating.

Interestingly, I think that it is Mr Swinney who vaguely believes in Labour’s approach to economics and has deliberately copied it over the past 10 years, trying to reinvent the SNP as a party of the social democratic left. Clearly, however, this is where it is tested. I draw Mr Swinney’s attention to an interesting blog entry that Dave Watson of Unison published this week, which points out exactly why Mr Swinney has made mistakes and where he is wrong. Dave Watson points out that “a staggering 51,700 jobs have been lost in the Scottish public sector” over the past four years.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Tens of thousands of Scots have been put out of work as a direct result of Mr Swinney’s decisions, and that figure is matched, I may add, by another 50,000 in the private sector. I could not agree more with Dave Watson’s conclusion that this action “tells the tale of Scottish Government priorities”.

Will the member give way?

I am trying to follow that metaphor. I am pleased that Mr Stevenson says that the Government should be measured on how it achieves economic growth. However, the Government has also claimed that this is a budget for jobs. Does Mr Stevenson think that the Government should be measured on whether unemployment goes up or down, either in a stand-alone way or simply in comparison with the rest of the UK?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. Everyone likes to play Santa at Christmas, and I have no doubt that everyone who has been named today and who has been shouting up the cabinet secretary’s chimney will be pleased to hear his news. Perhaps it is less clear what the impact of the decisions will be on the Scottish economy. There has been concern about exactly how shovel-ready the Scottish Government’s list of projects is. The cabinet secretary described his projects as ones “that could begin construction by the end of 2013-14”. They do not sound all that shovel-ready to me. When does the cabinet secretary expect to see the first shovel in the ground? Can he guarantee that all the projects that he has outlined will be under way by this time next year? A guide to the criteria that the Scottish Government will use to measure the success of its economic policy is also missing from the statement. Each project may be very worthy in its own right, but it is difficult to get a sense of exactly how many jobs will be created and how the economy will grow as a result of the investment. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that the funding secures maximum advantage to the Scottish economy and avoids the procurement disasters of the Forth replacement crossing process? Specifically, can he tell members whether he is insisting on contracts going to local Scottish small businesses, whether there will be guarantees on the number of jobs that will be generated or secured and on the apprenticeships that are awarded—

Will the cabinet secretary include tax transparency, union recognition and the living wage among his criteria?

So, that is an admission that they will all be shovel ready.

5. To ask the First Minister, in light of reported comments by the chair of the independent fiscal commission, Sir Crawford Beveridge, what the Scottish Government’s position is on fiscal control and financial regulation in the event of Scotland separating from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4F-01069)

Will the First Minister clarify one point? Will an independent Scotland’s future be supported by a fiscal stability pact? I also ask the First Minister to clarify two quotes. One is from an interview that he had with Andrew Neil in March 2012, in which Mr Salmond said that a prerequisite for a functioning sterling area would be a fiscal stability pact. He followed that up in September 2012, in a lecture in Chicago, when he answered a question by saying that there would be no need for a “fiscal stabilisation pact”. Which is his preferred option?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that none of us wants to drag the First Minister back here at the end of the day to correct himself, so I offer him an opportunity to do so here and now. In response to my question earlier, the First Minister did not say whether he supported a fiscal stability pact or otherwise, but he specifically said that my quote was incorrect, saying that he said no such thing in Chicago. The full quote from Mr Salmond reads: “I don’t believe that a monetary policy restriction would have to have a fiscal stabilisation pact. I think we can have plenty of room for manoeuvre within a currency union.” Those words are as quoted by Tom Gordon in the Sunday Herald on 30 September. Through your offices, Presiding Officer, I ask whether the First Minister made such a statement.

I am pleased that the Deputy First Minister has finally admitted that the terms of Scotland’s EU membership are a matter of negotiation. In her statement, she went on to say that adopting the euro and entering the Schengen agreement would not be up for negotiation. Specifically, would Britain’s European rebate, which is currently worth £90 to every Scot, be a matter of negotiation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would like to raise a further point of order following the question that I put to the First Minister at First Minister’s question time earlier today and a subsequent question to the Deputy First Minister following her statement on European Union membership. I am in the unusual and, I have to say, unwarranted position of being accused of inaccuracy by both when I was neither. [Interruption.]

My supplementary question to Mr Salmond this afternoon was to ask whether he still supported the idea of a fiscal stability pact in an independent Scotland. Perhaps some of his back benchers may listen to find out whether we get an answer this afternoon. I believe that that is a fairly important point to establish ahead of the referendum, as such a pact would effectively empower someone else—

—probably England, to place limits on Scotland’s taxation and spending.

I want to clarify why the First Minister is wrong and I am correct in this matter. If I may, I would like to explain the quote—if that is all right.

I think that it will take me about a minute, Presiding Officer.

Just to clarify, the First Minister said earlier in the year that he supported a pact. He then said, in September, at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs: “I don’t believe that a monetary policy restriction would have to have a fiscal stabilisation pact.” I have listened to the recording and can say that the quote is accurate. Members and others can read it in The Herald or on Tom Gordon’s blog, or they can listen to the recording themselves. It was not given “in terms of the debate”, yet the First Minister stood up at question time to reply: “I said no such thing in Chicago.” The Deputy First Minister then followed that up with a rather more gratuitous remark about my inaccuracy which, in the context of her own rather far-fetched claims and her willingness—

—to dismiss the EU rebate, is more ironic than offensive. Presiding Officer, I have checked the Official Report, and the First Minister has not yet made his weekly correction to alter what he said. It is one thing to muddy the waters around the Scottish National Party’s plans for independence; it is quite another to disguise that bluff and bluster with an attack—

There is, indeed.

I ask whether there is a standing order under which you or the First Minister can clarify that I was correct, Mr Gordon was correct, the quote was correct and the First Minister was wrong.

Given what we now know about Amazon’s affairs, does the cabinet secretary regret not imposing stricter conditions, such as insisting on transparency in the company’s tax affairs, on trade union recognition, on decent minimum standards of employment and on the living wage being paid as a minimum to all employees?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. As members will know, Labour members have strong concerns about the changes to public sector pensions that the Conservative Government has introduced, to the extent that, almost a year ago to the day, we took the unprecedented decision to stay away from Holyrood to make common cause with tens of thousands of people throughout Scotland on the day of action. I recall that the Scottish National Party Government criticised us for doing so. Many of the changes, particularly the steep rise in contributions, have been introduced by George Osborne outwith the Public Service Pensions Bill. We oppose them and, both here and at Westminster, Labour has argued strongly that there should be no erosion or diminishing of the Scottish Parliament’s powers to shape or modify Scottish public pension schemes through the introduction of the bill. That said, I am disappointed but not surprised that the finance minister makes much of who has the power to make these decisions and simply states that the Scottish Government has no choice but to match the Tory contribution changes. The Scottish Government has a choice. It may be a difficult choice and it may be a very expensive choice, but the Scottish Government has a choice nonetheless. [Interruption.]

I note the reaction from back benchers who constantly argue for power for the Scottish Parliament but who sometimes fail to live up to the responsibility that goes with that power.

The minister cites the Treasury reduction of £8.4 million each month if the Scottish Government fails to implement the contribution increase. Has the Scottish Government explored any variation short of the full increase, including doing so within the cost ceiling, and did it discuss the choices with public sector unions and other partners? In particular, as the Scottish Government goes out for consultation and negotiation on the changes, can the minister clarify that he still has the flexibility to make arrangements for and to make a contribution to those who wish to retire earlier than at the state pensionable age, for example?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what contact the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs has had with Creative Scotland in the last month. (S4O-01498)

I thank the minister for her answer, although I am not sure, given the level of discontent with Creative Scotland among the artistic community and creative organisations, whether that indicates a more hands-on approach or not. Does the minister think that Creative Scotland’s move from long-term funding to project-based funding for the arts has been a success?

I thank the minister for his opening speech. Despite the disappearing coin trick, the shameless playing to the gallery and even the two caveats on Labour’s amendment, I welcome his comments and his support for our amendment. I think that there is consensus around the chamber, as there has been in our two recent debates on tourism, and around Scotland that we need to do more to recognise the importance of tourism, and business tourism in particular. In a week that has brought rather gloomy and depressing news about business prospects and the Scottish economy generally, it is good to have an opportunity in the Scottish Parliament to talk about an area in which there is clearly great potential for growth and which has managed to at least somewhat buck the downward trend during the recession. The closure of Comet follows a number of high street retailers going under, and Vion’s decision to close its whole United Kingdom operation merely adds salt to the wound following its decision to halt production at Hall’s of Broxburn, with the loss of 1,700 jobs. It is more important than ever that we respond to such developments effectively, with a renewed focus on employment from the Government and Parliament and an emphasis on diversifying and supporting our manufacturing sector. We should also respond to the difficulties by putting an even greater emphasis on ensuring that we make the most of expanding sectors, such as the business tourism sector. It is worth reminding ourselves—as the minister did—of the importance of the tourism industry to Scotland already. We have had a number of debates recently about tourism in general. The Scottish Government’s motion highlights the £2.9 billion in value added that tourism is now worth to the Scottish economy. It is particularly notable that business tourism accounts for 20 per cent of total tourism expenditure in Scotland—some £878 million per year. Some 2.6 million business trips were made to Scotland in 2011. Perhaps as important is the fact that business visitors spend almost twice as much as traditional holiday visitors when they are here and their custom is less prone to seasonal highs and lows, making it important for the hotel sector in enabling it to utilise capacity all year round. There is also the incentive that those business tourists may return as holidaymakers at some point in the future. I am sure that we are all acutely aware of the importance of competing effectively in the main overseas markets: America, Germany, the Scandinavian countries, the Netherlands, France and so on. However, it is worth highlighting that the rest of the United Kingdom, including Scotland, accounts for three quarters of the total tourism expenditure. Without straying into our political differences over the constitution, I suggest that the union dividend is an important point to bear in mind. I welcome the news from the minister that the conference bid fund has already started to attract new business tourism to Scotland. The scheme, which is match funded by Scotland’s cities, is a very good example of collaborative working between our major cities and VisitScotland that is already showing results. Our cities have been the driving force in attracting business visitors. Yes, business tourism has been somewhat affected by the financial recession but it is recovering and is expected to grow, unlike many other areas. I single out Glasgow as being at the forefront of that growth, as it is the number 1 city for business tourism outside London. That has happened not by accident, but because of strong and committed leadership by the city council. Gordon Matheson, the leader of Glasgow City Council, has estimated that, in the first six months of the current financial year alone, conventions and business tourism have brought £120 million into Glasgow’s economy—the same amount that was achieved in the whole of the previous year. Without wishing to be overly controversial or to spoil the consensus, I note that one of the budgetary proposals made by the combined opposition in Glasgow earlier this year would have reduced funding to Glasgow City Marketing Bureau and ceased the air route development fund, which has brought so many new flights into and out of Glasgow airport. I am delighted to see the city and the Government working together to make the most of the potential that lies in the hosting of the Commonwealth games in 2014. The hydrodome next to the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre is just one of the many new facilities that will undoubtedly add to Glasgow’s attractiveness over the coming years and which will, I hope, be part of a very successful Commonwealth games legacy. Arguably the biggest addition that we could now make as a country to the success of Glasgow as a city and as a business tourism destination would be a rail link to Glasgow airport. Modern business travellers expect such connections as a matter of course, and it reflects poorly not just on Glasgow but on the whole country that neither Edinburgh nor Glasgow has a direct rail connection into the city centre. Investment in transport infrastructure is vital not just to bringing business visitors into our country, but to taking those same visitors to more rural destinations so that our whole country can benefit from any increase in the number of business visitors. I want to mention Aberdeen, too, as there is no doubt that the incoming administration has given a huge signal of its commitment by signing off the £26.2 million that was the accumulated debt of the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre. That proposal will see that historical debt cleared, allowing the centre to focus on the future and develop new ways in which to bring conferences and events to Aberdeen. Following yesterday’s debate, it is worth noting that the proposed rises in air passenger duty could act as a real disincentive to business tourism and tourism generally in Scotland. Airports that are located not just in Scotland but in the north of England are clearly at a disadvantage when it comes to APD, and the fact that the tax is higher in Scotland than in other comparable countries will not increase our attractiveness to foreign let alone domestic visitors. I return to some of the reasons why Scotland and our cities are such attractive destinations. We can talk about their heritage, their physical beauty and their accessibility, but it often comes down to the level of service, the friendliness and the hospitality that we offer. I spoke at length on the issue in our previous debate on tourism, in June. Glasgow’s hospitality is legendary and I hope that we are able to build on that reputation while moving away from the association with alcohol consumption that is often present in some minds. However, we still need to work on certain areas. On our way back from holiday this year, my wife and I arrived at Glasgow airport first thing in the morning—it was the morning after a fire at the airport and we had been delayed. We stopped off at a 24-hour garage in Paisley to buy breakfast. My wife went to pay for the goods and asked whether the shop had any orange juice. The one-word response from across the counter was, “Dilutin?” I can interpret that as a friendly response, but perhaps some of us need to work on our people skills if we are to make the Scottish welcome everything that it should be. That chap clearly had not been to the Commonwealth games Disney-style charm school that was talked about in a previous debate. Despite the tourism industry’s huge importance to Scotland and the potential for growth in employment, the idea of a career in tourism is still not attractive to many school and college leavers. Young men, in particular, still talk about training to be a welder rather than a waiter or hotel manager. We need to do more to demonstrate the opportunities that lie outwith the traditional picture of work in Scotland. There are many good examples of college courses and training, but it is unfortunate that the industry can still be associated with low rates of pay and with seasonal unemployment and insecurity. We need to challenge that.

Hear hear. I echo the member’s remarks. There is a difficulty, in that attitudes in Scotland are perhaps still a couple of decades behind. The industry has changed and tourism is a far more important and substantial industry than it has ever been, but sometimes our stereotypes of what to expect are forged in previous generations.

Indeed. That is behind the whole idea of boosting the industry’s status. We can do that in a number of ways, including through schools and careers services. I was making the point that the industry has a reputation for offering low pay, and tackling rates of pay would do much to overturn the image that I was talking about. The Government is still pursuing a target of 50 per cent expansion in the tourism industry, but if we are to have a remote chance of achieving that goal, one of the biggest contributors will be an expansion in the number of business visitors. That can happen if Government and cities work together. Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh have shown the way and I commend the leadership of those cities’ councils and the example that they have set. I move amendment S4M-04886.2, to insert at end: “; notes the value of business tourism in terms of promoting growth and dealing with issues of seasonality; recognises the key role of Scotland’s cities in developing business tourism, for example in Glasgow, where the city council has worked hard to achieve the position of largest destination for business tourism in the UK outside London, and in Aberdeen, where the city council has, in 2012, paid off the accumulated £26.2 million debt of the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre in order to continue to grow international conference business in the city; notes the importance of good transport links in helping to sustain and build on this success, and calls on the Scottish Government and local authorities to continue to work together positively to replicate this success across Scotland.”

As well as being anxious about the savings that they might be expected to make, many in local government are concerned about the impact of the Public Service Pensions Bill, which is currently going through Westminster. Can the minister tell us whether the Scottish Government will lodge a legislative consent motion so that we can discuss the implications of that bill for everyone in local government in Scotland?

It is extremely worrying and very revealing that the Scottish Government did not fully consult in advance of the bill on its measures and has steadfastly refused to listen to calls for a full business and regulatory impact assessment. That is despite forceful and convincing evidence that the bill will not have the effect to which it lays claim: it will not bring unoccupied business properties back into productive use. When similar measures were introduced in England and Wales, the argument was made then that some businesses were sitting on empty properties, knowing that their price was rising in a thriving property market. That is certainly no longer the case, and has not been the case for the past four years, which is why the measure has not worked in England and Wales. In towns like Paisley, which the minister knows very well, up to a quarter of retail properties now lie empty because of lack of demand, but the Scottish Government is in effect now going to punish business failure. We are also unsure of the impact that the measures will have on public revenue. One of the unintended consequences of the measures in England and Wales has been an increase in the number of charity shops. A very interesting briefing from the Scottish Property Federation points out that as the income from business rates relief has dropped in England, the amount given out in charity relief has risen. I am sure that that is not the picture that the minister and the Scottish Government wish to support in Scotland. There is also an unintended or unknown impact on the public sector, because we know that the measures will cost local authorities a lot of money for their properties, and it will even cost Government agencies such as Scottish Enterprise money. I urge members to support amendments 3, 4 and 5.

I support amendment 13 and particularly Jim Hume’s amendment 1. My colleague Sarah Boyack has accurately described the debate about section 1 as the politics of assertion over argument. Evidence to the Parliament on the section has not simply opposed the measures as a policy but convincingly and credibly argued that they will not work in practice. Few businesses or property owners are not desperate to find paying tenants to cover their overheads and costs. The minister is unconvincing in his evidence-light assertions to the contrary. Perhaps even more worrying is the proposal’s overall context. It is one month since the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth introduced what he called a budget for jobs and growth, but it is difficult to see how the new tax on businesses boosts the economy. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce highlighted today that the business rates burden is expected to rise from £2.18 billion in 2011-12 to £2.66 billion in 2014-15, which is an increase of 22 per cent in just three years. That is not the action of a Government that is trying to support growth or jobs. Section 1 will not return properties to productive use and will hurt the Scottish economy. We should listen to the evidence and reject the section entirely.

Does the Deputy First Minister believe that whether Scots use the euro or the pound is a matter that affects the everyday lives of every Scot who lives in this country?

Last week gave many of us the opportunity to catch a glimpse of what life in an independent Scotland under an SNP Administration might be like. No, I am not talking about the furore that surrounded the rather pretentiously named Edinburgh agreement—I will come on to that shortly. I am referring to the film that was shown on the BBC, “You’ve been Trumped”. I do not know whether other members also saw the film or how they felt, but I was embarrassed and ashamed. I was embarrassed that Scotland could be treated like some sort of banana republic by this bully of a man, and ashamed that not only did we do nothing to stand up for the local residents but we actually seem to have connived with the billionaire against the powerless. The lowest point for me was to see our own police officers seemingly intent on carrying out the bidding of Mr Trump against those who lived on the Menie estate. I mention that documentary because—as with the rest of the events that played out in the Scottish Parliament last week—one man was central to making all that happen. That man is not the bullying billionaire Mr Trump; it is our esteemed First Minister, Mr Salmond. The very person who should have been there to stand up for his own local constituents, the very person who should have been there to defend our interests against the unscrupulous attentions of the rich and powerful, the very person who should have been there to defend our proven systems of democratic accountability and decision making was instead cosying up to that bully. Mr Salmond is the one who picked up the phone to the chief planner; he is the one who bypassed the democratic and accountable procedures; and he is the one who, as I understand matters, to this day has not had the courage or the decency to go and talk directly to the residents, who are his own constituents.

It is not the fact that our esteemed First Minister enjoys the company of rich and powerful men that worries me, although I do not believe it to be a particularly attractive character trait. It is the treatment of his own office, the disregard for the office of First Minister and the disregard for the interests of the people of Scotland whom he is supposed to represent that I find most disturbing. That is what disturbs me about the other events last week.

In a minute, Mr McDonald. Many of us are familiar with our esteemed First Minister’s habit of making things up as he goes along. He makes assertions and then he believes his own assertions. There are many examples, some of which were given earlier, but one that I vividly recall from the previous session of Parliament was when he rebutted a question at First Minister’s questions about falling numbers of qualified teachers in our nurseries. I mention it because it is one of many examples that came out around the issue of the SNP’s broken election manifesto promises. The First Minister rebutted the Government’s own statistical evidence that the number of teachers was falling with the answer that the number of teachers was “substantially increasing”. An argument could have been made over how much the number of teachers was falling by, but under no scenario was the number of teachers increasing—never mind substantially. At the very least the First Minister misspoke. However, true to form, instead of apologising to the chamber or correcting himself, our esteemed First Minister sent out his human shield to set the record straight—in that case it was the then junior education minister Adam Ingram, someone I have a lot of respect for. That pattern was repeated last week as the First Minister sent out the hapless Jamie Hepburn to be slaughtered by Andrew Neil and the less hapless but equally unfortunate and uncomfortable Deputy First Minister, who was left squirming by Gordon Brewer on “Newsnight”. At least those individuals have some credibility, but then, as now, when his own trust is at stake, the First Minister hides behind the trust, the credibility and the respect that others have earned.

Mr McDonald seems to have missed the point that the First Minister picked up the phone to the chief planner and intervened directly, bypassing normal procedures, on behalf of a billionaire. That is not something that any other MSP, never mind any member of the public, could do. It was an abuse of office, and that is why I dislike and am very concerned about what happened last week. It is not about the behaviour of one individual; it is about the fact that he is abusing the office of First Minister and the power that goes with it. This should be an honest place for honest debate. There are parliamentary colleagues who have had the humility to come to Parliament—John Swinney and Nicola Sturgeon are among them—and who have retained their dignity and respect by being more open and honest with the chamber and the rest of Scotland. However, our esteemed First Minister hides behind others. He hides behind assertion and will not admit when he has led us all to believe something that is not true. That matters for two reasons. It matters because it reflects on the office of First Minister and the credibility of the Scottish Parliament. It also matters because these are crucial decisions that affect everyone living in Scotland. I hope that, despite recent adverse events in Europe, we would want to be members of the European Union. I further hope that the European Union would want to retain us as a member. However, as Willie Rennie, Hugh Henry and others have said, that is a far cry from agreeing the terms of that membership. We need to know whether we would have to renegotiate those terms. One way or another, we need to know whether those terms would include a share of the UK’s rebate, whether they would include a veto and—centrally—whether we would need to join the euro. Clarity on the latter point is not just a matter of the utmost practical significance; it is a highly politically significant matter, too. Given what has happened in the eurozone over the past year, the chances of Scotland voting for independence if, as a result, we would have to join the euro are virtually nil. That would be the killer blow for the SNP’s dreams of independence. I believe that, unfortunately, that is why the people get the accurate impression that the SNP will say absolutely anything to ensure that that does not happen. However, we are not having a frank debate about independence and this is not about the power of argument; this is all about the power of assertion. The SNP has asserted that we would have the safety net of the Bank of England, the sterling zone and the monetary policy committee when none of those is a proven fact. This is about having an open and honest debate. It is not about the character of just one politician; it is about his public office. He is the First Minister of Scotland, and he does that office a disservice when he fails to treat the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people with the respect that we deserve.

Will Rob Gibson take an intervention?

3. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the latest labour market statistics suggesting that there has been a quarterly increase in unemployment in Scotland compared with a fall across the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4F-00915)

Does the First Minister accept that 30,000 of the jobs that have been lost in little over a year were in the public sector in Scotland—that is, nurses, police support staff and civil servants? Those areas are the direct or indirect responsibility of the First Minister himself. If the First Minister is not able to explain why unemployment is higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK, can he tell us how many jobs—how many care assistants and teaching assistants—will be lost because of his 4.3 per cent real-terms cut to local government in this year’s budget?

I thank the minister for bringing forward the debate. As is often the case, I cannot say that I disagree with much that is in the Government’s motion. Improving people’s employability is not just helpful to individuals but—potentially at least—of wider benefit to business, industry and our productivity as a country. We will therefore support the motion, the Labour amendment and the request in the Conservative amendment. Unfortunately, as is also often the case, our greatest concern is about what is missing from the motion. The real problem that faces our country and our workforce is not employability but employment—or rather, the lack of it. We should support measures to improve employability, but much of that effort will be wasted if we do not do more to help to create jobs. A line in the motion talks about “linking employability support with actions to support economic growth in Scotland”, but where are those actions? We have just had one of the most half-hearted budgets that I can recall in my time in the Parliament. It contains little by way of economic stimulus and it began to fall apart within hours of Mr Swinney’s statement. I will return to the central issue of unemployment and our wider economy later, but I will first discuss something else that is missing. A gap exists between what the motion says about employability and the actions that the Scottish Government has taken, which fail to match the rhetoric.

As the cabinet secretary knows, all amendments to the budget must be framed so that they are properly costed. I wish that the Government had taken the same approach in producing its budget, instead of having a budget that fell apart under examination by the Scottish Parliament information centre within a couple of hours of being placed in the library. How does cutting £38 million from the further education budget improve employability? How does reducing the number of students at colleges by 80,000—that is 80,000 fewer people accessing a college education under the Scottish National Party Administration—help unemployed Scots back into the workforce?

That is the full-time equivalent figure, but the minister did not respond to the point that, under the SNP, 80,000 fewer people are going to college now than went two years ago. That means that 80,000 people have been denied a place at college—80,000 people have been denied the help that they need, and businesses have been denied the trained employees whom they need. Worse than that, 1,000 staff have been laid off at colleges. Members should not take my word for it. They should look at evidence that the Educational Institute of Scotland has provided and at the evidence to the Education and Culture Committee this week from Mary Goodman of the Federation of Small Businesses, who called for more—not less—flexible provision from Scotland’s colleges. As always with the cuts agenda, the most vulnerable are hurt. Across Scotland, parents of children with special needs feel frustrated and anxious as the few development courses that are available are being restricted, closed or removed altogether. The young adults who are affected are among the furthest from the job market. They want to make an economic contribution and they are desperate to improve their employability and to find work. They want to be valued for what they are capable of and not to be excluded because of the extent of their disability. College cuts are an immediate and pressing concern, but they have the potential to cause even greater damage to our society and economy in the longer term. In recent years, one of the most important policy developments—which I thought at one point was generally a cross-party development—has been the drive to reduce the gulf between vocational and academic educational options. People should have a genuine choice about how to make the most of their abilities and how to make themselves more employable, rather than simply being forced down the university route. For that to mean anything, there should be a move to narrow the funding gap between the two sectors. Instead, we are witnessing the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning’s naked elitism. There is a brazen promotion of universities over further education, and colleges are being forced to merge, lay off staff and close their doors to tens of thousands of Scottish students. That is all euphemistically called positive reform in order to disguise the truth of what is happening.

I am not sure that the minister is aware of what is happening in education on her watch. The funding for colleges is being slashed, and there is no parity of esteem—the drive towards it has been lost. Colleges certainly are for everyone, as they are about lifelong learning. However, under the current Scottish National Party Administration, they seem to have become solely the preserve of 16 to 19-year-olds, and we are reversing all that we have achieved in the past few years. That is not the way to create a knowledge economy, to promote skills and manufacturing or to improve employability. I ask the minister why there is such a lack of partnership between the Scottish Government and the Department for Work and Pensions on the work programmes. I accept her assurance in the motion that she is keen to promote employability partners. However, as I understand it, anyone who starts on the work programme is automatically ineligible for Scottish Government assistance or any other support such as skills or literacy training.

The cabinet secretary is keen to intervene—perhaps he can answer that.

There is a difference between avoiding duplication and partnership. The key point in that regard is that, if a young person in Scotland who is getting ESF funding for skills and training has to go on a work programme, they automatically stop the training and lose the skills, and are forced on to the programme. That is not a partnership approach.

Before I take an intervention, I suggest to the minister that the Scottish Government has now entirely and effectively pulled out of employability for all the long-term unemployed. She has left the future of the long-term unemployed solely up to the UK Government. I will take an intervention now.

Why is it that when the cabinet secretary intervenes yet again, it sounds not like a reason but like an excuse? Young people in Scotland want a joined-up approach from all Government agencies but they do not have that. What they have is the Scottish Government abdicating responsibility and saying, “We will not help young people in this situation”, although long-term youth unemployment is a serious problem that is facing our economy. Scotland’s unemployment rate is higher than that for the rest of the UK and long-term youth unemployment is now four times greater than it was just a year ago. There can be nobody in this chamber who has not heard about the long-term scarring effect of a prolonged period of unemployment on a young person’s life, yet the Scottish Government is pulling out of that programme entirely. We agree that improving the employability of young unemployed adults can help and that there is a need to tackle some of the barriers to unemployment such as transport and the provision of childcare, yet there is a gap between what the Scottish Government says about childcare and what it is doing, which is very little.

Surely, the most important priority for the Government is to boost the economy and reduce unemployment, but that is not happening. We are yet to hear any detail about the national employment programme, although there is a lot of eagerness to find out what is in it. It matters a lot whether it is a flagship Government programme or whether it has been pulled together hurriedly at the last minute for the budget. It sounds more like the latter than the former. However, it is important that we have a flagship employment programme—a wage subsidy programme—to get young people back into work. Employability helps, but employment is the biggest answer of all. I move amendment S4M-04365.3 in Kezia Dugdale’s name, to insert at end: “; supports the need for ambitious employment and employability programmes at both local and national level; is concerned, however, that the Scottish Government’s rhetoric is not matched by the decision to cut £38.2 million from college budgets, nor the £86 million cut to the housing budget in 2011, which coincided with the loss of 12,000 construction jobs; notes that Scotland’s unemployment rate is now higher than that of the UK as a whole, with one in five young people out of work, and that long-term youth unemployment is almost four times greater than a year ago; is concerned that the Scottish Government’s modern apprenticeship programme is failing to produce the necessary skills base for the growth industries of the future, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that its final 2013-14 budget is amended to genuinely promote jobs, growth and fairness in order to ensure that actions on employability can translate into actual employment.”

Yesterday we heard a series of invented figures, and today started with further fantasy. Where does Bruce Crawford get the figure of £124 million from?

If there is so much money in our colleges, why is Mr Crawford suggesting that the £38.2 million cut that I have identified is correct? Is there a £38.2 million cut or is there not?

I thank the minister for her opening speech. Before I get into the main substance of my speech, I will start with a brief digression. Last night, when I was at home preparing for today’s debate, one of the tasks that I had to do first was change the belt on the hoover. That is not a difficult or particularly time-consuming job, but it is clearly my job—as are taking out the bins, cutting the grass and changing the light bulbs.

Before Ms MacDonald and other members get the wrong idea, I should say that Claire and I do not live some sort of 1950s lifestyle—Claire in an apron and me with my papers and pipe. That is not how it is. The big advantage over our parents’ generation for men of my generation and for younger men is that we are able to participate fully in childcare. It is a huge advantage. As happens in many families, we choose to divide up the household tasks. That is fine, but there is a danger that if we pass on to our children a particular division of labour, then social and cultural attitudes become ingrained. If such attitudes translate into job segregation in the workforce, that is damaging to our society and certainly to women in our society. I think that Professor Ailsa McKay said at the women’s employment summit that irrespective of what the Government can do, it is up to parents, first and foremost, to ensure that we bring our children up with the right attitudes. However, I will not let the Government off the hook. Women’s struggle for equality in the workplace is not new, but it has taken on added importance in recent years as a result of the recession. Female unemployment has risen at an alarming rate—by more than 16 per cent among working-age women in the past year alone. For women aged 16 to 24, the rate is almost twice as high. The current level of women’s unemployment is almost double the level prior to the recession. I thank the minister and the STUC for hosting the women’s employment summit some three weeks ago and for calling for this debate, to enable us to reflect on the findings. An issue that was highlighted at the conference was that rising female employment has not only an acute impact on families and the economy but a more profound, although less talked about, impact on child poverty. The women in Scotland’s economy research centre, in conjunction with Save the Children, carried out important research that revealed a relationship between rising levels of women’s employment and falling levels of child poverty between 1998 and 2008. The centre found that women are more likely than fathers are to spend household income on children, and to defer their own consumption in favour of that of their children. The findings suggested that the needs of children in low-income households are more likely to be met when the mother is in work. We can draw our own conclusions about the accuracy and truth of the findings. I do not want to dwell on my party’s shortcomings, but I distinctly remember that when the 10p tax rate was abolished, the people whom I met who were the most anxious about how they would be affected were women—mothers and often grandmothers—in low-paid or part-time jobs. In nearly all cases, those women belonged to a self-sacrificing generation, which earned very little and put children and families’ needs first. The women were worried about the impact, not on themselves but on the people for whom they cared. The WISE research centre’s study makes important observations about how Government shapes public policy, in particular in the context of our approach to the recession. We know that in many cases, posts that women held were the first to go when the cuts started to bite. The high levels of women’s employment in the public sector—women are twice as likely as men to be employed in the public sector—mean that when the further cuts for local authorities that were announced in last week’s budget start to bite, women will again be the hardest hit. We have lost 30,000 public sector posts in a little over a year. Those cuts have come at the same time as the United Kingdom Government’s reforms to the welfare system, which will make it even more difficult for families to make ends meet. Save the Children has said that unless the final version of universal credit is radically different from the current version, there will be markedly higher levels of child poverty. That will be the case even in families in which parents are in work, as support from working tax credits disappears. What can Government do? In the Equal Opportunities Committee debate on the issue in June, Mary Fee and other members repeatedly highlighted the need for flexible, available and affordable childcare. I was encouraged when, at the summit, the Deputy First Minister equated childcare with infrastructure in its widest sense. As Frances O’Grady, the next general secretary of the TUC, said this week, investing in infrastructure for growth is about not just building more roads but is also about investing in our human infrastructure, by investing in education for young people, safe transport for workers and affordable childcare for families. Scottish childcare costs are among the highest in the UK. We must do more to bring costs down. Childcare must be flexible and accessible, to enable women to gain employment in all sectors of our economy. Women continue to provide the majority of unpaid care in the UK economy, whether for children or for other family members, and there is plenty of evidence to suggest that women opt for part-time work to do just that. It is important to recognise that caring for children does not stop when a child reaches school age. All too often mothers and fathers are restricted in the jobs that they can do because of the times that their children are in school. I understand that the Scottish Government is committed to introducing a children and young person’s bill in 2013, but there is no need to wait for that legislation. The Government would have our full support if it was to make more radical proposals now.

I agree with the tenor of what the minister said, except that I do not agree that we require legislation. Primary legislation can send out an important message and it certainly clears the way by setting policy firmly. However, I do not believe that flexible, affordable and available childcare needs primary legislation. We can do a lot right now by just investing in after-school clubs or activities for children, for example. Back in June, Mary Fee raised the point about encouraging more flexible working practices in the public sector. That does not mean just working practices that are flexible for employers, but working practices that are flexible for employees. Another example is our modern apprenticeship programme, which is very much to be supported. However—unintended or otherwise—it is clear that it is a Government-sponsored programme that can and does reinforce occupational segregation in certain areas. Some of the most recent statistics have revealed that, out of a total of 1,167 people who began hairdressing apprenticeships, 1,082 happened to be women. In contrast to that, only 31 women were accepted for an engineering apprenticeship out of a total of 1,209. Thank you, Presiding Officer. It would be easy for the Scottish Government to throw its hands up and blame the current crisis in women’s employment on the recession and on the actions of the UK Government. To some extent, we could make common cause in doing so, but I point to the many other things that the Scottish Government could be doing, even in these tough times, to promote equality and encourage women into the workplace. I move amendment S4M-04314.1, to insert at end “; is concerned that women have been particularly badly hit by the rise in unemployment in Scotland including an increase of more than 16% for all working-age women and more than 30% for women aged 18 to 24 over the last year alone and that women will have been disproportionately affected by the loss of around 30,000 Scottish public sector jobs over a similar period; is further concerned at the particular implications of high female unemployment in terms of tackling child poverty, and therefore calls on both the UK Government and the Scottish Government to urgently address this in their economic policies in addition to tackling traditional barriers to women accessing employment.”

Will the member give way?

I appreciate Jamie Hepburn’s comments about welfare reform. What does he think will be the impact on women’s employment of the Government’s decision to cut local government spending by 4.3 per cent in real terms, when we know that two thirds of local government workers are women?

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will publish its plans for broadcasting in an independent Scotland before the referendum. (S4O-01283)

I thank the culture secretary for her reply, although I had hoped that she would expand on the plans that the First Minister outlined at the broadcasting conference in Edinburgh last month, when he said that he intends to replace the BBC in Scotland with the equivalent of the Irish broadcaster, Raidió Teilifís Éireann, but potentially part funded by advertising. How will losing programmes such as David Attenborough’s “Frozen Planet”, Ken Bruce on Radio 2, Radio 5 Live’s coverage of the Olympics or access to the network of BBC correspondents throughout the country and in every country throughout the world improve the broadcasting or listening experience for most Scots? What benefit—

Last year, the cabinet secretary stood up in the Parliament and announced what he described as a budget for jobs and growth. He said that he planned to steer Scotland “a distinct course”. One year on, the rate of unemployment in Scotland is higher than the UK average and our country has sunk back into recession for the second time under his stewardship. That is certainly “distinct”. In fact, the decisions taken by this Scottish National Party finance minister and this SNP Administration have cost 30,000 public sector jobs over the past year alone, yet he stands before us today with no hint of humility and no hint of an apology. The worrying truth is that this finance minister seems content to pass the buck—either to blame Westminster for all our woes or to pass responsibility for all his cuts to our local authorities. In his statement, Mr Swinney talked of partnership with our councils. He did not mention that they will have to bear the brunt of his cuts—he did not even have the courage to mention that. He has transferred across the police and fire budget. I ask him to clarify what the real-terms cut to our local authorities is. How many care workers, nursery assistants and bin men are going to lose their jobs? How many older people are going to struggle for support? How many kids’ schools will suffer? How do his decisions in any way ameliorate or mitigate the welfare cuts that are being inflicted by the UK Government? The cabinet secretary is right to say that Scotland’s young people are being harshly affected by his recession, so why did he slam the college door shut in their faces with last year’s cuts to further education? The £17 million that has been announced this year does not come close to putting that right. Was the finance minister right then and is he wrong now, or is he right now and was he wrong then? He cannot be both. One of the few scraps of good news in the budget is some help for the housing sector. However, given last year’s cuts, the cabinet secretary is not even undoing the damage that he has wrought on the industry. Last year, 12,000 builders lost their jobs due to his decisions. Will he take a leaf out of the Welsh Assembly Government’s book and use Government revenue to pay off interest on housing association and council debt, thereby freeing up capital? Yet again, we have heard from the finance minister the droopy mantra, “It wisnae me.” The Scottish people know better: it is him. When will he stop passing the buck, take responsibility for his actions and get Scotland working again?

I echo the broad welcome for much of what is in the minister’s statement. On the minister’s proposals for energy from waste—in other words, incinerators that generate electricity—the minister has, rather than reduce the ROC by 50 per cent, as was initially proposed, retained the current level of support, according to the information on page 9 of the booklet accompanying the statement. Can the minister either expand on or clarify his intentions as regards incinerators? He will be aware of the anxiety that many such proposals create in communities across Scotland. Without my being too parochial I ask: does he support large-scale incineration from waste, as has been proposed in my own constituency in East Renfrewshire?

A favourite Woody Allen film of mine is “Zelig”, in which the eponymous hero pops up in improbable places alongside President Woodrow Wilson, Babe Ruth and even Hitler at the Nuremburg rallies. That character came to my mind over the summer when I took the opportunity to visit the nuclear power station at Hunterston for the first time—for anyone who has not been there, it is a beautiful place, as those from Ayrshire will know. Who should I find there but Fergus Ewing, the SNP Government’s Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism? We know that SNP ministers and often the grand panjandrum himself, the First Minister, are a ubiquitous presence at virtually any opening, even if it is of minor significance, but this is the same SNP that has remorselessly played on anti-nuclear sentiment for years. There are many SNP members—from their speeches today, I count Kevin Stewart, Gil Paterson, John Wilson and Dennis Robertson among them—for whom opposition to nuclear power is an article of faith, but there he was, not quite luring us in, sweeties and lollies in hand, the unembarrassable energy minister, heart swelling with pride as he welcomed us to a brand new nuclear-powered Scotland. It has been a pleasure today to continue to make common ground with the minister and members across the chamber in—nuclear aside—a consensual debate on electricity market reform. As a country and a Parliament, we are rightly proud that we have taken a lead in setting ambitious climate change and carbon reduction targets. The principles underpinning the UK Government’s reform certainly point us in the right direction to meet those targets, but we have to will the means to make those changes happen. That is not necessarily going to be a straightforward process. As Scottish Renewables highlighted, it has “concerns about the complexity of the proposals, the introduction of new risks to investors and the risk of timetables slipping.” The bill has a number of weaknesses that have been highlighted this afternoon, too. In spite of its being called electricity market reform, the draft bill does little to reform the electricity market to make it work in the interests of the consumer, rather than the big six. That point was made by several members, including my colleague Iain Gray, and it was made forcefully by Mary Scanlon. Those six huge companies dominate not just in electricity supply but in the tariffs that are offered to consumers. As my colleague Rhoda Grant highlighted, we need a system that encourages new entrants, particularly at local community level. Similarly, the draft bill contains few measures on demand reduction, which is essential not just in meeting climate change targets but in tackling fuel poverty, as Claudia Beamish said. There are a number of other concerns, all of which will need to be addressed by the UK Government. Several members highlighted issues that require leadership and commitment from the Scottish Government, too. Perhaps the most prominent of those, which we have highlighted in our addendum to the motion, is ensuring that grid connection to our islands is “fair and equitable”. In response to their interventions, I reassure Mary Scanlon and Murdo Fraser that that does not amount to advocating the so-called socialised system of charging. From the minister’s remarks, it sounds as though we are all singing from the same hymn sheet on the issue. To take the Western Isles as an example, more than 600MW of new renewable energy generation is under active consideration or development in the Outer Hebrides. If we are to meet our carbon targets, help our island communities and ensure basic fairness, it is essential that the interconnector to transport that electricity to market goes ahead. The review of transmission charges is yet to be finally signed off. Project transmit has offered some welcome improvement on the previous charging regime, but it appears that any further adjustments to its broad conclusions will be modest. I thought that Liam McArthur described well the distorting effect of an imbalanced transmission charging regime. If we want the projects in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland to go ahead, we need the Scottish Government to produce a specific renewables obligation certificate for island wind power. One of the reasons for using ROCs to promote renewable energy generation is the benefit that they provide to what are still fragile local economies, not just on the islands but across Scotland. It is not simply the income from wind turbine towers that benefits villages; it is the fact that local people are in control and are participating actively in decisions that affect the sustainability of their communities. In many cases, such community-owned renewables can also have a direct impact on fuel poverty. The huge hikes in fuel prices of recent years have plunged more and more people into difficulties and made them unable to pay their heating and electricity bills. John Wilson made that point particularly effectively. Although electricity market reform aims to create cleaner electricity and to improve security of supply—to ensure that the lights stay on—it remains relatively weak in addressing fuel poverty. There are incentives to improve the energy efficiency of our homes, but it is questionable whether the people in greatest need will be those who take greatest advantage of them. The Scottish Government needs to continue to look at how we identify and then help those low-income and fuel-poor households that are most at risk. That should include looking at projects that allow communities to generate their own electricity. I began by referring to the minister’s new-found love for all things nuclear. He followed that up in his statement on the renewables obligation review by making a virtue of seeking consistency across the UK, so it is little wonder that it has been such a consensual debate. From the way in which he neatly sidestepped my colleague James Kelly’s question, I gather that he may not entirely share our view that there is undoubtedly a union dividend from a single UK energy market. However, it is clear that there is a commitment to working together across the parties and across the Parliament. I would like to make one final point, which follows on from the minister’s statement. There is a need for greater clarity on, and a need to reassure communities across Scotland about, electricity generation from incineration or burning waste. It is not right that waste operators are trying to get round local planning controls and avoid accountability to local residents by applying directly to Scottish ministers for section 36 consent. Such projects are often speculative money-making exercises that have been disingenuously disguised and dressed up in environmentally friendly language. A stronger line from the Government that those projects are in line neither with its zero waste strategy nor with its renewable energy strategy would not entirely remove the threat from developers, but it would certainly give communities greater confidence that such applications are unlikely to succeed. As he often does, Stewart Stevenson made a particularly powerful and thoughtful speech, down to his topical tennis metaphor. He talked about the need for long-term fiscal certainty and security if we are to secure long-term investment in renewables. We are indeed in this for the long term and, although there remain many complexities to resolve, I believe that if we can maintain this level of shared purpose, we can deliver a secure future for consumers, for our businesses and for our environment. I commend the amendment and the motion.

I ask Mr Swinney what the impact has been on the Scottish economy—on joblessness in particular—of his decision as finance minister to cut £86 million from the housing budget.

If I appear in any way tired or distracted this afternoon, Presiding Officer, I hope that you understand that I come from a tennis-mad family. I do not often find myself on the edge of my seat when I am writing speeches for Government debates on the economy, but last night’s match was not one to have on in the background. Every minute of staying up until 2 o’clock was worth it. I pass on my congratulations to Andy Murray, Judy and the whole Murray team. [Applause.] Before I begin and—I suspect—lose the good humour of the Government benches, I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities to her new brief. I begin by confessing to liking another television programme. I am not sure whether other colleagues are fans of “QI”, which is hosted by Stephen Fry. It is very funny, informed and intelligent. In the most recent episode there was a little section on the use of irony. It got my attention as, last week, following the First Minister’s description of our former health secretary as a latter-day Nye Bevan, I asked the First Minister whether he had any sense of irony. I confess that I had the same reaction to today’s motion. We are in the midst of a double-dip recession, yet the Scottish National Party’s motion asks us to support the Scottish Government’s approach to economic policy and apparently to accept that it is taking “direct action to tackle unemployment and enhancing economic confidence”, and, of course, pointing the finger of responsibility solely at Westminster to provide the remedy for our economic distress. Irony is, of course, when the true meaning of what someone is saying varies quite markedly from the literal interpretation of the words used. I certainly struggled to find any accurate literal interpretation in today’s motion. Yes, we could join the SNP in criticising the Conservative Government at Westminster for an austerity programme that simply is not working. In fact, we have done exactly that in our amendment. However, to ignore the role of the Scottish Government itself or, worse, disingenuously to portray the Scottish Government’s economic interventions in an overly flattering light displays at the very least a lack of humility and a lack of sensitivity to those directly affected by the recession. Another example is the Scottish Government’s press release that accompanies today’s debate. It talks about the importance of boosting construction. However, in the past year we have lost 12,000 construction workers. Labour is certainly not alone in pointing to the fact that at least some of those job losses have come about directly because of Scottish Government cuts to its own housing budget, a budget entirely devolved and entirely at the disposal of the SNP’s team of economic ministers. On “QI”, Stephen Fry helpfully informed us of some of the different types of irony, including Socratic irony, which is when someone pretends not to understand the true meaning of the subject under discussion. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth may ignore the consequences of his decisions, but I suspect that even Mr Swinney would not be so thick-skinned as to pretend that there is no link between his cut to the housing budget and the 12,000 builders who lost their jobs last year.

That is a very strange and rather inaccurate—I was going to say ironic—interpretation of the figures on social housing. If Mr McDonald is going to contribute directly to the debate, I would like him to enlighten members about what the SNP’s manifesto commitment was. Was it to build social affordable housing? I am still unclear as to whether the SNP is going to meet its target and whether the commitment is to rented housing. I would like him to clarify that later on. “QI” did not list it, but I wonder whether there is such a thing as political irony, in which the words spoken do not match their true meaning. For example, there is the contrast between a budget that claims to focus on jobs and growth and the fact that it leads to higher unemployment and deeper recession; or there is the example of a party that reportedly objects to regional pay, but which stands on a manifesto in effect committing to the abolition of all national pay structures. Perhaps I can ask the finance minister why, if growth in the construction industry is so important—as we agree that it is—it is not listed as one of the seven key industrial sectors identified in the Government’s economic strategy and pursued by Scottish Enterprise. A more immediate example is that, despite the bombast from the First Minister and many others, we were genuinely taken aback by the contrast between that rhetoric and the thinness of the SNP’s legislative programme and the lack of vision that it illuminated. This appears to be a Government with no real sense of purpose or direction, other than of course towards the referendum. The legislative programme certainly does not convince many that it is designed to address the main difficulties facing families across Scotland—joblessness and the cost of living—or the economic problems facing our businesses and services. On the other hand, the promotion of the referendum and the promotion of responsibility for constitutional affairs to the SNP’s supposedly number one minister has meant a consequent demotion of responsibility for infrastructure, capital investment and the wider economic portfolio. That decision is the political equivalent of rubbing salt in the wound. I am not sure whether it is ironic, but it is certainly galling, is certainly insensitive and certainly reflects to me a skewed sense of our country’s priorities.

Yes, I do. That is a timely and good intervention, as I am just turning to that point. This week, Brian Ashcroft wrote a good blog article in which he discussed the accuracy of the Scottish Government’s claims that its interventions had made the difference in securing a shorter and shallower recession in Scotland. I believe in capital investment boosting the economy and have no reason to criticise the SNP from that point of view. That approach is Labour’s national policy and I genuinely want to believe that the Scottish Government’s and Scottish Parliament’s interventions can and do make a difference. Labour supports the approach that, for example, President Obama has taken in America, building roads and bridges and growing the US economy back to above pre-recession levels.

It is quite the reverse of that argument. I am saying that the SNP claims to have presided over a shorter and shallower recession because of the interventions that it has made, but constantly refuses to accept that it has the responsibility for making a difference to the economy because it says that it does not have the powers to do so. The Scottish Government’s argument is that, when there is good news—when things are going well and unemployment in Scotland is marginally or temporarily better than in the rest of the UK—it is all the Scottish Government’s doing; it is big. However, when things go bad again—when the economy or unemployment is worse than in the rest of the UK—it is suddenly all because we do not have the powers and big, bad Westminster has not given us enough money. That is not only ironic, but entirely contradictory.

I will make a slightly better contrast, if I may, by comparing the SNP’s economic interventions with what is happening in Wales. The Welsh construction industry has not taken the pasting that the industry in Scotland has suffered. One of the reasons is a deliberate, Government-led procurement policy. The Welsh have put greater emphasis on local employment and ensured that their small and medium-sized enterprises win contracts. They have done so legally. The Welsh Assembly Government has demonstrated that European legislation is neither a barrier nor an excuse for inaction, and we should do likewise. The other major initiative that has made a substantial difference in Wales is a wage subsidy programme—a specific programme to tackle unemployment, akin to Scottish Labour’s future jobs fund. It is scandalous that the SNP does not have such a programme in Scotland. There is the community jobs Scotland scheme, but it is simply not on a big enough scale. The CJS has made a tremendous difference to the lives of 1,800 Scots, but the Government should have loftier ambitions, particularly because of the damage that the recession is doing to our young people. The SNP likes to talk about vision, but many of its policies prove to be more of an illusion. In fact, worse than that, they prove to be an excuse for inaction. The Welsh Government has done more with fewer powers and less money. I expect much more of Government than simply an obsession with opinion polls and an Administration with the limited ambition of trying to prove that it is not incompetent, or one that is driven by the desire not to make any mistakes before the referendum and the hope that the Tories will muck things up at Westminster. Even if the referendum offered any realistic hope, Scotland simply could not wait that long. Last week we had what I thought was a genuinely consensual debate on economic wellbeing and Oxfam’s humankind index, but I do not detect that broad expression of political support and political agreement translating into Scottish Government action or exerting much influence over SNP economic policy. If we look at how the country responded to the banking crisis, we see that what we need is a Government that leads the way and recognises that we must do more to move to a more ethical approach to finance, which puts into economic practice the social values that the Scottish Government purports to hold as a progressive Government.

If Ms Urquhart had been at the CBI Scotland dinner last week, she would not have seen or heard much confidence expressed in what I believe is the centrepiece of the SNP’s manifesto, which is to break up this country. That hardly inspires confidence in industry and business.

That is an interesting observation. The CBI’s views do not matter, despite the fact that it represents some of the biggest companies operating in Scotland. I am intrigued that, because the CBI does not agree with the SNP and perhaps will not give in to the bullying phone calls that it obviously receives from the First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and their press officers, it does not count any more. I suspect that egotism is a failure of many MSPs—we can easily take ourselves too seriously—but I worry that there is a communal failing on behalf of this Government. It has a blinkered tendency to think: wha’s like us? It has a lack of awareness and a lack of humility. Most of the time that is simply a source of mockery—as in the idea that Scots were all cheering on Scolympians rather than team GB. It is certainly a source of political irony. The Deputy First Minister was quoted on the BBC last week talking, of course, about the constitution. She said that the referendum must be “made and built in Scotland”. If only she could say such a thing about the Forth crossing, we would all be delighted. When we talk about people’s jobs and livelihoods, this Government’s lack of a sense of irony is, unfortunately, not something to smile about. I move amendment S4M-04045.1, to leave out from “Scottish Government’s” to end and insert: “principle of boosting capital investment to tackle unemployment and promote growth but is concerned that decisions of the SNP administration, such as its £86 million real-terms cut in the housing budget over the last year, have contributed to the contraction in the construction sector in Scotland, with the loss of around 12,000 jobs last year; further notes recent reports, such as the Bank of Scotland Purchasing Managers Index showing Scottish private sector growth well below the UK average; believes that the awarding of steel contracts for the new Forth crossing sits poorly with the SNP’s claims to support Scottish manufacturing while the targeting of colleges for cuts and the demotion of its Infrastructure and Capital Investment portfolio to that of a shared brief with the referendum campaign is symptomatic of a Scottish Government with a poor sense of priorities; agrees with calls on the UK Government to acknowledge that its response is not working and a failure to secure growth in the UK economy is threatening its fiscal consolidation programme; calls on the UK Government to provide a stimulus to capital investment to support infrastructure and growth in the economy, but also expects the Scottish Government to use the powers at its disposal, including the forthcoming budget, to boost housing and construction and to introduce a major employment initiative designed to get Scotland working again, and further calls on the Scottish Government to reconfigure its National Performance Framework to encompass wellbeing, social inequality and environmental impact as well as promoting growth, building on new measures such as the Oxfam Humankind Index.”

Will the member give way?

Does Mr McDonald accept that the logic of his argument is that this Parliament is nothing other than a conduit to pass on Tory cuts from Westminster? If so, how can the SNP claim that plan MacB made any difference?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Mr Brodie think that the plans for independence will increase or decrease business confidence?

Will Chic Brodie give way?

Mr Hepburn paints a glowing and rosy picture that most businesses and most people would struggle to recognise. I ask him what impact cutting £86 million from the housing budget last year had. Did it have any relation to the 12,000 jobs that were lost in the construction industry?

There is a key point that I think all the Labour members have made. They have asked the Scottish National Party to take responsibility for its actions. What impact did the £86 million cut in the housing budget have? Did it lead to any of the 12,000 lost jobs in that area of work?

Before tongues start to wag or speculation mounts, I assure members that there has been no reshuffle or palace coup on the Labour benches—Johann Lamont sends her apologies for not being able to attend the debate. It gives me great pleasure to extend a warm and progressive Labour welcome full of forward-thinking positivity to the newly appointed team of Scottish Government ministers. We look forward to working with each and every one of them and to engaging with the Government and sharing Labour’s inspirational and aspirational vision for the future of Scotland. Before I turn to the appointments, I pay tribute to the three ministers who are demitting office—Stewart Stevenson, Brian Adam and Bruce Crawford. They have achieved the remarkable feat—certainly from the Opposition perspective—of representing the Scottish Government and the Scottish National Party while retaining their likeability. In their dealings with Parliament and the Scottish people, I believe that each of them has deservedly earned a reputation for fairness, sensitivity and good humour. I thank them all for the service that they have given to the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament over several years. Brian Adam is one of the original members of the Parliament and has now served in many different capacities: as a list MSP, a constituency MSP, a committee convener and a minister. I know that he will continue to make a substantial, and usually Doric, contribution from the back benches. Stewart Stevenson—sometime pilot, bank manager, psychiatric nurse, chauffeur to the First Minister, inventor of the computer, now unfortunately has another former post to add to the most impressive résumé in Holyrood. I believe that we are all delighted that Stewart was able to survive the weather, but unfortunately this season he has not seen out the change in the political weather. Bruce Crawford has won much admiration, particularly for his handling of the business manager’s role through four years of minority Administration. Mr Crawford gained not just the respect of Opposition politicians, but their friendship too—a rarity in our cynical world. He will be genuinely missed by politicians from the front bench of our party and from his own. [Applause.] Sad though it is to see Bruce Crawford step down from office, he will be the first to admit that the one downside of being business manager is that it stopped him from speaking in Parliament. The flip-side of that argument, of course, is that it gives the Opposition parties a good reason to welcome Joe FitzPatrick to the new post. Without wishing to be too cruel to Mr FitzPatrick, if the public face of the business manager’s job is to bob up and down in Parliament reading a pre-prepared and predictable script without being unduly troubled by independent thought, he is not only the perfect candidate, but has also trained assiduously for the past five years. Equally, I am not sure whether Mr FitzPatrick’s appointment will give hope or disappointment to his colleagues of a sycophantic tendency on the SNP back benches. Clearly for Bob Doris, Jamie Hepburn, Annabelle Ewing or the new boy trying on Joe’s crown as the most exuberant and loyal interventionist—the ever-enthusiastic Kevin Stewart—there may be short-term disappointment that this time round their phones did not ring, although they can see that fawning obedience is a long-term avenue to successful promotion. As for the other appointments, I am pleased that Margaret Burgess will be able to bring to bear her experience from the citizens advice bureaux and elsewhere on the tricky and troubled area of welfare reform. It will be a difficult task and we all wish her well in that area of work. I also congratulate Humza Yousaf, who is the acceptable face of the SNP—the poster boy of Scottish nationalism. He has been given an equally difficult task—that of ensuring that Fiona Hyslop remains in the Cabinet. I have no doubt whatsoever that Humza is there entirely on his merits, but I also want to congratulate him on his appointment as the Scottish Government’s first Muslim minister. [Applause.] Of course, I am similarly delighted for Paul Wheelhouse on his elevation. He is a back bencher who has earned a reputation for intelligent and informed contributions in the chamber. I was pleased to hear that when summoned to Bute House, Mr Wheelhouse’s first reaction was to assume that he was in trouble with the boss—an attitude that I imagine will go down well with the First Minister. I will conclude my look at the headline appointments on a slightly more serious point. I was a little baffled by the appointment of Alex Neil—I am assuming that his move to becoming health secretary is a promotion. What exactly—I asked myself—were his achievements in his infrastructure post? Surely his achievement was not to send jobs to China. Perhaps it was to announce dozens of long-term projects that may or may not happen over 20 years and then to withdraw funding from projects that should be happening now? The only conclusion that I could come to is that the First Minister took a leaf out of David Cameron’s book: if Jeremy Hunt can be promoted to health for his handling of the Murdoch affair, Mr Neil deserves similar treatment. Last, but certainly not least, there is Alex Neil’s predecessor as health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon—the minister whom Mr Salmond described, with no apparent trace of irony, as a modern-day Nye Bevan. She has been so successful that she is to be given six jobs. As well as being Mr Salmond’s loyal deputy, she now has responsibility for infrastructure, for capital spending, for welfare reform and housing, for cities, and of course—her number 1 priority—for delivering the referendum. There are plenty of jobs for Ms Sturgeon when what this Government should be delivering is plenty of work for the people of Scotland. The accusation has been laid at the feet of the SNP that it has identified the wrong political priorities—that it has promoted independence when it should be promoting the pressing needs of the people of Scotland: the economy. However, I look forward with positivity and with optimism and the challenge surely is to prove us wrong. It is a great honour and a privilege to be appointed as a Scottish Government minister, and on behalf of my Labour colleagues, I wish all of those so named today well in their work on behalf of the people of Scotland.

I ask the First Minister exactly what Nye Bevan’s views were on nationalism.

I join in with the general welcome back to the new parliamentary year. I hope that everyone has had a good recess and an enjoyable break, if they had one. I was going to say that it is great to see everyone again, but that is probably stretching things a little far.

It is great to see most members, Ms Robison. Of course, the start of the new parliamentary year is an opportunity for the Government and Parliament to reaffirm our purpose and our sense of mission. It is a chance to refresh our thinking on where we are heading as a country, to consider our key policies and to think again about what we are trying to achieve—or, failing that, to have a reshuffle. I take this opportunity to congratulate Nicola Sturgeon and her colleagues Alex Neil, Margaret Burgess, Paul Wheelhouse, Joe FitzPatrick and Humza Yousaf on their ministerial appointments. I also offer my thanks to Stewart Stevenson, Bruce Crawford and Brian Adam for their substantial contribution to the Government over many years. Equally important, the start of the new parliamentary year is an opportunity to assess our progress towards the goals of the Government. When looking back at the past five years of the SNP Administration, it is difficult for me to get a sense of progress towards anything other than a referendum on separation. When I was out and about on the doorsteps during the summer, as I am sure many colleagues were, there was absolutely no doubt that the economy was the number 1 issue on everyone’s minds. There is scarcely a family in the country that has not been affected one way or another. People are worried about bills, petrol costs, wage freezes or cuts and their job security or lack of employment. Times are tough and too many people are feeling the pinch. “Jobs” and “growth” were the watchwords of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, yet we are still not seeing economic growth and there are precious few jobs. A survey out last week suggests that real unemployment—the joblessness that affects families and communities across Scotland—is far worse than the official figures suggest. Even for those in employment, too many are becoming part of the working poor and are stressed and struggling to keep their heads above water. Our country is in the grip of a double-dip recession, but the only answer that the Scottish Government keeps coming up with is to ask Westminster for more money or to blame the Tory Government for everything. I am not saying that there are not problems emanating from the Tory Government, but surely we can do more with the powers that are at our disposal here in Scotland. The construction industry—which should be the spark to get the economy going—is in the doldrums, yet the SNP’s response in last year’s budget was to cut £100 million from the housing budget. Unemployment is running at record levels. Youth unemployment in particular is a hallmark of the recession and one that could scar a whole new generation, yet the SNP’s answer has been to cut college budgets by more than £70 million. In answer to Mark McDonald, I say that, yes, of course more capital to spend on shovel-ready projects would be a huge help, but why is the SNP delaying its own projects, which could be shovel ready, such as the sick kids hospital in Edinburgh? Why is it ripping hundreds of millions of pounds out of projects such as the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme? Even the programmes that are in the gift of Scottish ministers, such as the Forth crossing, could be used to better advantage in the Scottish economy. Instead, the droopy mantra that we hear repeatedly from the Scottish Government is that only independence will give us the levers of control that will allow us to reshape our economy. We heard that yet again from the First Minister yesterday and from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning today—that sounds to me less like a policy and more like an excuse.

I also welcome Nigel Don back to the chamber—[Interruption.] And Christine Grahame—[Laughter.] Please stop now before we get to my—

Mr Don says that the only thing that we can do is to ask for money from Westminster—surely that cannot be the limit of his ambition. If the Government were to grow the economy, more money would be generated. There are so many things that could be done to reshape the budget, but the whole point about the Scottish budget is that it is not designed to grow the economy, it is designed to appease popular sentiment.

Not now.

I suggest that promising jam tomorrow—independence in two years’ time—is no answer to the problems that the Scottish people are facing today. Let me make it clear that there will be areas where the Labour Party will work with the SNP and the Scottish Government, such as on preventative spend, childcare and working to protect our NHS and to care for our elderly. We will work with the Scottish Government where we can. However, we need to remind ministers that the difficulties and unfairness that blight communities and families today need answers today, not the promise of jam tomorrow. We need a Government that is driven by the need to get Scotland working again; to get people back into jobs and to ensure they are not paid poverty wages; to boost housing and construction and get the economy firing on all cylinders; to offer childcare to those who need it and education, skills and training to those who want it; to use the purchasing power of the Government to greater benefit; and to use all the powers of this Government and Parliament to build a better Scotland today.

What would Mr McDonald do with any of the powers to which he refers? Would he borrow more money? Would he raise or cut taxes? Does he want control over the Bank of England and over the currency? I want to know what he would do with any one of the powers.

If this independent Scotland adopts the Bank of England as the lender of last resort, and it sets the borrowing requirements for Scotland, how can we borrow more than the UK Government is currently giving us?

In the absence of an intervention from Mr Carlaw, I have a question for Margo MacDonald: was the NHS a creation of the union or a creation of Scotland? It is a creation of us all, and a benefit to us all.

More than a decade ago, when Scotland’s school examination system almost collapsed during the Scottish Qualifications Agency debacle, there was a revealing episode when, in the midst of the crisis—when a cohort of pupils and students feared that they would not get the highers for which they had worked—Scotland’s universities turned around and said, “Don’t worry. We don’t need to see your highers; we’ll take the assessment of your teachers.” Whatever their motivation was in saying so, the striking point for me was that the universities recognised that what matters is not the higher, nor even the grade in the exam, but the ability of the pupils who sit the exam, which is simply one way of testing or proving that ability and potential. However, how often do we find that the criteria that we use to assess, to moderate and to compare become the goal itself? We need to be careful about the values that we reflect when measuring success, because more often than not we end up being shaped by that very measurement. I do not think that that lesson has ever been more obvious at a national and international level than in the fallout from the banking crisis. Our society is crying out for a more ethical approach to finance, but we still return to the very criteria that got us into trouble in the first place. We promote the chase for AAA credit ratings, wealth generation becomes an end in itself rather than a means to an end and we end up promoting the values of greed and selfishness. No one is suggesting that money is not important, but if we track only income or economic measures, we fail to capture the damaging effects of inequality and the negative impact that lack of control, low status and poor neighbourhoods have on many people’s lives. A truly prosperous society needs to value and measure health, happiness, social wellbeing, relationships, poverty, housing, crime and environment. A host of factors affect our wellbeing and if we ignore them our social progress and ultimately our happiness will prove elusive. The good news is that both here in Scotland and around the world a range of alternative and complementary measures are being developed. Countries as diverse as France and Bhutan have shown the way in that regard with Government-led initiatives. I was no fan of President Sarkozy, but the work that he commissioned by Professor Stiglitz, which is a name that we are more familiar with here in the Scottish Parliament, has given complementary indices of wellbeing both importance and credibility. Closer to home, our Prime Minister, David Cameron, does not talk so much about happiness these days, for understandable reasons, but he is to be commended for at least beginning the process of collecting the necessary information through household surveys on social wellbeing. Here in Scotland the national performance framework, and Scotland performs, is similarly a positive step in the right direction. Without wishing to be overly critical, my main concern is that it is still too focused on quantitative rather than qualitative indicators and it strikes me that the framework itself has yet to become a practical tool of government. As with much of the work that is going on in other countries, these new indices of wellbeing do not seem to be used or referred to as an active measurement and I am certainly not aware of any decisions here in Scotland that have been changed as a result of the national performance framework. That is just one of the reasons why I was particularly pleased by the work that Oxfam and a host of voluntary sector and other organisations have done in producing the humankind index. I am pleased to have secured the debate following my motion on behalf of Oxfam, but I am conscious that several members and colleagues worked on the humankind index and I want to thank them for their contribution. They include Patrick Harvie from the Greens, Linda Fabiani from the Scottish National Party and, from Labour, my European colleague, David Martin MEP. I give particular thanks to Katherine Trebeck and all her colleagues from Oxfam. I do not think that any of us is saying that we have finally cracked it and that here is the one index that can sum up the human condition, but the point about the humankind index is that it is interactive and participatory; it goes into our communities—in fact, it goes into our most deprived communities and asks, “What is it that affects your wellbeing?” Few of us will be surprised at the list of measures that Oxfam identified as being important to most people: living in a neighbourhood where they can enjoy going outside; having a clean and healthy environment; feeling that they and those whom they care about are safe; access to green and wild spaces; community and play areas; having the facilities that they need locally; being part of a community; having good transport to get to where they need to go; and being able to access high-quality services. On what are often regarded as harder economic indicators, the Oxfam humankind index shows that one of people’s top priorities is satisfaction derived from work, not work per se, and that security and sufficiency of income are more important to people than just having large amounts of money. The result comes far closer to reflecting our values than the more often quoted but distant and anonymous indicators such as gross domestic product. I am grateful to the Carnegie UK Trust for circulating ahead of this debate a quote from Robert Kennedy, who said of GDP that, while it is useful, “it measures everything ... except that which makes life worthwhile.” I am delighted that the Parliament’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee is considering alternative and complementary measures of prosperity and wellbeing. The Glasgow centre for population health is doing pioneering work in the area. Later this evening, the Parliament’s Scotland’s Futures Forum will host a discussion on the same issue. Scotland is already leading the way, but we could do more, and Oxfam’s humankind index shows us the way. I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to look again at the national performance framework to consider whether it can be reformed and whether the link between governmental decision making and indices of wellbeing can be made more explicit. Specifically, I ask him to consider Oxfam’s work and the interactive way in which Oxfam asks members of our society and communities what matters to them. Official recognition of Oxfam’s approach and official use of the index would send out a clear signal of our intentions and values here in Scotland. The values that we use to shape our criteria and measure progress can shape our goals and the sort of country that we want to be. I hope that we make the right choice.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. This is the first use of the new budget exchange mechanism, and I will begin by asking the cabinet secretary whether he believes that the new framework achieves the right balance between spending controls and end-year flexibility. This has been a month for budget U-turns at Westminster. I am pleased that Mr Swinney is partially following suit by reinstating some of what he cut from the housing budget in Scotland. The cabinet secretary has clearly recognised the strength of the Opposition’s argument about cutting such a vital sector when we are supposedly pursuing economic growth. Has he yet recognised the damage that he has done to Scotland’s colleges and the prospects for Scotland’s young people? If so, why is there nothing in today’s announcement about education? The statement gives Mr Swinney the opportunity to report on how much taxpayers’ money has been spent. Has he made any assessment of the outcomes that have been achieved through his spending decisions? Earlier this year, he said that his was a budget for jobs and growth. We now know that more than 25,000 jobs were lost last year in the public sector alone—the area for which the cabinet secretary has primary responsibility. Has the outturn of the minister’s budget been to deliver any economic growth for Scotland? If so, in which areas?

A couple of weeks ago, the national media picked up on a story about thousands of Glaswegians being sent to a Disney-style charm school ahead of the Commonwealth games. “Have I Got News for You” and other programmes clearly enjoyed the idea of Rab C Nesbitt and the like reciting pledges such as, “I must learn about the Glasgow botanic gardens,” and, “I will smile more often.” In fact, I suspect that most Scots and most Glaswegians who heard the story liked it as well. Whatever other failings we have, we are not too po-faced to laugh at ourselves. The story is particularly good for illuminating where we need to concentrate some of our efforts if we are to make Scotland a more attractive tourist destination and to grow the industry by 50 per cent by 2016. The visitor experience in Scotland is shaped more by the welcome that we give tourists than by the beauty of our scenery or the majesty of our historic castles and battlefields. Whether we are saying, “Have a nice day,” or “Gaun yersel,” it is the genuine warmth of the words that we offer to visitors that will bring them back to our country. That message rings out loud and clear in the strategy document. I will quote one passage: “Growth will come about by • Turning the country’s assets into top quality experiences. Everybody involved in tourism, whether an hotelier, a shop assistant, a self-caterer”, those who work in “a theatre, an attraction or a bus driver, will be challenged to ensure top-notch quality across all the services and places that make up a visitor’s experience. This doesn’t mean everyone has to have a luxury product, but it does mean that what is on offer has to exceed visitor expectations.” I thought that Mary Scanlon made an excellent point when she said that the fact that many hillwalkers, climbers and cyclists who come to Scotland are not staying in 4-star hotels does not mean that they should not expect the best—quite the reverse. Quality and high standards are the watchwords in the report. Another key word in the tourism leadership group’s strategy is growth. Tourism is a key area of the economy in which the circumstances can still support growth if the partners, including the Scottish Government, work together. Many members talked about the winning years—the year of creative Scotland in 2012, the year of natural Scotland in 2013, which is a chance to grow green or eco-tourism, and the second year of homecoming in 2014, which brings the Ryder cup and Commonwealth games to Scotland. Economic growth should be the main goal of every level of government. That is why Labour’s amendment reiterates the importance of retaining the target to grow tourism by 50 per cent. That goal is not just desirable but achievable, given the propitious circumstances, and vital. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee pointed out that a question remains about the Government’s commitment to the 50 per cent target. The chief executive of VisitScotland called it an ambition rather than a target, and we need clarity from the minister on whether the target is at the heart of his thinking. A good start for the minister might be to provide further information on how he intends to measure progress. The Scottish Tourism Alliance talks about the importance of gathering performance indicators, which echoes a call by the EET committee. Will the minister say how he will work with the tourism industry to establish a monitoring and evaluation framework? Sporting events figure largely in the list of events that will contribute to the winning years. I add my congratulations to those of Chic Brodie to everyone who was involved in winning the open championship for Royal Troon in 2016. Ahead of the debate, the Scottish Sports Association circulated a particularly helpful briefing on sport’s contribution to the Scottish economy. Fishing and golf have long been huge attractions for high-spending visitors, but they have been joined in the past few years by new and exciting activities, such as mountain biking. When I was a kid, Fort William meant a place for wet games of shinty but, when we pass through the town now, we cannot help but notice all the cycle racks, bike shops and posters, which show what a difference mountain biking is making to the local economy. So much more can be done to improve and expand facilities. Instead of lining up swimming pools for closure and bemoaning the lack of ice rinks in the country, we should be investing in those areas and providing activities that are not weather dependent and facilities that will not just be attractive to visitors but will be used all year round by locals. I am optimistic that Scotland will make the most of the opportunities that are presented by the Commonwealth games in 2014, but the visit of the Olympic torch left me slightly anxious about the Scottish Government’s approach. It has been difficult not to contrast some SNP ministers’ rather grudging remarks about the so-called London Olympics with the phenomenal welcome that the torch received in every Scottish community. I acknowledge what Dennis Robertson said about the welcome that the torch received in Aberdeenshire West but, like Rhoda Grant, I cannot help feeling that we missed a trick in Scotland and could have marketed the warmth of the Scottish welcome, rather than appearing as if we have a chip on our shoulder. I heard the chef Marco Pierre White on the radio recently. He observed that the standard of food in our restaurants is now first class, for the most part. I am not sure that it is first class everywhere, but I certainly accept that we expect good food whenever we go out to eat. Marco Pierre White said that the key is not just to maintain the high standard of cuisine but to make the atmosphere and the experience of eating out enjoyable. He went on to say that good staff are the key to a good night out, and he talked about how he hires on personality and trains for the skills that he needs. I have heard the same approach described by other people who work in retail or hospitality. Therefore, one of the most important tasks for the Scottish Government is to support better training and skills in the hospitality and retail sectors. We need to be able not just to attract the right people into the industry but to retain staff by offering the prospect of a full and rewarding career. Margaret McCulloch was right to highlight our on-going concern about pay, conditions and status in the sector. The report that is at the centre of the debate was industry led and focused on a partnership approach. The minister rightly commended the approach, but that does not let the Government off the hook. I will not strike an overly critical note, but the motion is a little vague on the actions that the Government will take. The most specific point in it is the call to the UK Government to cut VAT and devolve air passenger duty. I simply mention that because I am disappointed that, by highlighting what other people should do rather than what the Scottish Government is doing, the motion reads more like an excuse than a call for action.

Indeed. I did not have time to do so, but I will take the opportunity now to add my congratulations to those involved in attracting businesses to Scotland, particularly with respect to the conferences that are now coming to Scotland. I draw the minister’s attention to Helen Eadie’s comments, particularly the ones about the importance of maintaining standards in our hotels. She raised a serious point about the impressions of the eastern European visitors. On a similar but less serious note, my aunt runs a bed and breakfast in Skye. A few years ago, an Italian couple stayed there. They were making a bit of a racket—she said that it sounded as though they were playing football in the bedroom—so she went upstairs and gave them a row. She thought nothing of it. They wrote something Italian in the guest book and left. It was another year before she had another Italian visitor. She asked them to translate it and they laughed and said that it was a very famous Italian saying from Dante’s “Inferno”: “Abandon hope all ye who enter here”.

Yes. I am just suggesting that one person’s standards are not universally accepted.

I was invited to my local Asda last week, partly to hear about its successful work experience programme but, more important, to join its mums listening group, which is a new initiative in which the supermarket gathers together a group of mothers to talk about how the current economic situation is affecting them. It was a useful exercise to hear at first hand and to confirm the iniquitous choices that many families are having to make in the face of difficult circumstances. One of the many things that struck me from the discussion was the unanimity of opinion among that group of women when asked what the Government and others could do to help. One example was cheaper, more flexible and more widely available childcare. They were all mothers, but they were also teachers, lawyers, shop assistants and more. Not all were ready to return to their previous occupations or careers, but all felt that their choices were constrained by the lack of affordable childcare. There is no doubt that childcare is an incredible burden on parental income. Scottish childcare costs are among the highest in Britain. Scottish parents can expect to pay more than £100 for 25 hours of nursery care for children under two. In some cases, it is up to or more than £230 a week. For children over two years of age, families can expect to pay £95 a week—and that is when childcare is available. I look back at the huge investment in and expansion of nursery education for all three and four-year-olds under Labour as one of the most significant achievements in the Parliament, but it feels as though progress on improving childcare has stalled. It is more than five years since the SNP promised extra childcare. Despite the political support that any such move would get from Labour, the Government has, as the minister has just confirmed, postponed the introduction of a children’s bill until next year at the earliest. On the broader issues, I congratulate the Scottish Government on its promise to hold a women’s employment summit later this year, but, as with the lack of affordable childcare, I fear that not enough is being done to tackle effectively the central problems affecting women in the workplace. As the minister mentioned, we know that young people have been particularly badly affected by the recession, but it is worth highlighting that unemployment among women has increased faster than among men. In fact, since the SNP was elected, it has doubled from 4.1 to 8.2 per cent with more than 100,000 women now out of work. I will not try to blame the Scottish Government for that entire issue or the wider economic recession that we are in, but I highlight that unemployment among men has dropped recently from 9.7 per cent, at the beginning of 2010, to 8.2 per cent. In other words, the impact of the recession has not been evenly felt. There is no single explanation for that, but gender stereotyping, segregation in the workforce and other negative attitudes and practices are undoubtedly a part of the cause. Even ageism, which demoralises so many people in their 50s and 60s who still have plenty to offer, is thought to affect older women more than older men. Those unemployment statistics are likely to become worse as austerity cuts take an even greater toll on people’s lives. We know that cuts to the public sector are likely to result in further huge job losses with women expected to be worst hit. In fact, it was depressing to hear it confirmed today that more than 25,000 public sector workers have lost their jobs over the past year. I am afraid that it was no surprise to hear that unemployment among women in Scotland is now higher that it is across the rest of the UK. Basically, women are far more likely than men to be employed in the public sector—they account for two thirds of the workforce—therefore it is unfortunately the case that public sector cuts will lead to twice as many women losing their jobs as men. If we look at the practical steps that we can take to make a difference, it is disappointing that the Government is not doing more. Last week, we called for a gender quota system to be introduced for public sector boards. That measure is supported by many organisations from Oxfam to the STUC, and I was pleased that Mary Fee, the committee convener, referred to it in her opening remarks. That proposal has been rejected by the Government despite the fact that quotas have proved successful in similar small countries, including Norway, Denmark and Iceland. Of course, in addition to women facing a threat to their employment, there continues to be a glass ceiling. A pressing issue over which the Scottish Government certainly has control is that of the disparity between men and women in apprenticeship schemes. It is essential that we offer a vocational alternative, but we have to challenge gender stereotyping and segregation, not reinforce it. Such disparities create uncomfortable working practices and pigeonhole men and women in certain industries. There is so much more that we can do. We need to close the pay gap, challenge occupational gender segregation, offer more, not less flexible working, and improve the gender balance at boardroom level. I am pleased to support the committee’s work in highlighting the challenges ahead.

Will the jobs that the minister announced in the enterprise companies be new posts, or will the young people concerned replace older workers in those posts?

I thank the cabinet secretary for giving the chamber notice of at least some of the Scottish Government’s thinking on taxation. We have heard a great deal this afternoon about why we need to establish a Scottish HMRC, but there has been very little on the question that most people want to know about: whether the new taxes will be higher or lower. The Scottish Government says that it wishes to cut corporation tax, over which it has no control, and yet has said very little about what it plans to do with the taxes for which it has full responsibility, other than to make the rather unconvincing assertion that one option to be consulted on involves a revenue-neutral proposal that will leave 95 per cent of people better off. Given that, will the cabinet secretary tell us exactly how much it will cost to establish revenue Scotland, what the additional on-going costs to the Registers of Scotland and SEPA will be and whether he has discussed with HMRC the costs of collecting the new tax? Will he also undertake to publish in the Scottish Parliament information centre all his research and costings on these matters? The cabinet secretary remarked about certainty: “We believe it is important to create certainty around the amount of tax that individuals have to pay. To do this we need to consult effectively on our proposals”. Will he apologise for not carrying out a consultation or business impact assessment on the public health levy and undertake to implement just such a consultation on the empty properties levy? Given that the First Minister has said that he will use the new powers transferred under the Scotland Act 2012 to replace the council tax with a local income tax, will the cabinet secretary tell us exactly when those proposals will be brought forward? Will he assure us that he will not spend any more Government funds or taxpayers’ money on court fees to prevent the Scottish public from seeing the Government’s calculations? Finally, will he confirm that he is still committed to introducing this new income tax?

I support amendment 1 in the name of my colleague Rhoda Grant, and echo the sentiments that Patrick Harvie expressed. There is no point in pretending that the bill has created widespread excitement among the general public, but the issue of beneficial ownership of land and the concerns about greater transparency around who owns land and property in Scotland have engaged slightly wider interest. It is clear from the committee’s deliberations and findings in its stage 1 report that there was a lot of sympathy among committee members for the need for further measures to promote the accessibility and transparency of the register. I understand why the committee could not accept Andy Wightman’s suggestions at stage 2, but I believe that Rhoda Grant has come up with an alternative and fairly tightly drawn amendment that would provide further information on proprietors, which I hope the Scottish Government is minded to accept.

As I suspect all members will do today, I begin by welcoming the reforms in the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill and the improvements that we hope the bill will introduce to the system of land registration in Scotland. Our country has one of the oldest public registers of property and land, which dates back almost exactly 400 years to 1617 and the establishment of the register of sasines, which is the original national register of property deeds. I was slightly worried when Mr Ewing seemed to suggest that he can remember the old system. A replacement for the register of sasines was introduced in 1979 with the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979. We hope that the passage of the bill today will improve further on that modernisation process. Before I go further, I thank all those who have been involved in introducing and working on the bill: the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and his team; members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and their clerks; the researchers at the Scottish Parliament information centre; all those who gave evidence or responded to the consultation, including the Law Society of Scotland; and of course the Scottish Law Commission, whose original report and recommendations were the basis for this reforming bill. There are a number of reasons why the bill is necessary and welcome. An effective system of land registration is important to any modern economy. To give an idea of that importance, it is worth mentioning that the Scottish property market, including mortgages and remortgages, was worth more than £24 billion in 2009-10. The new land register of Scotland was introduced in 1979 to replace the register of sasines. It was gradually brought into operation and, since 2003, it has applied across the country. In fact, I note that Renfrewshire, in my constituency, was first to use the new register. Unlike the old register of sasines, which often only contained a written description of the legal boundaries to a property or a poor quality plan, the land register describes the property by reference to the relevant part of an Ordnance Survey map. The land register is a register of title, not of deeds. For example, on the one hand, a person who buys land on a register of deed has to verify the seller’s legal title by examining the sequence of prior deeds, which is a complex task. On the other, if the land is on a register of title, it is only necessary to check that the seller is the person who is listed on the register as the owner. I note that the documentation accompanying the bill stated that that job could therefore be carried out by a paralegal, rather than by a trained lawyer, which means that the process should be much cheaper for all involved. I am not sure whether that saving has been necessarily passed on yet, but I look forward to that happening under the new system. There have been big improvements, but until now a number of concerns have remained about operation of the new land register, which the bill will address. The main concern is that, despite the register’s having been operating for more than three decades, only 55 per cent of Scotland's more than 2 million property titles have been switched to the new register. In terms of area, that represents only 21 per cent of the land mass of Scotland. As members know, that is because land belonging to the Crown, local authorities, the churches, and some of the larger estates is rarely sold. The bill addresses that concern and the other key weaknesses with four specific measures that are designed to ensure the eventual transfer of all property in Scotland to the land register, and the subsequent closure of the register of sasines. The bill improves the law relating to rectification of inaccuracies in the land register, and operation of the state guarantee of title, which was criticised for being legally complex. The bill rebalances the law towards the true owner of the affected property, rather than the person who acquires the property. However, the bill does not do everything. There has been criticism of the mapping system that is operated by Registers of Scotland. That issue has not been addressed by the bill, although I note that Registers of Scotland has set up a mapping forum with the Law Society of Scotland and other interested bodies. I confess that I found the bill—or, at least, the informed briefings that have accompanied its parliamentary passage—to be very educational. I admit that I was one of those who thought that, following the initial missives, the exchange of keys to a property, accompanying the settlement, marked the transfer of ownership. I am reliably informed that ownership transfers in law only when it is registered in the land register. Of course, there is typically a delay between receipt of an application and its registration. Part 4 of the bill introduces a new system of advance notices that are designed to protect the buyer of the property from the risks that he or she is exposed to in the short gap between handing over the purchase price and receiving legal title. The only major disagreement or, rather, disappointment with the bill is that it misses the opportunity to move the land reform agenda on apace. The Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism made the point at Stage 1 that the bill is not about reform of the law on property, but about reform of the law on registration of property. The trouble with that argument is that there are issues that are to do with registration alone and, in particular, to do with access to information and transparency, which would help communities across Scotland. The minister, in rejecting Rhoda Grant’s amendment 1, suggested that the land register is sufficiently open and transparent. He argued that the point of the register is simply to establish or validate ownership. The argument that I and many others who have an interest in wider land reform in Scotland share, is that there are still plenty of murky practices and a great deal of obscurity about who owns land and property. The best way for us to end that unwelcome state of affairs is simply to shine a light on the matter. People and companies who operate openly and are potentially subject to wider public scrutiny are far more likely to act in the wider public interest than in self-interest. I believe that we have a choice: we can simply allow the land register to be used by any and all property owners to secure their own interests, or we can use the register as a tool of public policy that is designed to encourage beneficial ownership. I am disappointed that we have not taken the opportunity to pursue the latter option, and I hope that the Parliament will have the opportunity to come back to and address that issue. As many others are, I am particularly anxious that people in urban areas and not just those who live in rural Scotland become more aware of their own environment and exercise greater responsibility over that space. How many of us as constituency MSPs have been approached over the years about land ownership issues? Such issues include, for example, local eyesores or patches of ground for which no one seems to claim ownership and which become magnets for refuse and litter. Finding out who owns and is responsible for maintaining land in Scotland should be simpler and more straightforward. On that point, I am pleased to see the measures in part 10 of the bill that will make use of electronic documents easier. Despite our achievements early on in this Parliament in abolishing feudal tenure, guaranteeing the right to roam and introducing the right for some communities to buy their land, Scotland still enjoys the most inequitable distribution of land ownership in Europe. I believe that there is a clear majority in the Scottish Parliament in support of further land reform, so I am anxious because today is a bit of a missed opportunity. Having said that, I am pleased to welcome the measures that the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill will introduce and I hope that they make a marked and welcome difference to our 400-year-old system of public land and property registration.

Before the cabinet secretary moves away from the issue of wage incentives, will he say whether his comments mean that the Scottish National Party supports Labour’s Scottish future jobs fund?

The debate has had at least two threads. On the one hand we have heard quite clear and genuine concern about what is happening in the euro zone. There is anxiety over the current instability and the impact that that is having on our economy. There is also concern about the social cost of the supposed solution to the euro’s problems—the aggressive pursuit of austerity measures over economic growth and the impact that that is having here in Scotland and perhaps more immediately on the people of Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland. It is a concern that has been shared by members across the chamber. I suspect that SNP members will not reflect on or share my view on the second thread that I will pick up. In highlighting the failure of the austerity-only policies that right-wing European Governments have pursued, the Scottish Government inadvertently illustrates its own failure to produce any distinctive economic growth in Scotland. Today’s debate has revealed again an intellectual vacuum at the heart of the SNP’s supposed plans for a post-referendum separatist Scotland. For example, in the past days and weeks, we have heard a series of vague assertions—they were simply assertions and not arguments—about the currency that Scots would use in a separate Scotland. Most of us have been left none the wiser about how we would exert any influence over such a currency or hold people to account on it and about why leaving sterling or continuing to use it would make us better off. It is staggeringly ironic that the SNP-led Government wants us to leave the UK, lose our right to produce Scottish banknotes and negotiate an agreement to use English or Northern Irish notes. More than 300 years of Scottish currency are about to be lost for what, exactly? We are to be left in a sort of currency limbo in which we beg the Bank of England to set our fiscal and monetary policy for us until the situation in Europe stabilises, when we will ask Frankfurt to do the same for us. If I have time, I will return to that point. In recent weeks, it has been difficult to switch on the telly or radio or open a newspaper without scaring ourselves about the euro zone’s future. There are horrendous unemployment levels in Spain, the beginnings of social unrest in Greece and even the replacement of democratically elected Governments with Administrations that are run by technocrats, as Neil Findlay said. That is all evidence of an economic system that is not delivering the goods. What is more worrying—to a degree, the SNP and Labour have agreed on this today—is that the austerity-only approach of the Tories in the UK, which the German Government has led across Europe, is making things worse, not better. Deficit reduction is important but, without parallel measures to stimulate economic growth, it is simply suppressing demand, forcing up our unemployment rates and leading us into the double-dip recession that many feared and which could have been avoided.

Before Willie Rennie intervenes, I say that I am not a huge fan of the IMF’s approach to the economy. However, like Christina McKelvie and others, I highlight Christine Lagarde’s view that we need to start promoting growth in this country and that we are in danger of entrenching recession. The right-wing chorus has been challenged by the success of President Obama in America and, in particular, by the election of François Hollande in France. We have not exactly reached consensus across the chamber, but we have a large majority in support of one point: we need to send a message to our UK and European colleagues that we, too, want a rebalancing—if I may put it that way, Mr Brown—of economic policies, with a far greater emphasis placed on growth rather than simply focusing on deficit reduction. I say to the cabinet secretary that, if we are so united about the importance of Governments pursuing and securing economic growth, why exactly is that not happening in Scotland? It is unacceptable to demand a change of policy from the UK Government and across Europe if the Scottish Government is unwilling to play its part and accept its share of responsibility for stimulating the economy. The UK Government should invest more in capital programmes, and £300 million for shovel-ready projects would be a big help, but is it not a little hypocritical of the Scottish Government to demand such sums when it has just cut more than £100 million from the housing budget? The UK Government should bring forward investment in infrastructure, but why has the SNP Government allowed many of its NPD programmes—never mind its direct-investment programmes—to slip? The sick kids hospital in Edinburgh, the Borders railway and the dualling of the A9 have all been delayed. The UK Government should be doing more to get people back into work rather than presiding over mass unemployment, but why has Mr Swinney’s Government allowed the steel contracts for the new Forth crossing to go to China rather than Lanarkshire? The social cost of austerity is unacceptable, but why has the Scottish Government cut college budgets by more than 10 per cent—to be followed by a further 20 per cent cut? Why are the young paying the price for the recession?

Mr Brodie is confusing protectionism with procurement. We need a procurement bill. If he listened to some of our trade union colleagues or our Welsh colleagues, he would hear what can be done with procurement when there is the political will. We need action at all levels of government, and it is an evasion of our responsibility to ask of others what we are not willing to demonstrate ourselves. I was intrigued that Mr Swinney did not mention independence in his opening speech. I thought that he gave us a rather abstract analysis of the economy, almost as though it did not affect us directly. I could not disagree with much of what he said because he seemed to be repeating Labour’s analysis of why growth is important in the economy. However, Johann Lamont and I thought that he was attempting to take politics and independence out of the argument. I suspect that one of the reasons why the SNP is running scared of holding a referendum soon has been demonstrated by today’s debate, which has highlighted some of the basic questions that the SNP is unable to answer. For example, why would anyone want to leave Britain to join the euro zone? That is the SNP’s position, but I ask the question because its position seems to change depending on which way the political and economic wind is blowing. I thank Ross in the Labour resource centre for finding some wonderful quotes. Back in 1999, according to Mr Salmond, the pound was “a millstone round Scotland’s neck”, but in January this year he told us that “the lender of last resort would still be the Bank of England”. At the SNP conference in 2009, the SNP’s national secretary described procrastination on joining the euro as “the politics of moral failure”. I cannot understand the argument that we should be independent but sterling is the best that we can do. It gets better. Two years later, Alyn Smith MEP said: “We could be like Denmark and have an independent currency in the EU”. Jim Sillars said: “My view is that we should have our own currency, after a transition period”. I have not even mentioned the yen.

The debate has been great. We have had the SNP quoting Tony Blair, and several colleagues have said, “Thank goodness for Gordon Brown.” We have not heard enough of that. Thank goodness for Gordon Brown, not just for rescuing our banks but for the five tests for entry to the euro. There are steps that we can take. It is clear that currency union has not worked without greater monetary and political union, which means socialising the debt and the richer helping the poorer. A central bank issuing euro bonds might help.

A financial firewall might help. Most of all, we need growth—and that means the Scottish Government delivering growth.

I have a couple of quotes from Mr Swinney. In 2009, Mr Swinney said: “The events which have taken place in global markets ... are ... without precedent ... However there appears to be general agreement that the immediate cause of the crises stemmed from two powerful external shocks during 2007—the international financial crisis” and the credit crunch. He went on to say: “The origins of the financial ... instability can be traced back to the growing imbalances in the World economy”. Perhaps Mr Swinney would like to thank Gordon Brown, who is not to blame.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how it procures public contracts for supported employment. (S4O-01039)

The cabinet secretary and many other members will share my concern about the future of Remploy. I believe that the consultation on the issue is about two thirds of the way through. The biggest support that the Scottish Government can offer the employees and trade unions is to place further contracts with Remploy. Has he been able to use article 19 or the other techniques that are available to him to place such contracts and is he looking to do so in future?

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will not mind if I begin by celebrating a marvellous election result this week. I do not mean the local election results, although it has been very enjoyable to see the people of Scotland putting the First Minister’s gas at a peep. I mean the election of François Hollande as the new President of France. His first message to the people of France was that there is an alternative to austerity. Speaking at the Bastille in Paris, he spoke to us here in the UK and Scotland. He said: “In all the capitals ... there are people who, thanks to us, are hoping, are looking to us, and want to reject austerity”. He told the crowd: “You are a movement lifting up everywhere in Europe, and perhaps the world.” C’est formidable, Monsieur le Président! There is an alternative to austerity, and that alternative is sustainable growth. I am pleased that the Scottish Government brought this debate to the chamber. We have the opportunity to lend our voices to those echoing around Europe that not only is austerity not working, it is positively damaging our economy and society. At the end of last month, we heard the grim news that the UK had entered recession for a second time. For the past two years, the Labour Party and others have argued repeatedly that, unless the Tory and Lib Dem coalition changed economic tack, we would be heading for a double dip. “We told you so” does not even begin to capture the sense of frustration and despair that accompanied confirmation of that news. This week, in response to the developing political and economic situation, the Prime Minister and his deputy travelled all the way to Essex to renew their austerity vows. I did not know whether to laugh or cry. Today, it would have been good to be able to speak with one voice from the Parliament about the political and economic direction that we want the country to take. It would have been good to be able to join the Scottish National Party and those around Europe who are clamouring against the wrong-headedness of punishing working people, families and pensioners with an austerity programme that is simply failing to deliver. Unfortunately, instead of reaching such an understanding, the SNP has lodged yet another self-congratulatory and, frankly, self-delusional motion about its supposedly distinctive alternative set of economic policies.

What a fantastic contribution from Mr Stewart. He has the good fortune of hearing me open and close in today’s debate and I will certainly return to some of the many policies that we could pursue to encourage growth, including using procurement and wage subsidies. First, I will look at what the Scottish Government is actually doing as opposed to what it says that it is doing and we will see whether it can back up its assertions about focusing on jobs and growth. Economic commentators are certainly clear about where the evidence points. Professor David Bell, an adviser to the Parliament’s Finance Committee, pointed out that the average difference in unemployment rates between Scotland and the UK during the recession has been only 0.4 per cent. He therefore concludes that the SNP has not driven any massive differences in labour market outcomes north of the border since the beginning of the recession. Professor Bell is not the only one, of course. The same point was also made by Professors Peat and Armstrong, and backed up by the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, which stated: “Overall, the different approaches taken by the Scottish and UK government’s thus far appear to have made little difference to the economic outcomes. The deterioration in both GDP and the labour market have been on a similar scale in both Scotland and the UK.” The Scottish economy, for all intents and purposes, is in exactly the same unhappy position as the wider UK economy. One can only conclude, therefore, either that the Scottish Government is not delivering on its promises, or that its policies are not working. One example is the policy to support enterprise zones in Scotland. When the cabinet secretary was asked by one of his own back benchers how many jobs the new enterprise areas would create, he was forced to admit that he could not quantify that number. That is not exactly the response that I would expect from a Scottish Government that is truly putting employment first. What about the public health levy—the so-called Tesco tax? The minister has not even apologised for not carrying out a business or employment impact assessment for that. As my colleague Michael McMahon pointed out only yesterday, and as the Scottish Trades Union Congress and others have repeatedly flagged up, there is no evidence whatsoever that the small business bonus scheme has improved employment levels or helped small businesses to grow. In fact, it appears from the STUC’s comparison that small businesses in Scotland have not done as well as those elsewhere in the UK.

Mr Swinney does not seem to have been listening very closely. I was illuminating the difference between his far-fetched claims and assertions, and the evidence of what the Scottish Government is doing and what is happening. Ministers constantly rush—as Mr Swinney just did—to point out the popularity of the rates relief scheme for small businesses, but that says it all. The SNP is concerned about the popularity of the scheme, not about whether it is working or making a difference to employment or growth as the Government claims.

Again, Mr McDonald is not listening to what I am saying. The Scottish Government constantly claims that it puts employment and the pursuit of growth at the top of its agenda. That is what the debate is about. However, there is no evidence—either from the Federation of Small Businesses or from anyone else—that growth or employment has been achieved because of that policy. Yes, it is popular, but that is not the same thing. The pursuit of popular policies is called populism, and that is the trouble with the SNP. It is populist, not progressive, and it does not believe in economic growth. It is pursuing not economic growth but popularity, which is not the same thing. The sector that is most often linked to growth—

I certainly do not favour scrapping it. Members: Oh! I do not see why the SNP should feign surprise at that. Why would one wish to take so much money out of a key part of our economy? I am asking what we are getting in return for that policy. Could that money be better used? Could it be applied better? That is the key. Could it achieve growth or increase employment? It is not doing so at present, and the SNP should not try to claim otherwise. The sector that is most often linked to growth in the economy is construction, yet all the Scottish Government’s talk about shovel-ready projects masks the fact that the construction sector has lost 30,000 jobs in the past year, which is a reduction of more than 15 per cent. That compares to less than 2 per cent in England and 0.5 per cent—

Despite all those interventions, Presiding Officer?

Very well. I am not trying to blame the downturn on the Scottish Government, but I expect ministers to take responsibility for their decisions. Need I remind the minister that his election manifesto promised, for example, 6,000 social rented houses per year, not 6,000 affordable homes, as it has been rewritten. Instead, the Government is withdrawing £100 million from the housing budget, which is money that could boost construction and grow the economy. I move amendment S4M-02808.3, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert: “believes that the UK Government’s austerity programme has failed, given that the UK economy has shrunk yet again despite repeated warnings to change course to avoid a double-dip recession; agrees that both the Scottish and UK governments need to pursue policies that will promote sustainable growth, secure employment and lead to a low-carbon economy, but fails to see how the SNP administration’s actions in cutting the housing budget by more than £100 million are consistent with pursuing shovel-ready projects; is dismayed that, in the face of 100,000 unemployed young people, the Scottish Government has seen fit to cut funding to colleges by more than 20%, following on from last year’s cut of more than 10%, and further calls for an urgent change of policy on procurement to prevent contracts such as the Forth Replacement Crossing being awarded to China, particularly at a time when Lanarkshire’s steel mills lie underused.”

Does Mrs Ewing believe that the policy has increased growth or improved employment?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is an opportune time to discuss the importance of growth over austerity, but it has been disappointing to hear from the SNP a list of unsubstantiated assertions in the place of evidence-backed argument. Annabelle Ewing and Kevin Stewart suggested that only separation can deliver the levers of economic control that are necessary to make a difference. I fundamentally disagree with that assertion, and it illuminates the contradiction in the SNP’s position. On the one hand, the SNP claims to be making a difference with its so-called plan MacB, which has apparently made the recession slower and shallower. On the other hand, however, it claims that it is prevented from making a difference because it does not have the powers to do so. Which is the true position? That contradiction was illuminated even more frankly by Mike MacKenzie. He tried to claim credit for the Scottish Government’s success in making the unemployment rate lower than it is in the rest of the UK, but when he was challenged by Gavin Brown, who noted that the figures are often higher in Scotland than elsewhere in the UK, he said simply that that is nothing to do with the SNP. As an argument, that clearly makes no sense whatsoever, and I fundamentally disagree—

I will make some progress first, and let members in later. I took so many interventions in my opening speech that I did not make the points that I wanted to, so I will do so now. I believe that we can do so much more here and now, in a devolved Scotland, to build sustainable growth through promoting manufacturing, developing our skills agenda, using procurement through effective regulation and giving industry our political support. Those who contributed to the Finance Committee’s debate have stressed how much could be done within the devolved settlement. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation highlighted skills, the WISE Group and others talked about employment and Colin Mair from the Improvement Service said: “in the public sector, and particularly in local government, we tend to be focused on our services, which are what we think will have the beneficial impact. In reality, it is our employment capacity and not our services that might have the beneficial impact on people’s lives.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 January 2012; c 532.] That is an important point. The UK Government has a target of shedding up to half a million jobs in the public sector, and the Scottish Government‘s contribution in the past year—despite its talk of a growth in employment—has been to shed 25,000 public sector jobs in Scotland. Where, for example, is the proposed sustainable procurement bill? Malcolm Chisholm and John Park mentioned the report from the Jimmy Reid Foundation, which highlights the millions of pounds that are leaving Scotland as big public contracts go to foreign firms. For example, the steel for the new Forth crossing is coming from China rather than from Lanarkshire. I respect Paul Wheelhouse’s intelligent and informed comments, but I did not understand his closing remark that the reason that we did not have that steel was somehow due to the UK Government. Malcolm Chisholm’s contribution was particularly good. He reminded us not only that Government indebtedness was caused by the recession rather than being the cause of it, but that all political parties supported the levels of borrowing that we carried in that decade. I mention that because I believe that one of the reasons that austerity is failing to convince people in this country and elsewhere in Europe is that, as a policy, it appears still to be driven by financiers, or by politicians who are keen to win the support of financial markets. Our country, more than many in Europe, has been too dominated by the financialised economic model, which essentially means that our economy is focused too narrowly on the financial sector. We need not only to rebalance our economy, but to reflect a wider set of values in our decision making.

Possibly in a couple of minutes, Mr McDonald. I will make some progress first. That is certainly the message that is coming from our trade unions, our churches and the fair trade movement. It has been spelled out in books such as “The Spirit Level” and by organisations such as the High Pay Commission, which recently revealed in evidence to the Parliament that over the last 30 years, the top 0.1 per cent of earners have become substantially wealthier. It pointed out that in the past decade, the earnings of FTSE 100 directors have risen from 47 times to 102 times the average earnings, and concluded that excessive top pay is deeply damaging to the UK as a whole. That message was also embodied in Oxfam Scotland’s humankind index, for which I welcome the cross-party support. Mary Scanlon talked about how tax avoidance and evasion has become a feature of the Conservative agenda in the UK. I welcome that move; indeed, as I said in yesterday’s debate, we need a more open discussion about the relationship between the taxes that we contribute and the services that we enjoy and share. The Scottish Government motion emphasises the importance of attracting inward investment. Of course, the First Minister is never happier than when he is reeling off lists of companies that are supposedly investing in Scotland—although I note that, six months too late, Doosan has been dropped from the script. However, he still refers to Amazon. Not only is that company associated with unwelcome employment practices but, as we have discovered, it is avoiding paying tax in this country. What does the cabinet secretary think of such practices? Has he written to or contacted Amazon to raise those concerns? Perhaps even more worrying, among all the dodgy dealings that the First Minister seems to have enjoyed with Rupert Murdoch— Members: Oh! Well might SNP back-benchers squirm. One of the most unsettling reports was about the First Minister trying to lure News Corporation to Scotland with promises of lower corporation tax. Scotland as a tax haven for the unsavoury is not my idea of inward investment or sustainable growth.

If Mr McDonald believes that the new garden planned for the centre of Aberdeen is a “vital infrastructure project”, I have to tell him that—from a distance, I admit—I fundamentally disagree with him. The people of Aberdeen face many problems that the new council will have to address, and I am very pleased at the new council that has been voted in—

No. Members have already had one go at this and I have addressed the point. We need to rebalance the economy. That means having not just a more effectively regulated and reformed banking sector, but a reinvigorated manufacturing sector to create attractive, sustainable employment and make our economy more resilient. Indeed, we need only look at countries such as Germany to see the advantages in such a strategy. Given how the SNP veers between its unsubstantiated claims of economic success—the so-called plan MacB—to expressions of economic helplessness such as, “We’ve done all we can—if only we had more powers,” I ask the cabinet secretary or his colleague Fergus Ewing to say in their summing up whether we still have a plan MacB. The reason I ask is because almost as worrying as the current second dip into the recession are the economic forecasts that have been shared with us of our prospects over the coming years. Many colleagues in the chamber were present at the briefing at which the Royal Bank of Scotland suggested that there would be a continuing rise in unemployment. There is a lot that we can do, but I am not convinced that the SNP is taking all the action that it can. We need wage subsidies; we need to do far more for the half of the population who are not going to university; and we need job-ready schemes, work experience and welfare reform. Instead of forcing people into dead-end, unfulfilling jobs, we need to give them proper support to get back into the workplace. Where is the Scottish Government’s equivalent of the future jobs fund? Perhaps after last week’s result in Glasgow the SNP will wake up and think about the importance that voters gave to Labour promises on, for example, the Glasgow guarantee that my colleague Anne McTaggart highlighted. In any case, given that the ministers were not paying much attention to Ms McTaggart’s speech, I ask them to answer her specific question about what is happening to reduce unemployment among women, which has shamefully risen over the 100,000 barrier. My colleagues and I in the Labour Party have no problem with the stated intention of placing jobs and growth at the heart of policy, but there is little sign that that is happening. Let us seize the moment and follow the example of our French colleagues. Allez, les socialistes!

Will the minister take an intervention?

Did the minister hear our comments on sustainable procurement, the skills strategy and the many other policies that we wish the SNP to proceed with?

How does the £100 million cut to the housing budget help to secure either of the two aims, which the cabinet secretary has just highlighted, of economic growth and employment?

That is not true.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Listening to the mellifluous and soothing sounds of the cabinet secretary, for one second I forgot that we are in the middle of a recession and that 100,000 young people and 100,000 women are out of work in Scotland. One would never have believed that from the way in which the cabinet secretary has just described the Scottish economy. I thank members of the Finance Committee for this afternoon’s debate. In particular, I thank my colleagues for keeping me up to speed with what was clearly an informative and stimulating series of round-table discussions. Conflicting demands for funding on the one hand and the short-term electoral cycle on the other are just two of the many obstacles in the way of good governance, and they can prevent sustainable decision making. I welcome today’s opportunity to look forward into the long-term future. However, from the start I should highlight my worry that sustainability is not a neutral concept. Certainly, there is not always unanimity about the criteria that we bring to bear in assessing what is or is not adjudged to be sustainable. A current example of that is the Tory Government’s obsession with keeping our AAA credit rating. The Tory Government defends the acceptability or fiscal sustainability of its austerity programme on the basis that it will reduce our indebtedness, but who decides how fast we must reduce our borrowing, or what level of public debt is acceptable?

One second. According to the Tories, we should look to the credit rating agencies, such as Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s, which are the very organisations that gave AAA ratings to collateralise debt, or the sub-prime mortgages that sparked the global recession. Does anyone in the chamber believe that we should assess the sustainability of our economy or society solely, or even primarily, on the judgment and values of credit rating agencies?

My colleague Michael McMahon has just pointed out that that intervention was not worth the long build-up. I refute utterly the suggestion that the current Tory budget is the same as the one that the previous Labour Administration proposed. What a load of nonsense. There is no evidence whatsoever for that. Perhaps Mr Swinney in summing up will produce evidence that somehow the Tory Administration produced the same budget. By the way, it has just borrowed an extra £150 billion from the borrowing markets.

Mr Swinney can address the issue in his summing-up speech. I want to make progress. The committee’s report contains an excellent section on inequality in Scotland. That issue was summed up by the representative of the Poverty Alliance, who stated: “in our policy making we need to bring economic and social objectives much closer together than we do at present.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 January 2012; c 530.] We are not here simply to serve the economy and certainly not financial institutions—it is the other way round. I will return to the social and economic objective of achieving higher levels of employment, which emerged repeatedly in the evidence to the committee. In much of the committee’s discussions, there was an implicit assumption, or at least a working one, that accepted the current balance that we strike between taxes and spending. I do not suggest that the sustainable answer to every difficult spending decision is to put up taxes—far from it—but I believe that we need to be more transparent and talk more publicly about the relationship between the taxes that we contribute and the services that we share and enjoy. I believe that my party needs to contribute to that discussion. The minister will be familiar with my anxiety that the Scottish National Party talks constantly about low taxes and high public spending. That is not a sustainable position and, frankly, it undermines the Government’s authority. For example, can we afford care for the elderly? In simple terms, of course we can. We are the sixth or seventh richest economy in the world, so of course we can afford it. The real question is whether we have the public support and political will to do so. One of the most illuminating contributions was from Dr Jim McCormick, who said: “One unsustainable faultline that is built into our system is the fact that we spend about four times more on emergency admissions to hospital for the over-70s than on the entire free personal nursing care budget.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 11 January 2012; c 472.] On the surface, that is a perfect example of an issue on which the political parties could work together to make more fiscally sustainable choices. We are in general agreement on the preventative spending agenda. If we could reduce emergency admissions for older people, we could meet health, social and fiscal objectives. Unfortunately, the political reality is that hospital reform, for example, is incredibly difficult to put into practice, as the Labour Party found out to our cost. I have been trying to work out how to say this delicately, but I do not think that I can, so I will just say openly that many of us in the Labour Party believe that the SNP is opportunistic and populist. Short termism is seen as the hallmark of the SNP Administration. I say that not to raise the temperature of the debate, but simply to highlight the need for us to find a sustainable political mechanism that allows room for such choices to develop. Even when we share objectives, reaching agreement on long-term tax and spending is extraordinarily difficult. I note that the committee did not make specific recommendations, yet it is pretty clear that we must think about fiscal sustainability across a range of political choices right now. I return to what I thought emerged as the strongest line of sustainable policy development in the evidence to the committee: job creation or tackling unemployment, which was raised repeatedly by witnesses as the key. Colin Mair from the Improvement Service said: “On the basis of the evidence, I think that the most preventative thing that you can do for people is to ensure that they are employed.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 January 2012; c 521.] Those comments were echoed by the Wise Group and others. I found even more interesting the comments about viewing the public sector not just as a provider of services, but as an employer. That is quite the reverse of the UK Government position and flies in the face of the fact that the SNP has lost 25,000 public sector jobs in Scotland alone.

There were further illuminating suggestions about job creation. When the Government is faced with difficult decisions, it must make clear whether it is cutting back because we, as a country, cannot afford it, or whether we are choosing not to afford it. I am optimistic that this debate will help to illuminate that perennial and difficult political discussion.

I was referring to the UK.

Will the member give way?

I thank the Scottish Government for securing today’s debate on project transmit and the minister for his opening remarks. It is fair to say that my colleagues and I have some fundamental concerns about the Scottish National Party’s approach to energy, but today we want to put the focus on agreement rather than on disagreement. In particular, we, too, want the Scottish Parliament to unite in sending a strong message to the electricity regulator, Ofgem, on transmission charges: to treat Scotland and its islands fairly and to support the expansion of the renewables industry in this country. Later this month or early next month, Ofgem will reach a decision on the various options that are open to it on electricity transmission charging. Project transmit is the independent review that has been commissioned by the energy regulator to lay out the choices that are before us. It has been asked to balance the move to renewables against security of supply and against cost. Ofgem states: “The aim of Project TransmiT is to ensure that arrangements are in place that facilitate the timely move to a low carbon energy sector whilst continuing to provide safe, secure, high quality network services at value for money to existing and future consumers.” No one believes that the status quo is a viable option. The current transmission pricing regime was designed for an entirely different mix of electricity generation that was dominated by traditional energy sources including coal, gas and nuclear power. The further generators were from where electricity was needed, the more was paid to transmit the electricity. Given that greater distance pushes up the cost of transmitting electricity, not to mention the inefficiency and resultant energy loss of doing so, there is a certain logic in the current system of charging. Where that logic breaks down is in how that pricing system discriminates against certain areas of the UK, such as Scotland, and in the barrier that it creates to the development of renewables. Coal, gas and nuclear power are, to some extent, transportable sources of energy that can be taken to centres of population and industry; renewables sources—wind, wave and tidal, in particular—cannot. Furthermore, renewables generators tend to vary in their use of the transmission network; for example, in demanding greater access when the wind blows. If we genuinely want to move to greater use of renewables and to a lower-carbon economy, the current charging formula needs to change also to reflect that variable output from renewables generators. The good news is that project transmit has clearly identified those factors and has come up with a fairer charging system that will benefit renewables and, therefore, Scotland. It is not an entirely flat pricing system—it is not the postage stamp approach that some people would like to see—but for mainland Scotland, at least, it is a huge step in the right direction. Niall Stuart, of Scottish Renewables, described the proposals as “a step towards fairer charges for projects on the Scottish mainland” and said that “the reforms will encourage rather than block investment in renewable electricity in Scotland”. Unfortunately, project transmit does not appear to have concluded that the same argument that it accepts for mainland Scotland and even for the Isle of Skye should apply to Scotland’s islands—in particular, Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles. The methodology that is used to calculate shared transmission charges across most of Scotland has not been extended to the islands, which are treated as exceptions. Niall Stuart has estimated that, under the reform proposals, a wind farm on the Western Isles would pay £77,000 for every megawatt of capacity, compared to the charge of £2,000 per megawatt that a wind farm in the south-west of England would pay. Those figures are similar to the ones that the minister quoted. That could scupper many proposed developments and will have a direct impact on small-scale community-owned renewables, which will not be able to access the grid. The islands—Orkney perhaps more than anywhere else—have led the way in micro and community electricity generation. The issue for those small-scale projects is not so much the transmission charges as the basic problem of connecting to the network. There are few cables and wires across those more remote areas, and I hope that we all would want a new charging system that would improve access to the grid rather than one that rendered it entirely uneconomic. Our more remote communities are economically disadvantaged and often fragile, but we have the opportunity to secure jobs and generate wealth. Project transmit did not take community benefit into account, but I hope that Ofgem will reconsider its transmission proposals with a clear eye on the bigger picture. If we are to fulfil our legal obligations for carbon reduction, it is even more important that we make the most of our abundant natural resources and, therefore, that we connect Scotland’s islands to the national grid. If we do not do that, not only would proposed wind farms on the islands be adversely affected, but the charges could also put additional costs and, therefore, obstacles in the way of developing wave and tidal generation. Scotland’s potential in that field is vast, but the technology is also expensive and some way from establishing itself as being proven. We need to invest in the renewables industry, not to create barriers to its development. The vast majority of projects that involve wind or tidal power are located in the waters around Scotland’s shores and are often adjacent to Scotland’s islands. They will not be able to proceed on any scale without transmission links to the main centres of population elsewhere in the UK. The difficulty that Ofgem faces is in balancing the country’s—and, indeed, the world’s—need to move away from carbon fuels and towards renewable energy, with managing the costs. There are unlikely to be many people in Britain at the moment who are not painfully aware of the cost of heating their houses and keeping the lights on. The costs of implementing the findings of project transmit should, and will, be borne by the six big energy companies, but they will in turn pass those costs on to the consumer. Project transmit has ruled out a socialised or postage stamp approach to transmission charging mainly because of cost, but there is surely room for greater equity in its application of a reformed system. I hope that Ofgem will make more allowance for the Scottish islands, but if costs still act as a deterrent to development, that need not be the last word. The Scottish Government should do what it can using ROC payments. It is already reviewing the renewables obligation system and could do more to support projects and developments on the islands using the powers and charging mechanism that are at its disposal. I hope that Parliament will unite in an appeal to Ofgem to improve its transmission charging proposals further. Project transmit is a major step forward in encouraging the development of renewable energy and in treating Scottish generators more fairly, but the islands of Scotland need to benefit from a similar pricing regime. There is where much of our renewables potential lies, so we need to approve structures that will allow us to develop that natural resource. I move amendment S4M-02623.2, to leave out from “continues” to end and insert: “welcomes Project TransmiT and recognises that the changes proposed to the charging regime are fairer than the current position; notes, however, that these charges will still disadvantage the Western Isles, Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands where there is greater potential for community-owned renewables; urges Ofgem to come forward with a pricing regime that does not penalise these communities, and calls on the Scottish Government to use the current review of Renewables Obligation Certificates to take account of any remaining disparity in grid access costs and to encourage community renewables.”

To pick up on Murdo Fraser’s final comments, the general tone of the debate has been consensual. It would be a shame if that was not reflected at decision time. Members have all recognised in their contributions that the system of charging could be more equitable. I shall concentrate on that. This is a time of radical change for electricity generators throughout the UK. Legally binding climate change targets and soaring targets for finite conventional sources of energy such as coal and gas have created a real need for fundamental reform. Our economy relies on the secure supply of electricity, while, as consumers, we are more aware than ever of the financial and environmental costs of electricity generation. The upside of all that is that Scotland is well placed in the UK to meet those future energy demands. However, to do so we must first agree on a transmission network that will help us to exploit Scotland’s renewables potential. We need a fair and equitable charging regime that allows our renewable generation ambitions to become a reality. We need that to fight fuel poverty, address climate change and ensure that the areas best placed to provide that energy are not disadvantaged. The initial proposals from project transmit come close to meeting our needs and are to be welcomed, but it is clear that there is the belief, at least here in the Scottish Parliament, that they could be improved further. The high cost of transmission to and from our islands is unfair and will hold back potential development. It is worth looking at the cost. The scale of the task ahead is enormous. It has been estimated by Ofgem that energy customers throughout the UK already pay £2 billion a year in transmission costs. Ofgem has concluded—through project discovery, I think—that up to £200 billion of investment is needed in energy infrastructure. I sympathise with Maureen Watt’s comment that it surely cannot be beyond the wit of man or woman to come up with a more equitable system but, when we look at such figures and realise that someone has got to find that funding, we can see why the situation is not so straightforward. In fact, although project transmit listed four reasons for rejecting the socialised or postage stamp approach, it is clear that the key factor is cost. It concluded that all the charging options would help to meet the UK’s renewable targets “with no material differences in the implications for security of supply. The key differences ... are the impacts on power sector costs and consumer bills” and went on to say that the postage stamp approach would push up consumer bills by £6.9 billion. Interestingly, like Mary Scanlon, it argued that it would also “exacerbate existing regional patterns of fuel poverty”. However, I am not totally convinced by project transmit on that point. Analysis of the wider socioeconomic impacts or benefits did not fall within its very tightly defined remit and as my Labour colleague Margaret McDougall, Rob Gibson, Mike MacKenzie and others have pointed out, a fairer, more equitable regime that allowed for community development would be good in tackling fuel poverty in Scotland. As Murdo Fraser said, the argument is balanced and, in the interests of fairness, I think that although there is a case for ensuring greater equity in the transmission charging system we cannot simply ignore the historical arguments for continuing to generate electricity as close as possible to the population base. We must adjust the charging system to harness new sources of power, but it is a simple fact that, when electricity is transmitted over long distances, power gets lost and we need to balance the need to move towards renewables with the on-going need to optimise energy efficiency in transmission as well as in usage. As a result, although some of us have expressed concerns, most of us, including Stuart McMillan, have welcomed the project transmit review for at least moving us significantly in the right direction. At this point, I want to highlight an issue that has not yet been mentioned. In its briefing, Scottish Renewables expressed concern that because Scotland lacks high-load-factor plants that low-load renewables can be balanced against, there might be a significant difference between Ofgem’s indicative tariffs and the actual tariffs that will be set when the new system is put in place. Indeed, it suggests that the actual tariffs could be 25 or 30 per cent higher than those that are set out in the project transmit review and has asked Ofgem to clarify the matter. I certainly seek reassurance in that respect. After all, if, after agreeing with what project transmit has concluded, we find out that the final cost is 25 to 30 per cent higher, how can we have confidence in its figures and calculations for the way forward? Real concerns remain about the charging regime. We have a window of opportunity to get pricing right for the future, but the review needs to address the question of our islands that everyone in the chamber has raised. A failure to do so not only affects us now but affects our ability to develop wave and tidal generation. As some of my Labour colleagues have pointed out—indeed, our amendment refers to it—some of our largest community-owned renewables are based on the islands. For example, the community trust on Shetland is a major partner in the Viking project, which is developing an onshore wind farm that will secure the future of a trust fund built originally on oil revenues and used to provide facilities for the local community. It is difficult to quantify the social good that has come from the trust in the past, but it is good that this partnership will ensure benefits for the island in future—if, of course, it can access the grid. As I said earlier, Orkney has been widely recognised as a location for developing and testing wave and tidal devices; for example, the European Marine Energy Centre allows developers to test prototypes in all sea areas and even to generate electricity for the grid. However, grid access charges that disadvantage the islands could affect Orkney’s reputation as a world leader in this field. I understand that there are also great opportunities in the Western Isles, where community-owned estates dominate and might be best placed to benefit from the boost to the local economy. I fully understand that the onus is on Ofgem to provide a solution but, as our amendment urges, the Scottish Government should use its powers if Ofgem fails to do so. I believe that we are united in asking the organisation to review its charging regime to give Scotland’s islands a fairer deal.

Is Mr Swinney aware of the Labour Party’s stance on the 50p rate before the budget, during the budget and now?

I do not normally feel sorry for the Tories, and I suspect that charity will be in short supply in today’s debate, but Conservatives must have winced with each successive headline that they read this past week. The budget was the most trailed in living memory, with leaks about a package of measures specifically for Scotland and help for the oil and gas industry—a lot of supposedly good news stories. The days of strict budget purdah seem to be far behind us. The chancellor failed, however, to mention that his headline measure, the much-heralded tax break for top-rate taxpayers, was to be subsidised by freezing the personal allowances of pensioners. Nearly everything in the budget was well publicised, except for the granny tax. I suspect that some members on the Tory side of the chamber think that, with a little more political savvy, a bit of better news management and a bit of political spin, the budget could have been handled better—those on our own side could perhaps learn from recent days too, but that misses the point. The granny tax sums up for most people what is wrong not only with the Tory budget, but with the Tory Government. The budget is fundamentally unfair and is failing in its prime objective of getting the economy going. No one understands why giving more money to millionaires will improve our country’s economic prospects, whereas most understand that it is not right to punish those on fixed incomes who are entering retirement.

No, but the point is that someone on £150,000 is in the top earning bracket, and it is not right for a Government that says that we are all in it together to give to those in the top 1 per cent handouts that are paid for by the vast majority of working people. That is fundamentally unfair. The tax break that someone on £150,000 is getting is actually greater than the salaries—and pensions—of some of the people I am talking about. All those stories remind us that we are talking about the same old Tories: a cabinet full of public school millionaires who introduced a budget in which those who earn more than £150,000 become £10,000 a year better off. Just for good measure, in case people missed it, the day after the budget we discovered in the Treasury red book that the chancellor plans some extra help in retirement and on inheritance tax for non-domiciled individuals too. Who pays for all that? Families with children, pensioners and working people.

That is a series of questions. We introduced the top rate of tax as a temporary measure. We are not in favour of high taxes per se but, in a recession, if one believes in progressive policies, one should expect those who earn more to pay more. That is the principle that is lacking in the Conservative budget, which does not have a progressive heart.

The 50p tax rate was introduced to pay for public services and to get the economy going. The simple answer is that we will make that assessment on its merits in 2015. I can tell Willie Rennie that we do not support the rate coming down now, because it is the wrong measure at the wrong time. Who is paying for it? The answer is families with children, pensioners and the working people of this country. If I may borrow a phrase, it is being paid for by the squeezed middle. They are the ones who are losing out because of increased VAT and fuel charges and they are losing child benefits and child tax credits. Perhaps those who lose out most of all are the 2.6 million unemployed people in this country. We are losing a whole new generation of youth to unemployment, because we have a Government that is obsessed—

I appreciate the subject that Mr McMillan has raised, but it is outrageous for a member of the SNP to question Inverclyde Council when 89 per cent of the cuts proposed by this Government fall on local authorities. Decisions by the SNP Scottish Government are forcing cuts in local authorities, in education and in the voluntary sector. The SNP always looks to pin blame for the cuts elsewhere.

I am sorry, but talking about the spending share disguises the fact that 89 per cent of the cuts fall on local councils. I suggest that Mr Mackay should argue more strongly in the Cabinet and in his party for the local authorities that he used to represent to stop these cuts falling on the services that are provided to people in Scotland.

I had better make some progress, Presiding Officer.

My goodness. I was going to say that there is much common ground between Labour and the SNP on the economic agenda, because we agree that the budget is both unfair and does not stimulate growth, but my difficulty with the SNP motion and the SNP submission to the budget is that there is a list of demands and cuts but no statement of how the chancellor would pay for the demands and cuts that the SNP asks for. When he sums up, will the minister say whether he supports Labour’s measures? Does the SNP support a cut in VAT? Does it support the bankers’ bonus? In particular, does the SNP support a cut in corporation tax? The chancellor has cut corporation tax to 24 per cent, will cut it to 22 per cent and possibly aims to cut it further. My understanding of the SNP’s position is that it wants to cut corporation tax still further. What services do the SNP intend to cut to pay for that? I do not believe that competing with the rest of the UK on corporation tax is a policy that will work for Scotland. It will clearly have a detrimental effect on services in this country. I particularly do not like the idea that we will cut corporation tax so that we can attract companies such as News International to set up their headquarters in Scotland. The leadership of that company is morally bankrupt and the only reason why it would come to Scotland is to treat us as a tax haven. In all honesty and all seriousness, is it the SNP’s policy to cut corporation tax further than the UK Government is doing? That is my understanding of its policy. The difficulty with the Government’s motion is that it refers to giving Scotland “the full range of economic levers” and powers, but the Government refuses to say what it would do with those economic levers. If the Government intends to cut corporation tax, I do not believe that that will be progressive or fair. I move amendment S4M-02494.4, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “believes that the Chancellor should be doing more to create jobs across the UK; is disappointed that working families with children are still set to lose tax credits and child benefit as well as being hit by increases in VAT; believes that, rather than reducing taxes on those earning more than £150,000, measures such as a cut in VAT would be fairer on hard-pressed families and working people and would do more to stimulate the economy, and calls on the Scottish Government to do more using the powers and spending at its disposal to tackle unemployment, which is higher in Scotland than the rest of the UK, and to help local businesses including through the use of community benefit clauses for public sector contracts.”

Why, therefore, has the OBR revised downwards its forecast for growth from more than 2.5 per cent to 0.8 per cent?

Will the member give way?

Mr Rennie has answered my question. I was going to ask whether, despite that list of achievements, he can genuinely say that he is proud of the budget, particularly given that Vince Cable said that we should not lower the top rate of income tax from 50p to 45p.

We have to engage in the argument about support for progressive taxation in order to pay for public services, but there is no argument in favour of high taxes by themselves. What we need is an appropriate level of taxation to pay for the public services that we need.

I thank the minister for the advance notice of his statement and for the helpful informal briefing by his officials. We are all pleased that the sums of money that were raised by the fossil fuel levy have been released for investment and are now available to help Scotland to make the transition to a low-carbon economy. The minister has indicated the broad thrust of his initial priorities for how the £103 million will be spent, and the mechanism that he will use—a fund to which organisations, companies and communities can apply—but it is clear that a huge number of important and detailed decisions on issues such as who will administer the fund, what criteria they will apply and how long the fund will last, have still to be considered. I want to focus on just a couple of those points. The minister can count on our support for investment in community renewables projects—including microgeneration and combined heat and power schemes—but it sounds from the statement as though a lot of importance is being placed on attracting or leveraging in additional resources, or on the fund as an investment vehicle. Can the minister assure Parliament that community need and social justice will be important criteria in deciding on loans, grants or other fund investments? What appointments to the fund board will he make, or what other mechanism will he use to ensure that social justice policy—as opposed to commercial criteria—is adhered to? Earlier-stage investment, particularly in wave and tidal power projects, is unlikely to attract the support of the green investment bank because such projects are riskier and less commercial. What balance does the minister envisage the fund striking between ensuring the longevity of the fund and investing in such strategically important, but inherently riskier, projects?

I am pleased that the Scottish Government and the Parliament have found time to debate the future of Remploy. For several years, members from across the chamber have raised on-going concerns but, as a result of the current highly controversial proposals that the Conservatives at Westminster have announced, the issue has now come to a head. The recent review of disability employment that the UK Government commissioned and which was led by Liz Sayce tried to frame the debate as a choice between two models of employment—the traditional model that Remploy has offered of providing supported jobs for people with disabilities in a factory setting versus a focus on helping disadvantaged people into mainstream or open employment. The review came down forcefully on the side of the latter option and the Conservative Government has followed up on the report’s recommendations through the current plans to close 36 of Remploy’s 54 factories across the UK, including four in Scotland, with an expectation that the remaining factories will also close. As campaigners, employees, trade unionists and elected representatives from all sides have pointed out, that is a false division and choice. There should not be an either/or decision between supported and open employment. Of course it is right that adults with disabilities or learning difficulties should have every opportunity to work in a mainstream setting. In fact, although we have come a long way in recent decades, further progress clearly must be made if we are to overcome the discrimination and other barriers that stand in the way of equal treatment of all our fellow citizens. However, whatever the mainstream or open employment options, many people’s active and positive choice will be to continue to work in a more sheltered environment. Furthermore, the closure proposals ignore the role of Remploy factories as an avenue into mainstream employment. Many individuals gain the confidence, experience and training that they require to enter the marketplace through their work in Remploy factories, but that avenue is to be closed off. Perhaps most worrying of all, the Government’s decision makes no allowance for the practical reality of today’s employment market, in which almost 0.25 million people are unemployed across Scotland and more than 2.5 million are unemployed across the UK. More important, in that market, despite changing attitudes and stronger legal rights, fewer than half of all disabled individuals are likely to be in a job, compared with 80 per cent of able-bodied workers. There is no evidence whatever to suggest that closing Remploy’s factories will improve the employment prospects of people with disabilities in Scotland or the rest of the UK, but there is every reason to think that it will make matters worse. As several colleagues did, I spoke to Remploy employees at their demonstration in Edinburgh this morning. I welcome those of them who have joined us in the public gallery this afternoon. What came across to me loud and clear was the fear and anxiety that the proposals have generated. This is not a consultation; it is a 12-week redundancy notice. Many of the men and women who are affected are in their 50s and have never worked outside Remploy. What chance do they have of securing employment or of competing with displaced graduates and the thousands of others who have been forced into the marketplace in the difficult economic circumstances that we all face? One of the men on the demonstration this morning thrust a letter into my hand, which is a series of questions to ministers in the Scottish and UK Governments. One of the questions is: “if ten able bodied people are chasing the same job as a disabled person, what are the chances for the disabled person getting that job?” The anxiety is palpable. I draw a parallel between the current focus on mainstreaming jobs at the expense of supported employment with the inclusion agenda that was pursued in the area of additional support for learning, particularly when it was first introduced. I agree that we want to challenge the reduced expectations of work and the limited career ambitions that we as a society have imposed on disabled people in the past, just as we have challenged that in our school system. However, rather than look on Remploy factories as segregated institutions, it might be more accurate and helpful to see them as supportive environments. Just as we rebalanced our view on inclusion and additional support for learning and recognised that there was an on-going role for special schools while giving all children the option of mainstreaming, so we should continue to support disabled people in every workplace while maintaining sheltered and specialist workshops and factories for those who want and need them.

I wish that Mr Fraser had echoed my tone. The point about Mr Hain’s review was that it absolutely followed the model that I have set out. It considered the difficulties of modernising Remploy, bringing it up to date and making it more sustainable in today’s environment, while maintaining a secure future. It was all about modernising Remploy factories and sustaining their future. There was an investment of £550 million and a five-year programme, not the 12-week redundancy notice that we have now. I hope that Mr Fraser will start his speech with an apology for the anxiety that that has caused. Does anyone in the chamber need to be reminded of the importance of employment to not only people’s income and standard of living, but their self-esteem, health, education and prospects, and their hopes and dreams for the future? Yes, we should try to improve the efficiency within Remploy—lots of suggestions for that have been made by the trade unions and others—but to make decisions about the future of the factories simply on the basis of their supposed profitability misses the point of the social and economic costs of their closure. The vast majority of former employees—more than 80 per cent—who took voluntary redundancy from Remploy three years ago are still unemployed and claiming benefits.

I do, and I thank Mr FitzPatrick for that. Members: Mr Stewart. Sorry—I beg your pardon, Mr Stewart. That is a terrible thing to do, and I have done it twice in one week now. I should know better after what happened with Mr Miliband. [Laughter.] I thank Mr Stewart for those comments, and I turn to what we can do practically to help. On the basis of the evidence and past experience, it strikes me that political will is hugely important. I will be honest: when I heard that the debate was coming up, I thought that we, as the Opposition, had chosen the motion. I was slightly surprised to hear that the SNP had chosen it. I am not trying to apportion blame; however, when Blindcraft was threatened with closure, there was an expectation that the Scottish Government would intervene but it chose not to. On the other hand, when Glencraft was threatened with closure and there was a lot of political unrest, the Scottish Government intervened. There are political choices to be made.

It is quite right that the Glencraft process involved the Government and the local authority; that was missing in Edinburgh’s case. My point is that there are political choices to be made and political leadership can be shown. The most obvious tool that ministers can call on is article 19 of the EU public procurement directive, which exists specifically so that contracts can be given to organisations in which more than 50 per cent of the workers have a disability. Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries is showing, through its contracts with Glasgow City Council, exactly how the sector can be led. At the demonstration today, I met somebody from the Remploy factory in Springburn who told me that it is the sole maker of wheelchairs in the whole of the UK—not the sole supported employer, but the sole maker—and it is now, for the first time, on the list as an approved supplier; yet, it is threatened with closure. I am conscious of the time, although I have taken some interventions. We can offer political will. The minister mentioned Scottish Enterprise, and I believe that Co-operative Development Scotland also offers a model. The minister should work with trade unions and the sector. That would make a huge difference not in saving money, but in generating money for the economy. By using the untapped potential of disabled workers—who are underemployed at the moment—we will improve our economy as well as improving lives. I move amendment S4M-02431.2, to insert at end: “; urges the Scottish Government to take the opportunity to express an interest in acquiring the Scottish Remploy factories affected by the closure proposal and, through Co-operative Development Scotland, to explore the community cooperative model of ownership for those businesses and to establish a task force comprising Remploy employees, trade unions and cross-party representatives to help secure a sustainable future for those factories and their employees, and further calls on the Scottish Government to commit to greater use of Article 19 contracts by the public sector.”

We have suggested one alternative—the co-operative business model. Is Mr McDonald saying that that is not an attractive alternative? That is not about subsidised employment that is supported by grant-in-aid; it is about an alternative, sustainable, long-term model.

I thank Mark McDonald for bringing the debate to the chamber. He highlights a very worrying problem throughout Scotland, which involves not only the January pay date but increasing levels of personal debt and bankruptcy. Too much credit is available in some cases, and not enough is available in others. That all comes together at Christmas time, bizarrely, because bringing forward the pay date in December defers and builds up problems for January. Mark McDonald has highlighted a modest but practical solution that would offer some support, and I thank him for doing so. The background to the problem that we are discussing is difficult. In November last year, R3—the Association of Business Recovery Professionals—published its sixth “Personal Debt Snapshot” report, which focused specifically on why individuals turn to pay day loans. It revealed the highest level of worry about debt ever recorded. It also identified a group of people who currently pay only the interest charges on their debt and not the debt itself, and said that that affects one in six people. That issue has been raised by many members from all sides of the chamber, including Margaret Burgess and my colleagues Johann Lamont and Neil Findlay. I was particularly pleased to hear that Aberdeen City Council has offered a practical way forward, by changing its pay date, which presents an example to the rest of the public sector. The overall statistics on debt in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom are horrendous and make for grim reading. According to Citizens Advice Scotland, debt accounts for a quarter of all the cases that it deals with, and more than 40 per cent of those citizens advice bureau clients say that they go without food or fuel to try to pay off their debts. In many cases, that is because they are being aggressively pressured by their creditors. Shelter has published evidence that 2 per cent of the UK population admits to having paid their rent or mortgage by means of a pay day loan and Shelter Scotland has confirmed that the proportion is similar in Scotland. There is a significant problem in Scotland and throughout the UK for the most vulnerable communities, who are particularly vulnerable at the end of the month and after a five-week pay period. Those communities are vulnerable to two predators in particular: loan sharks and pay day lenders. It is estimated that annually about 85,000 people borrow from about 150 illegal moneylenders in Scotland, who are charging astronomical interest rates; the rates are off the scale. That is a huge problem, which affects the whole of Scotland. Pay day lending is perhaps a more recent phenomenon. As members know, it is a form of credit whereby the borrower authorises the lender to make an automatic withdrawal from their bank account, as a security for a short-term loan. The loan must be repaid in full, plus interest, on the borrower’s next pay day. The pay day loan industry targets lower-income and minority groups. It targets the vulnerable and the low paid. Loans are given without regard to borrowers’ ability to pay, and borrowers sign a payment authority that can be cancelled only by the lender. The lender has it every way and the borrower is trapped. The original loan gets rolled over again and again, and the interest and costs keep rising. Evidence from CABx tells us that clients who have pay day loans have an average of three debts more than clients who do not have pay day loans, which suggests that people who are in long-term financial difficulty are more likely to turn to a pay day loan. Interest rates can be in the thousands—3,000 or 5,000 per cent. It is estimated that the pay day loans sector is worth some £2 billion, so members can see why there is such interest in companies in the area. There are solutions, such as credit unions, and practical measures such as have been suggested by Mr McDonald. I am happy to express my support and the Labour Party’s support for such measures.

I acknowledge that, although the bill is largely technical, most of its proposals have been welcomed and are required if we are to improve land registration. There is no doubt that a modern and effective system of land registration is important for any modern economy. Much as the communist in me—I am sure that the minister looked up with a start to see that Red Ken is now standing in the chamber, so I will put it differently. Much as the idealist in me struggles with the concept of us as mere humans asserting our rights to mountains and rivers, which will outlive and outlast us all, I appreciate that our banking, business, trade and credit systems rely on securing title to property and land. I understand that the property market in Scotland was worth approximately £24 billion the year before last, so the bill is an important and worthwhile measure. The background to the bill lies, as many members, including the minister, highlighted, in the gradual replacement of the 17th century register of sasines with the land register of Scotland. Although the changes have been taking place since 1979, so far just over half—55 per cent—of Scotland’s 2.6 million units of property have been switched. The figure for the land area that has been covered is much lower, with only 21 per cent of Scotland’s landmass on the register. As Paul Wheelhouse, John Wilson, John Park and others said, the completion of the register is a practical and important step that will make a difference for many communities. The reason why there is a gap in the transfer to the land register is mainly that the principal way in which a property enters the land register for the first time is through its sale. The bill will update the law on registration. It will enable electronic conveyancing and, in due course, it will provide for the closure of the register of sasines. It makes provision for four measures that are designed to ensure the eventual transfer of all property in Scotland to the land register. As my colleague Rhoda Grant suggested, the only disappointment with the bill is that it misses an opportunity to move the land reform agenda on apace. There is a timely article in today’s Scotsman—not the one about my former colleague Jack McConnell but the one by Brian Wilson—which I encourage ministers and members to read. It highlights some of the issues around land ownership that still bedevil communities around Scotland. Mr Wilson says that, despite the Parliament’s early achievements, such as abolishing feudal tenure, guaranteeing the right to roam and introducing the community right to buy, Scotland continues to have “the most inequitable distribution of land ownership in Europe”. As I suggested earlier, I struggle with the concept of owning a mountain or a river, and it is jarring to see absentee millionaires and billionaires buying up Scottish islands and estates while local people on those estates struggle to make a living. Like Andy Wightman, who was quoted favourably by my colleague in the Green Party, Patrick Harvie—sorry, Patrick—I believe that it is offensive that there is such difficulty in finding out who owns land in Scotland. I was going to quote the case from 10 years ago that involved the MacLeods in Skye claiming ownership of the Cuillins and trying to sell them on. That case was resolved, but other members, such as James Kelly, have reminded me of constituency cases that are far more practical and which involve areas of land in suburban and urban areas whose ownership is unknown and which are therefore not maintained and become litter infested and overgrown. Being able to identify the owner of those pieces of land, which have become nuisances, would improve the environment and therefore provide a great service to many communities. It is worth highlighting that the issues of land reform and the transparency of land ownership are not just relevant to rural areas. When residents of Neilston, which used to be in my constituency but is now admirably represented by my colleague Hugh Henry, were faced with the closure of the last bank in the village, they used the Scottish Parliament’s land reform legislation to buy the property for the community. The benefits have not simply been about the use of that building, because the Neilston Development Trust has become a driving force for improving the landscape of the village, bringing people together for events and other activities, and the trust is now on course to establish the ownership of a wind farm, the income from which will go directly to the village. That demonstrates that what on the face of it looks like an issue to do with property and land ownership is, in essence, about the rights, needs and wishes of the local community. Like many members, I am grateful to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for the work that it has done to highlight a number of issues in the bill, particularly the issue of beneficial interests and ownership, with particular regard to the transparency and accessibility of information relating to that issue. The bill does not do quite enough in that area, so I am pleased that the committee has recommended that “the Scottish Government should reflect further on options for ensuring that the land registration system reduces the scope for tax evasion, tax avoidance and the use of tax havens, and that the Government should explain prior to Stage 2 what additional provisions can be included, whether in the Bill or otherwise, to achieve this objective.” Similarly, on access and transparency, the only electronic system that is in place is predominantly geared towards lawyers and conveyancers. I am pleased that the committee has flagged up that point and I whole-heartedly agree with its recommendations in that regard. I would like to raise some other points—about prescriptive claimants; common land; and section 108, which I noticed was raised only by the lawyers or former solicitors in the chamber, but is still an important point—but, given that my time is up, I will end by welcoming the work of the committee and saying that I am pleased to support the general principles of the bill.

It has been a very consensual and—dare I say it—enjoyable debate. We started with the announcement about the decision to locate the headquarters of the green investment bank in Edinburgh, which all sides welcomed. That will benefit the whole UK, but it will particularly benefit Edinburgh and Scotland. The minister’s announcement of the £2 million conference bid fund was also welcomed. Tavish Scott suggested that in the future the minister should wear a tweed suit. Metaphorically, many of us have been dressed in tartan suits during the debate, as we have walked backwards through our constituencies, highlighting various attractions on our left and right. There have been plugs for Coatbridge, Falkirk, Dumfries, Hawick, Arbroath, Glamis castle, Castle Stuart, Inverclyde, West Kilbride, Seamill and Saltcoats. We heard about the attractions of ABBA in Ayrshire. Another place was mentioned by George Adam, but its name has slipped my mind—the minister might be able to jog my memory later. It is clear that all parties in the Parliament now recognise the importance of the tourism industry to Scotland. Many speakers mentioned the livelihoods that it supports, its importance to rural and other fragile economies and, most of all, the huge contribution that it makes to our GDP. Estimates vary. It is thought that the industry supports more than 200,000 jobs, although according to some estimates, it supports more than 300,000 jobs. Despite that, and the fact that the industry could be worth between £4 billion and £11 billion annually, some tourism leaders are concerned that it is still not treated with the seriousness that it deserves. Jean Urquhart mentioned that, in the past, we were not allowed to describe tourism as an industry. Although attitudes have changed, it is still not treated with the same seriousness as other key contributors to Scotland’s economy. Therefore, it is important that we in Parliament talk up Scottish tourism. I congratulate the members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on their recent report, which I thought made an important contribution in that regard. To summarise some of the figures that have been mentioned, it looks as if businesses expect to see growth of 8 per cent this year, which—if we consider the state of the economy—just goes to emphasise the sector’s importance. In breaking down the figures further, VisitScotland tells us that there was a 16 per cent increase in the value of tourism visits from UK travellers last year, which went some way towards offsetting the 6 per cent drop in international visitors over the year. The so-called staycation—the term that Annabel Goldie half-heartedly embraced—counterbalanced the effect of the euro zone situation on overall numbers. We still had 12 million visitors to Scotland. As the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee pointed out, and as Mary Scanlon and Chic Brodie said, there is still a large question about the Government’s target of boosting the industry by 50 per cent by 2016. Malcolm Roughead, the chief executive of VisitScotland has said that he thought that 50 per cent growth is an ambition rather than a target, and that it is realistic to say that it will not be achieved. I will be honest—it is difficult to know what to make of a Government target when the major players say that it is not their key driver. It would be helpful to know how ministers intend to help the tourism industry to meet the 50 per cent target or what their alternative strategy is to be. To that end, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s conclusion was helpful in calling for annual updates on progress towards the 50 per cent target, as well as a plan to deal with any shortfall. I would welcome further information from the minister on how he intends to monitor how well Scottish tourism is doing. The committee highlighted the difficulty of measuring progress. The hugely varying estimates of the size of the industry that I mentioned are another example. The committee urged the Government to consider setting up a new system for gathering statistics and other performance-related information. It is clear that there are obstacles to be overcome. The numbers may be up this year, but the profits are being squeezed. As well as being affected by a lack of consumer confidence, tourism is particularly badly affected by the soaring cost of fuel and by hikes in VAT, which makes tourism businesses and services here among the highest VAT rated in Europe—a point that was made by the minister in his opening remarks. The industry is looking to the UK Government and the Scottish Government to assist. One area in which we can assist is standards and quality; it is difficult to know where we stand on the spectrum of quality compared to others. Some in the industry still complain that the country has been let down by poor quality services, by rather run-down accommodation and by too many owners who are in the industry because of a lifestyle choice rather than to run a business. It is certainly the case that only a fraction of the 15,000 tourism businesses are signed up to an official trade body. On the other hand, quality has improved dramatically over the years, and it is not the issue that it used to be. I will put my tartan suit on now, although not to talk about East Renfrewshire. My family is from Skye. Tourism has been the mainstay of the village of Elgol since Sir Walter Scott encouraged all the southerners to take the boat to Coruisk. When my cousins and I were growing up we used to sell painted shells and gouged-out sea urchins to the tourists. I am not too sure about the quality of the experience for visitors—and I do not mean the shells I was selling. At B and Bs, people had to be in their bedrooms by 10 o’clock at night and out by 9 am the next day. It was also a Sabbath-observing community—that is a good thing. However, the food is what I most remember because everything was boiled. Fish, cabbage, root vegetables and ham were all boiled and everything was rather grey. Nowadays, although Elgol is a tiny village—of fewer than 200 people—it has two restaurants or cafes, where I can get a caffè latte that is the equivalent of anything in the west end of Glasgow or Edinburgh. I am not going to talk him down, but my Uncle Lachie used to run one of the boats. He certainly looked the part—he had the beard. He was a Gaelic speaker, and even when he spoke English most people thought that he was speaking Gaelic, although the visitors would not know, because he never spoke to them. Like most people, he viewed tourists with suspicion. These days, however, one can get tea and shortbread on the boat and a running commentary about the flora and fauna, the wildlife, the scenery, the geography and the geology. It is a fantastic experience. Expectations have changed, but standards have risen to match them. The hospitality and the welcome are better than ever. We need to keep travelling in that direction and driving up standards. VisitScotland is considering its own voluntary quality assurance scheme. I hope that the minister and Parliament intend to keep an eye on that. Accessibility is a big issue in Scotland, as Siobhan McMahon in particular pointed out. I was intrigued by Siobhan’s description of Lanarkshire—I hope that she gets an award for her devotion to the area. She had me won over to visit Summerlee until she said that the local tourist board asks us to pay £3 to listen to George Galloway. Most of us would pay £3 not to listen to George Galloway in Lanarkshire. An important point was made about the difficulties accessing sites outside our major cities because of opening hours and transport infrastructure. There is the issue of connectivity: Rhoda Grant and Tavish Scott talked about the lack of flights, the missing BMI connection to Heathrow—which is still an issue—and slow trains and poor roads. I do not have enough time to talk about the contribution of eco-tourism, about which Claudia Beamish spoke eloquently. Another important issue is skills, which Margaret McCulloch and Jean Urquhart talked about. With the winning years coming up, we have lots of opportunity and potential. Today it is clear that the Parliament gives its support to the tourism industry.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to review the effectiveness of the national health service individual patient treatment request process. (S4O-00716)

I am encouraged to hear that guidance has been recirculated. The cabinet secretary will be aware of my interest in two cases: one relates to constituents with paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria and the other to patients with melanoma. In both cases, there are drug treatments that are available only through the IPTR process. For people with PNH, the problem appears to be inconsistency between and within hospitals. In relation to people with melanoma, ipilimumab is not available to any patient in Scotland. Will the minister insist that all health boards publish their IPTR processes, so that patients can have confidence in a transparent process and can believe that the process is not just robust, but fair?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the country enjoys better economic activity and inactivity rates only in a defined age group? In the whole age group above 16, the country does not enjoy better economic activity rates than the rest of the UK has.

Yesterday, we enjoyed that rarity in economic debates: unanimity among the parties across the chamber. That was on our approach to the green investment bank—we all hope that the Scottish bid is successful. I suspect that there will be little such agreement today, but I will begin by mentioning the one line in the Scottish Government’s motion with which the Labour Party agrees. Austerity is not working. The tax rises and spending cuts that the Tories in Westminster have introduced have proven to be too deep and too fast, which is precisely as Labour claimed. They have choked off recovery, pushed up the cost of living for many families, and created a rise in unemployment that many of us fear will lead to a whole new lost generation. I will go further. As I have said in every contribution that I have made to the debate on the budget in recent weeks, despite the fact that the Scottish National Party has been in power in Scotland for the past five years, I do not blame every economic ill on it. We are in the midst of an international as well as a national economic difficulty, and the Scottish Labour Party stands ready to work with any and all parties to tackle the serious problems that we face and to get Scotland working again. I hope that I will have time to return to that point later. If it were simply a case of taking the Scottish Government at its word, or taking the minister at his word today, we might have much more in common on the economic agenda. However, the motion before us follows the unfortunately all-too predictable SNP line of false assertion rather than evidence-based argument, while simultaneously avoiding facing up to any of its own responsibilities. I do not doubt that the Scottish Government claims to have a distinctive approach to economic policy, but I believe that there is a huge gap between what the SNP says that it is doing and the decisions and policies that are implemented by ministers. Economic commentators are certainly clear about where the evidence points. In an article earlier this month, following the publication of Scotland's horrendous unemployment figures, Professor David Bell, who is a professor of economics at the University of Stirling and an adviser to the Finance Committee, pointed out that the average difference in unemployment rates between Scotland and the UK as a whole during the recession has been less than 0.5 per cent. He therefore concluded that SNP policy “has not driven any massive differences in labour market outcomes north of the Border since the beginning of the recession.”

The point is that the motion that is before us calls on us to support the Scottish Government’s “distinctive approach”. What distinctive approach? The SNP is always claiming—as Mr Swinney did again today—that plan MacB, that fantastic success, has given us a shorter, shallower recession. I point out, by the way, that it has taken us longer to get out of recession. I am just suggesting that there is no evidence for the SNP’s argument. It is simply assertion. Professor Bell went on to make an interesting point. He said: “The contrast in rates of unemployment between Scotland and the rest of UK is insignificant compared with the differences within Scotland itself ... the claimant count unemployment rate in Aberdeenshire was 1.5 per cent, while that in West Dunbarton was 6.7 per cent.” In other words, we have a Scottish Government that is more interested in making unsubstantiated claims about the difference between its approach and that of the Tories in the rest of the UK, and is either unable or unwilling to tackle the gross inequality in joblessness that is within its own jurisdiction in Scotland. Professor Bell is certainly not the only economist illuminating that gap. Last month, in evidence to the Finance Committee, the point was made by Professors Peat and Armstrong, and the Centre for Public Policy for Regions has said: “Overall, the different approaches taken by the Scottish and UK governments thus far appear to have made little difference to the economic outcomes. The deterioration in both GDP and the labour market have been on a similar scale in both Scotland and the UK.” In my intervention earlier, I was trying to make a point that we had just heard another example of the politics of assertion over argument. The minister was trying to claim that economic activity, employment and economic inactivity rates are better in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. However, that is not true. It is true only if we consider the 16-to-64 age group—the working age group. If we consider the rate for everyone over the age of 16—that is the age group to which the minister is referring in relation to unemployment, so it is not my selection; it is his—we see that we are not doing better than the UK but are doing worse. The Scottish Government is asserting that it is making a difference, but the evidence does not support that at all. I suggest that the minister starts to make a case for his assertion that the Scottish Government is making a difference and starts to deliver on his words.

Can I suggest that it demonstrates nothing of the sort and that it answers a different question? The minister’s claim is that his Government is making a distinctive difference compared with the policies that the Westminster Government is pursuing, but the evidence does not back that up. The minister is comparing previous Administrations with his Administration and is not comparing his Administration with the UK Government. However, the SNP’s motion claims that it is doing the latter. I do not know why any of us might be surprised by the Government’s position, given the decisions that we saw in the budget this month. We apparently had a budget for jobs and growth, but it had a cut in the college sector of 20 per cent over the next three years and a housing budget cut of more than 30 per cent, which is more than £100 million. However, if the SNP policy is so distinctive, perhaps we can see it if we look at the SNP’s specific economic policies. What specific policies does it have? There is the public health levy—the so-called Tesco tax—which was introduced without even an apology for not carrying out an assessment of the impact on business and employment. We had the announcement of enterprise zones, but guess what? When asked by one of his own back benchers how many jobs that would create, the minister replied that he did not know. Of course, the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s analysis of the small business bonus scheme has revealed that there is no evidence whatsoever that demonstrates that it has had an impact in improving employment levels or growth—quite the reverse. Scottish Government ministers are quick to point to the scheme’s popularity among small businesses, but is that not the point? The SNP is keen on appealing to electoral advantage. The scheme is populist, but it is certainly not distinctive, measurable or progressive.

That is a good question that goes exactly to the point that I am addressing. Of course the scheme is popular: that is why the SNP introduced it. It is popular, but that is not what the SNP, or the Scottish Government, is claiming. The SNP claims that it is a distinctive policy that is part of a budget for jobs and growth, but it does not create any jobs and has not proven to have produced any growth. It is simply a populist policy. If we are going to have a genuine budget for jobs and growth—

The minister asks what we are going to do about it. Can I suggest that the minister should listen to Labour? Perhaps he is already doing so. For example, I am pleased that the SNP has already adopted the idea of guaranteeing work, education or training for every 16 to 19-year-old and that the minister has already adopted the idea of appointing a minister specifically for youth unemployment. In addition, the minister has already heeded our call to increase the number of apprenticeships that are on offer, so thank you very much. I am glad that the SNP can recognise the excellent ideas that are on offer from the Labour Party. However, the SNP needs to do more. [Interruption.]

Following three interventions, Presiding Officer? Well, okay. We should see further interest in wage subsidies and a drive to maintain rather than reduce the number of jobs in the public sector. We also need to see an increase in productivity, a graduate-led economy and far more use of procurement and less of giving our contracts to foreign countries, which means that we unsustainably import steel and cement and rely on wages in countries in which workers do not enjoy the same protection as workers do here. We can agree with the SNP that the Conservative austerity measures are failing, but the SNP is not in opposition, much as it pains me to be reminded of that. The SNP has both the powers and the responsibilities of government. It is time for it to stop simply pointing the finger of blame elsewhere and to live up to those responsibilities. I move amendment S4M-02084.4, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert: “calls on the Scottish Government to acknowledge that its approach has resulted in very little difference to economic outcomes in Scotland compared with that of the UK; notes that despite claims that the Scottish Government’s budgets are designed to boost economic growth, the evidence suggests otherwise, with Scottish GDP growth stagnating at the same rate as the UK’s and with joblessness in Scotland now at an even higher rate than in the rest of the UK; believes that the Scottish Government must, as a matter of urgency, ensure that its public spending boosts the Scottish economy and put reducing unemployment and increasing employment at the heart of public policy, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a sustainable procurement bill as soon as possible.”

Will Maureen Watt assure me that the finance minister gave the supermarkets a warning that he was about to impose the Tesco tax?

I said nothing of the sort. Will Mr Wheelhouse say how many jobs the small business bonus scheme has generated?

I am pleased to open the debate for Labour on the green investment bank. I assure the minister that we will vote for the Government’s motion this afternoon. I suspect that the debate will be broadly consensual. We should take encouragement from the fact that members from all shades of the political spectrum have been able to unite around our common desire for the green investment bank to be located here in Edinburgh. The word “consensus” is often used and—dare I say it?—misused in the chamber, but it is heartening that we are able to unite today on the need to tackle climate change and face up to the importance of our environmental challenges. The need for a green investment bank rests primarily on two factors. First, the Climate Change Act 2008 and the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 from the UK Government and the Scottish Government respectively have not only set ambitious targets for reducing carbon emissions but enshrined those targets in legislation. We now need a series of practical measures to meet those goals. Secondly, there is a recognition that traditional funding and investment streams that are delivered through our high street and investment banks are not delivering the radical transformation to the low-carbon economy that we need. We know, for example, that, although there has been tremendous expansion in the renewables industry in recent years, investment decisions that are taken solely for commercial return are more wont to stick with tried and tested—and, at this stage, cheaper—generating technologies. I am, of course, pleased that it was Alistair Darling as Chancellor of the Exchequer who first promoted the green investment bank to the political main stream in 2010, but I am also pleased that the current UK Government has continued to give the proposal its backing. It seems that there has been some tension between the more environmentally minded members of the Government and those at the Treasury. That may have had an impact on the nature of the bank, but it is crucial that the bank is still going ahead. The case for locating the bank here in Edinburgh is very strong. I pay tribute to all those in the public, private and voluntary sectors who have united in presenting such a strong case for Edinburgh. One of the criteria for deciding on its location is the ability for the bank to recruit and retain the specialist staff who are needed. It is clear that Edinburgh has one of the biggest financial sectors in the whole of Europe, let alone the UK. The city therefore has immediate access not only to the necessary financial expertise but to the sizeable and expanding renewable energy industry that is already located in Scotland. The bid team for Edinburgh has brought together some of the key organisations that will need to work side by side with the new bank. Those include Edinburgh’s prestigious universities; the country’s banks and some of the leading investment houses; public sector bodies such as Scottish Enterprise and Scottish Financial Enterprise; environmental organisations; and, of course, our power companies. I have already mentioned the cross-party consensus behind the bid, but it is worth noting—as the minister did in his opening remarks—that Edinburgh has the support of all Scotland’s major cities, including Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow and Stirling. I genuinely doubt that there is anywhere in the United Kingdom that can beat Edinburgh on access to financial and industrial expertise, on the totally united political backing and on the proximity not only to existing renewables capacity but to the tremendous potential that exists offshore and onshore from the north of England right up to the northern and westernmost islands. I believe that the bank will be of tremendous potential benefit to Scotland, which is one of the reasons why I am sure that we are all united in wishing to see it here. However, I will flag up a few points, not so much for the Scottish Government but for the UK Government as the body that is establishing the bank. First, I understand from recent statements that the new bank is to lend at commercial rates and to return a profit at all times. I see no reason why it should not return a profit, but I believe that at the very least we need further clarification of that criterion, given that the bank is being established essentially to address market failure. At its heart, the bank must have the intent to deliver on an environmental policy imperative rather than a solely commercial motivation.

Absolutely. I could not agree more. That was clear at the genesis of the bank. The only reason why there is anxiety is that it is felt that some political momentum might have shifted from the environmental objectives to the commercial ones. The issue is balance, which is why I asked for further clarification, rather than suggesting that the bank is heading in the wrong direction. Like many in the environmental movement, I am anxious that the bank should invest in infrastructure and manufacturing but should also support small-scale community and co-operative enterprises. The RSPB put that point well in its briefing for the debate, in which it said that the challenge for Scotland and the UK is to ensure that the climate and renewables targets are met sustainably. The RSPB points out that many energy projects claim environmental credentials but can be damaging to landscapes, wildlife and natural habitats. It argues that, although it makes financial sense for the big energy firms to invest in large-scale renewables projects, the ambition for smaller-scale and community projects is limited by a lack of credit and the financial risks to those who are involved. The green investment bank can therefore provide value in making that possible. I am slightly concerned that the green investment bank will, for the first few years at least, simply be a green investment fund, in that its borrowing powers are unlikely to be established before 2015 or 2016. Ministers have suggested that even then, those powers will be dependent on the UK Government hitting deficit reduction targets. Most environmental commentators believe that, if we are to make the significant move that is required to a low-carbon economy, the bank needs borrowing powers. To meet our climate change targets, the borrowing powers should come sooner rather than later. If we are to meet the climate change targets, it is important that the bank supports energy efficiency as well as renewables capacity. The bank will have a remit in promoting non-domestic energy efficiency, but we still need to change attitudes and behaviour across Scotland. We need demand-led energy efficiency reforms that are about consumers reducing demand, rather than generators simply expanding the supply to meet it. The bank might be crucial in helping to achieve that. I do not know whether many members have had the benefit of a smart meter in their homes. I had that joy recently when Scottish Gas came round and I have to say that I am a total convert to smart meters. A young engineer came round to fit the meter and then showed me the difference that switching a kettle on makes and so on. The meter works on a traffic light system, with red, amber and green lights. Now, as soon as my kids come into the house, they are conscious of whether the green light is on. That is working. That was a little plug for Scottish Gas and its work on that. I do not want to cause consternation among Scottish National Party members, but I want to pose a question to the Scottish Government minister that I believe he will need to answer if the bid is to be successful. Why should a UK Government want to locate a UK bank in a separate Scotland? I am not trying to break the consensus, but I genuinely believe that that question needs an answer and that the issue is a potential barrier to our bid winning. To be honest, I have huge doubts about how the Scottish Government’s plans for separation sit alongside its renewable energy policy. The renewables industry is based on Scotland being part of the UK economy. Even with a Scotland-based company such as SSE, its funds for investment come in large part from consumers who are based in the south of England. That is not simply a political question or point; it is an anxiety that already exists in the renewables industry and was most recently raised by Citigroup. There is a paradox at the heart of SNP policy in its support for renewables and for separation. I would welcome the minister’s comments on that paradox and dilemma in his concluding remarks. To return to a more consensual note, I am pleased to be part of Scotland-wide unity in calling on the UK Government to site the green investment bank in the best possible location in the UK, which is here in the city of Edinburgh.

Almost every contribution this afternoon has made it clear that we all take youth employment very seriously and there is a lot of common ground on which we can work together. That is certainly the approach that we wish to take. It is in the nature of political debate that it often focuses on weaknesses and criticism, but any criticism should be taken as constructive and not as overt hostility. In that vein, I repeat our welcome to the minister. We welcome not just her appointment and the recognition that it gives to the jobs crisis that Scotland faces, but the launch of a strategy that has £30 million in resources to invest. I believe that we are making progress simply by describing the scale of the challenge that faces young people in Scotland today. Kezia Dugdale made that point in her opening speech, and the minister responded to her and clarified the issue, although I note that the minister was careful to avoid using the word “crisis”; she always talks about difficulties and challenges. We still seem to agree that the country faces a formidable difficulty. One hundred thousand young people are out of work in Scotland. That is 100,000 individuals who are seeking employment and looking to their Government for help. The cost to our economy and society of maintaining such high levels of unemployment is immense. The National Council for Voluntary Organisations in England, which has established a commission on youth unemployment, has estimated that the benefits bill will be more than £4 billion this year, with more than £10 billion being lost in economic output. The real costs of youth unemployment go far beyond the financial. Unemployment, particularly if it is without hope, takes a huge emotional toll on young people. In some cases, they face a downward spiral into depression, poverty and even drug addiction. Those of us who remember the 1980s know that we still live with the damage that was done to our society in a time when unemployment was a price worth paying. Estates in our cities and sometimes whole towns and villages bear the scars of mass unemployment and still have a sense of hopelessness and poverty of ambition.

Alistair Darling was being realistic in the face of a worldwide recession. At no point did he say that we should use the power of the state to crush the unions and destroy our steel-making industry and so on. He was making a completely different point, which has been misinterpreted by a Government that has just passed a budget that will put thousands of people out of work. I do not want to strike an overly party-political note, but lots of members have said that today and have then gone on to do so. This is a difficult time and I suggest that members in glass houses should not throw stones. The director of the Scottish Drugs Forum has said that we need to learn lessons. The focus of our debate and public discussion has been on unemployment, but it is worth mentioning the related problems of underemployment and unfair employment that can accompany joblessness. Wage freezes, overtime bans and other cutbacks are adding to the number of working poor in this country. That can give rise, in turn, to feelings of resentment and social tension. Just this week, Citizens Advice Scotland produced a report on fair employment that highlights an increase in poor working practices. Employers are under pressure to reduce costs while workers put up with bad conditions for fear of losing their jobs. That is part of a vicious cycle that is created by downwards pressure in the economy. I am sure that there is unanimity among members that the best way to counter it is to create a virtuous cycle of economic growth, just as we need, where possible, to get people to pay taxes rather than claim benefits. We need to shift the emphasis from state intervention trapping people in welfare dependency towards subsidising their employment. The community jobs scheme is a move in that direction, as I have suggested before. I understand that the scheme’s impact and value have yet to be fully assessed, but I am pleased that the Government has agreed to continue it, with a view to making further improvements. The minister announced that £6 million of her £30 million would be used on the scheme. What is less clear is how the Government intends to use the rest of that money to tackle youth unemployment. The money is welcome but, as I said in yesterday’s debate, my concern is that we should not have a series of initiatives. Margaret McDougall put it well—I am sorry; I mean Margaret McCulloch. I am confusing my Margarets again. Margaret McCulloch put it well: the budget needs to add value to programmes that are already in place. All Governments of all hues are prone to initiativitis and Scotland is a world expert in projects—a little money here and a pilot scheme there. The enterprise zones could be a good example of that. They are welcome in select areas, but the evidence is that they displace jobs rather than truly create them. When Adam Ingram asked a question last week about the job creation or displacement effect of enterprise zones, I was a bit concerned by the answer from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, who said: “At this stage it is not possible to quantify the number of jobs that might be created in Scotland’s enterprise areas.”—[Official Report, 2 February 2012; c 6064.] The same argument applies to the so-called public health levy. A letter from the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers says: “we believe that the levy has been set far too high at a level which will seriously endanger the terms and conditions of employment of existing staff, the level of employment in the stores affected and future investment and jobs”, yet the measure’s impact on jobs has not been assessed. Despite today’s strategy, I am slightly anxious about whether employment and tackling unemployment are central to the Government’s thinking, even in its own economic policies. Perhaps the best example of that is from the cuts to our colleges’ budgets. There is no getting away from the contrast between talking about the importance of youth employment on the one hand and cutting tens of millions from Scotland’s colleges on the other. Many members—including Liz Smith, Liam McArthur and my colleague Siobhan McMahon—have made that point. Siobhan McMahon suggested that such action reveals the gap between the rhetoric and reality, but—like many other members—she also cited examples of good practice that is taking place in areas such as Falkirk and North and South Lanarkshire. Many members took a consensual tone. Even Christina McKelvie and Jamie Hepburn promised that they would do that, although they struggled to maintain that promise. Jamie Hepburn tried to make a rather disparaging point about North Lanarkshire Council’s £1.5 million. As John Pentland has helpfully passed me a copy of the Wishaw Press, I point out in the interests of accuracy that the figure is £15 million, which is a more substantial contribution.

I counter with the Wishaw Press, which refers to £15 million—take that, Mr Hepburn. Many members have commented on John Park’s speech, which raised an important point about apprenticeships. We have had a big discussion about who created the apprenticeships in Scotland. Leaving that aside, an important issue is the number of apprenticeships that are available and the age groups to which they are available.

I quite liked Chic Brodie’s analysis, although not necessarily his conclusions. He talked about the entrepreneurial spirit in Raploch. He also talked about throwing down gauntlets and slaying dragons in relation to going to university—his speech was of a medieval bent. I have not been able to talk about the role of the public and voluntary sectors, to which Liam McArthur and my colleague Kezia Dugdale referred, or about the important role not just of big procurement projects but of helping sole traders—architects, graphic designers and so on—who sometimes struggle to access tenders because of their turnover and size.

We have a long way to go in tackling the employment crisis, but all parties have shown their willingness to seek the elusive goal of the full-employment society.

Does that mean that the cabinet secretary will meet his target to deliver 6,000 rented homes a year?

I wonder whether colleagues across the chamber are as surprised as I am at how little fuss and fanfare the SNP has made about its budget. After all, this could be the defining moment of the Administration, as it is laying out its spending plans for the next three years. However, since the weekend, the normally on-message SNP back benchers have seemed more concerned about whether the First Minister could appear on BBC Scotland to talk about the rugby. That really would have cheered us up. The Scottish budget might not present the same political spectacle as the equivalent annual announcement at Westminster, but it still provides the SNP with its biggest opportunity to shape the Scottish economy and to set out not just its vision but what it is doing right here, right now to help Scots through difficult economic times. The trouble is, I hear the words but I do not see the actions to back them up. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth talks of a budget for jobs and growth, but there is no sign in this budget of a Government grabbing an economy by the scruff of the neck, no sign of the dynamism that is needed to galvanise the economy and no sign even of a Government taking all possible steps to create jobs and protect employment. In fact, the SNP’s main economic argument is more of an excuse. It claims to be helpless to shape the economy, prevent service cuts or stop unemployment rising, because of the cuts that it faces from Westminster and its lack of control over the economic levers of power. Surely the SNP can do better than that. Where are the job creation schemes? Where are the interventions to maintain public sector employment? Where is the innovative use of procurement? I have said before, and I say it again today, that I am sympathetic to the difficulties and challenges that face the cabinet secretary and I am not trying to lay all the blame at his doorstep. The Scottish, UK and world economies are not doing well. Cuts are tough. We do not agree with the austerity approach of the Conservatives at Westminster, but—and it is a big but—the SNP’s supposed lack of control over the levers of power was not an argument that was deployed last year, when plan MacB was apparently such a success. Back then, when our economy was doing better—though only marginally—than that of the rest of the UK, that was because of prudent decisions that were taken by Mr Swinney, using the powers that he had, and within the budget coming from Westminster. This year, when things are not going quite so well, apparently only the normal powers of a normal, separate state will do. That is not the argument of a can-do Government, or of a party that is intent on seizing the day and stamping its economic imprimatur on the country. It is an evasion of responsibility. It is the argument of a party that is looking for someone else to take the blame—a Scottish Government that is happy to take the credit when things go well, but which takes a low profile and hides behind the Tories at Westminster when times are tough and decisions are testing.

Actually, the member has already heard some—he clearly was not listening. He will hear more shortly. What are the main concerns of the people of Scotland? I suggest that they are jobs and the rising cost of living. Two weeks ago, we debated a budget against a backdrop of rising unemployment and falling gross domestic product. Since then, we have had further bad news, including a record number of Scottish firms going bust last year and personal bankruptcies running at almost twice the rate of the rest of the UK. In our stage 1 debate, I suggested that there is a problem with this budget on two levels. Not only has it failed to address the scale of the economic problems that face us but, even within its limited aims, it still does not do what it set out to do. The cabinet secretary suggests that his focus is on the economy and jobs, but a budget that set out to cut housing by more than 40 per cent and colleges by more than 20 per cent—even with today’s welcome but limited backtracking—does not sound like a budget that is designed to get young people back into work or the construction industry moving. The SNP promised 6,000 homes for social rent. I did not hear the minister confirm that claim again. Not only will the SNP yet again be unable to deliver on its manifesto promise, but it is missing the opportunity to breathe new life into a struggling part of industry. Services for carers, for vulnerable youngsters and their schools and for old folk are all facing more than double the cut in spending that the Scottish Government is inflicting on the rest of our public services. However, our colleges—the very sector that does most to prepare people for work and improve their skills and qualifications—are the hardest hit. I am pleased that Mr Swinney has listened to Labour, the other Opposition parties and the 80,000 students who have written in to demand that he thinks again. However, after saying that he will cut the budget by £40 million this year, rising to £74 million in two years’ time, it is simply not enough for him to give back £19 million and expect a round of applause, although I notice that he got a round of applause from the sycophants on his back benches, who should be ashamed of themselves. [Applause.]

The interesting thing is, some people recognise that people who applaud a cut disguised by smoke and mirrors should be ashamed of themselves. At a time when 200 Scots a day are losing their jobs, the last thing that the Government should be doing is cutting training places for young people. Scots are losing their jobs not just because of the Tory cuts at Westminster, but because the SNP is failing to put measures in place to stop that happening.

I do not know how many times we have to tell the SNP that Labour pressure is the only reason that it has ever put such things as apprenticeships into its budgets. We all know that. [Interruption.]

Not only that, we voted against that budget because, despite its improvement with the apprenticeships, it got rid of 4,000 teaching jobs and 2,000 nursing jobs. Of course we would not vote for such a budget. What the Government should do—Mr Mason may wish to listen to this—is intervene more robustly to ensure that our taxes do more to create and maintain employment. However, instead of a future jobs fund, there is the Scottish Government’s community jobs scheme. Perhaps that is a nod in the right direction, but it does not seem to have been a runaway success. Local authorities such as Glasgow City Council that have been trying to use their pension funds to secure and create jobs, for example, have been left isolated when they should be being encouraged. We could be doing much more to use our procurement policies as a way of securing employment, introducing the living wage and reaching other desirable policy objectives. Just this week, the Jimmy Reid Foundation published a report that highlighted the millions of pounds and thousands of jobs that are leaving Scotland as big public sector contracts go to foreign firms. My colleague Michael McMahon has been campaigning tirelessly on behalf of Lanarkshire steel makers, whose interests are being ignored. Some 90 per cent of the steel in the Forth road bridge, which is an iconic feat of Scottish engineering, came from Lanarkshire. I am not sure whether any steel in the new Forth crossing will do so. Even the cement will be shipped in from across the world. That is sustainable transport at its best. I have no doubt that someone on the Government front benches would love to have the opportunity to open the glorious new Forth crossing only to look on its underside and see “Made in China” stamped underneath. Is the SNP’s vision for a separate Scotland one in which we go halfway round the world to try to undercut our own workers’ pay and conditions? What do we have instead? Ministers have fallen back on the old Government standard initiatives.

The thing about where the procurement contracts are currently going, not only for the Forth road bridge, but for the Southern general hospital, is that the SNP seems to have designed them so that Scottish firms cannot get them. [Interruption.] I am sorry, but the SNP is the Government of the day. [Interruption.]

Once more, a supposed Government with an absolute majority is failing to take responsibility for its decisions. It is always looking elsewhere, always looking at someone else’s record and always looking for someone else to blame. The SNP Government has awarded contracts, and they are not going to Scottish firms. Another measure that has been introduced and which shows the lack of economic coherence that exists is the public health levy. Its impact on jobs has not been assessed. The SNP says that it wants to introduce a corporate tax culture in Scotland that is friendly to businesses, but a series of new measures in the budget, such as increasing business rates and a special new business rate, will penalise business. The SNP is trying to create the illusion that Scotland can have high levels of public spending, but low levels of taxation—that it can have Scandinavian levels of welfare services, but American levels of taxation. That accusation has been made repeatedly, but I have yet to hear a rebuttal from the SNP front benches. Last year, the finance minister tried to make the claim once more in his attempt to outline the economic argument for a separate Scotland. That is a jam-tomorrow argument rather than grappling with hard decision making now. In fact, it is not an argument; it is an assertion that is collapsing under scrutiny. Charged with the risks associated with separation, the SNP has found itself clinging to the benefits of union without, of course, the benefits of actually being in a union. The SNP wants to leave the UK but keep the pound; to leave the UK but keep the Bank of England; and to leave the UK but keep the AAA credit rating. At the same time, it wants to keep EU membership, keep the Queen, keep the Army, and keep British passports. It wants to leave the UK but keep everything that the UK gives us as a country. In the previous Administration, the SNP—

In the previous Administration, the SNP simply had to prove its competence; now, with an overall majority, people want to see what it will do with the powers at its disposal. This was the SNP’s big opportunity; instead, it is its big disappointment.

I am delighted to hear Mr Mason’s support for colleges as well as universities. Why, therefore, is his Government cutting the college sector by such a significant amount—£74 million by three years’ time?

I like to hear what the SNP’s plans for separation are. Does Mr FitzPatrick intend to put up taxes to pay to protect us from welfare cuts?

Does Mr FitzPatrick think that the 30 per cent cut in finance for housing will help the construction industry?

Can the member clarify which powers Mr Swinney used when he was so successful in implementing plan MacB?

Will the member give way?

As part of his discussions with the SRC, did the minister discuss the impact of the public health levy? If so, does he agree with the assessment that has been made of the impact of such a levy by Asda and other organisations?

Further to that, does the cabinet secretary believe that plan MacB is making a difference to the Scottish economy?

It is good to hear the minister’s words about his commitment to tackling youth unemployment, but how will cutting the colleges budget by 20 per cent, following last year’s cut of 10 per cent, help with that?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

None of us can be in any doubt about the seriousness of the economic difficulties that we face. Last week’s unemployment figures simply confirmed the damage that is being done to too many families in Scotland. The outlook for growth was already gloomy, and it will not have been leavened by last night’s comments by the governor of the Bank of England, by the IMF’s downgrading of projected economic growth or by today’s confirmation that the economy has shrunk by 0.2 per cent. My concern is—aside from worries about us teetering on the brink of another recession, about the euro and about the series of radical and difficult cuts to the public finances that we face—that we need to address underlying problems with an economy that is not delivering for the people of this country or for our society. For more than 30 years, we have followed economic policies that have been based on an assumption that the markets will provide the growth and prosperity that we need in order to thrive, but those markets have never provided the jobs that we need in order that we can truly prosper. We have endured deep-seated unemployment for three decades, and unemployment is now rising again—not falling. The cumulative impact of permanent mass unemployment has been to create a dependency culture, which in turn undermines the principles on which the welfare state is based. There is still huge support for our national health service, but already attacks are being made—not just on so-called benefits scroungers, but on the whole idea of a welfare system that covers us all. Welfare was originally conceived in a full-employment society as a way of tiding people over during the difficult times. It was there for children and the elderly, and for people who were sick or vulnerable, but able-bodied adults were expected to work. For thirty years, there have simply not been enough jobs for thousands of capable citizens. What worries me is not just that the Conservative Government in Westminster is cutting back on the public purse because money is tight, but that it is using these straitened times to shrink the welfare state. Universal benefits such as child allowances, which help to tie us all together, are going. The public sector is being reduced while simultaneously and fallaciously being portrayed as a drag on our economy and on the wealth that is created by the private sector. If we wish to defend our progressive vision of a fairer and more just society, we must challenge some of the assumptions and assertions that underpin those attacks, and we will not be able to do so if our first reaction is simply to oppose every cut or to put up taxes. If we want to hold on to a welfare system that looks after the most needy, that can provide social and economic mobility and which is perhaps even—dare I say it?—a little redistributive, we must do what we can to end the dependency culture, too. That was the road that the last Labour Administration was taking us down through welfare into work, jobseeking, and retraining and reskilling people to improve their employment chances. That is how I believe we should tackle the problems that face us today—by getting Scotland working again, by giving people a job and a stake in our society, and by giving them hope and a future. However, just as, if left to their own devices, market forces will not provide an answer, neither, unfortunately, does the budget that the cabinet secretary has announced begin to face up to the fundamental weaknesses in the Scottish economy. It does not go nearly far enough in looking at how the state can create or support employment, rather than simply being left to pick up the pieces when people lose their jobs. A few attempts have been made to explore the economic principles and practices that might create the employment levels that we seek, but they feel marginal rather than mainstream.

I welcome Ms Scanlon’s question. It is important that the welfare system be sustained and that we all feel that we are part of it. It should be there for everyone in society—not just for some parts. The Labour Party cannot support a budget that fails to address the most pressing problems. Growth here was weaker during the past year than it was across the UK. One Scot in every 10 is unemployed and one in five Scottish children lives in poverty. There are, in the budget, decisions on which we agree. There is widespread support for the principle of moving to preventative spend, and Labour has campaigned long and hard to boost the number of apprenticeships. We want early intervention programmes and protection for spending on our health service, although there might be robust discussion on how the policies will be implemented. Overall, however, the budget does not do enough to generate employment or galvanise the Scottish economy. The Scottish National Party needs to rethink its approach to the budget and the economy; it must not just tinker round the edges. I will leave aside the scale of the challenge to which the budget does not face up, but I am concerned that the budget does not deliver even on the minister’s stated—if limited—ambitions. Mr Swinney talked about bringing forward capital spending, but he has cut capital spending by more than George Osborne has done. We have identified up to a dozen capital projects—schools, roads, public buildings—that have been delayed because of decisions of the SNP Government. We need to get the economy going now, and public works are a key trigger in sparking growth. A boost to the housing market would get the construction industry going again.

I am arguing first that the budget is not radical enough overall and secondly, that the budget does not deliver on the claims that the minister makes for it. I do not believe that there is a transfer from resource to capital. I do not believe that the infrastructure developments are happening. You talk about infrastructure development, but you have cut the housing budget by 40 per cent.

Mr Swinney seems to be avoiding the key point that I am making about his claims for the budget. He can excuse himself and say that plan MacB is working, but he made specific claims about investing in jobs and growth and he is not even delivering on his own promises. If he says that he is investing in housing, why has he cut the housing budget by 40 per cent? He has changed his terminology and talks about 6,000 “affordable homes”, rather than social rented homes. The key point is that he is talking a good game, but is not delivering on his promises. The First Minister and Mr Swinney are quick to take credit when they think that things are working. Last year, when Scotland’s economy was doing marginally better than the UK’s, they said that plan MacB was working, but now it is not working and that is suddenly not their, but the UK Government’s, fault. Of course, the First Minister and Mr Swinney always attach a little rider to their remarks: “Everything would be all right if we only had all the levers of economic power.” Members: Hear, hear. SNP members’ approval is interesting, so I ask them what levers of economic power they have in mind. Perhaps they mean control over currency—the pound or the euro; I am not sure which they want to control. I think that the SNP currently wants to have control over the pound, but the party’s main economic adviser, Crawford Beveridge, said at the weekend that such a situation would be far from ideal.

We will get more borrowing powers if the SNP supports the Scotland Bill. It will be interesting to see whether that happens. As I understand it, the First Minister said yesterday that the Bank of England would be the lender of last resort to the new independent country. In other words, the Bank of England of the UK would set the borrowing limits of an independent Scotland. We are talking about key decisions: the bank would set the interest rates that govern the amount that everyone in this country pays on their mortgage. Is that acceptable to the SNP? Those are fundamental questions. The SNP cannot claim that everything would be all right if we had the levers of power but then not say what it would do on taxation. Would it accept a 50p rate of taxation or take control of currency and interest rates? The SNP is abdicating responsibility. The argument in the SNP seems to be that it would not take those chances because that would be too risky as the markets might prey on a Scottish currency. That is actually an argument for being part of a union—perhaps it could be the United Kingdom. These are difficult times. Young people and their families are incredibly worried, particularly because the Scottish Government seems to be closing the door to their getting the qualifications and training that they need by cutting college funding by 10 per cent last year and by a further 20 per cent this year. At a time when families are worried, there are cuts to social services and local authorities, with 13,000 jobs having gone in the past year. The budget does not reflect the right priorities for Scotland. However, we will work with the SNP. Rather than make damaging cuts, the SNP must invest in housing and colleges to tackle youth unemployment, and it must invest in maintaining jobs and services. The SNP has £155 million in Barnett consequentials right now and £600 million—more than £0.5 billion pounds—of consequentials at its disposal. The way in which we choose to use our Government’s budget has a huge effect on our lives. We must step up to the challenge and use the budget to create jobs.

I am intrigued, because I was trying to lay out to the SNP that there is an alternative, which is to invest in jobs. Does Mr Gibson think that the SNP Government is doing enough to invest in jobs?

In my opening remarks, I highlighted the fact that the cabinet secretary has £155 million available in consequentials this year alone and more than £600 million in consequentials over three years.

I do not want to exaggerate our differences. We questioned, and we still question, whether the preventative spending agenda is being pursued as vigorously as it could be, but we welcome it. Similarly, it is accepted across the chamber that the only reason why apprenticeships are in the SNP budget now is the pressure that Labour put on the Government. The member wants to talk about youth unemployment, so will he say how the £70 million cut to colleges helps to tackle youth unemployment?

I am intrigued, because Mr Mason did not accept our word on this, either. There are £660 million-worth of consequentials. It is interesting that all the parties across the chamber have identified similar areas on which that money could be spent, among which housing and colleges are predominant. Does Mr Brodie accept that there is money to be spent and that those areas should be prioritised?

Does the SNP accept that neither the UK Government nor the Scottish Government is currently doing enough to tackle our unemployment problem? What would the SNP do to reduce the level of unemployment?

Let me use the argument that the cabinet secretary has just applied to the Opposition. If he takes £70 million out of the college budget and then gives £15 million back, he should not pretend to us that that is an increase.

Will the member give way?

Has the minister revised his optimistic predictions for business rate income, given the downgrading of the predictions for the growth of the UK economy?

I thank the finance minister for his earlier good wishes. My friend and colleague Johannn Lamont assured me that, in asking me to take up this post, she was recognising my contribution over recent weeks. Speaking to a half-empty chamber on the final day of the term, I am trying to work out whether it is a reward. In recent weeks, I have been talking about the importance of emphasising Labour’s positive message and our willingness, where appropriate, to work with the Scottish Government. It is therefore only fitting that I begin on a consensual note. I can say in all honesty that I have a lot of sympathy for the finance minister and the difficult circumstances in which he finds himself. It is not easy to make budget decisions with a tight funding settlement, particularly when the economy is so fragile. I would go further and suggest that Labour and the Scottish National Party share common ground in our concern about the economic approach of the Conservative Government at Westminster. To cut spending so dramatically and to reduce the public sector, and in particular to lay off public sector workers in the hope that the private sector will somehow make up the difference, strikes me as the triumph of ideology over experience and the pursuit of political dogma rather than an approach that is based on a practical appreciation of what might prove to be effective. In these difficult times, it is even more important to take decisions that reflect and stem from our principles and values. In Labour’s case, as people struggle with the cost of living or their gas and heating bills or worry about their employment or pension prospects, we would prioritise jobs, growth and education. The Scottish Government’s spending review outlines a similar set of key economic objectives, but it is disappointing that the Government’s actions do not yet match its words. Finance and infrastructure ministers talk about the importance of capital spending but, last year and this, capital spending has fallen or is planned to fall by more than in the UK under George Osborne. The front page of The Scotsman today reveals that another capital project, the M8 Baillieston interchange project, is to be delayed, for four years. That is hardly the boost to the construction industry and the economy that the Government says it supports. The cabinet secretary talks about the importance of jobs. We are delighted that the Government has taken up Labour’s suggestion of a dedicated employment minister to reflect that priority. However, unemployment is higher here than it is in the rest of the UK and we are shedding jobs faster. For the first time since devolution, the number of jobs in the health service has begun to decline and more than 13,000 jobs have been lost in local government in the past year alone. The draft budget outlines further cuts, in the civil service and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. Each one of those job losses brings anxiety and upset to families across the country, and the net effect economically is to depress consumer spending and demand. On top of my concern that the Scottish Government simply is not doing what it says it is doing, I make it clear that, overall, the budget does not reflect Labour’s principles and priorities. To give just one example, the education budget is predicated on cutting the number of teachers, reducing their pay through a pay freeze and cuts to the rates that are paid to supply teachers. The budget fails to deliver a national school building programme of any scale and in fact takes capital away from local authorities, which will hinder their ability to deliver their own school building programmes. Education is just one example, but I make the point to outline our overall approach to the budget and our contrasting priorities. In that context, we are of course willing to engage constructively. On that note, I highlight a number of decisions or proposals that need to be addressed and amended in areas such as housing, further education and local government. If jobs and economic growth are the priorities, as we appear to agree on the surface, why are the very areas that can deliver that growth—housing, further education and local government—bearing the brunt of the cuts? The Finance Committee has touched on some of those issues, but in the view of my Labour colleagues on the committee, it pulled its punches, which is why they dissented from the report. The lack of transparency that the Government displayed over the annual budget is frustrating. It did not produce the detailed so-called level 4 figures in time to aid scrutiny; it refused to give further information on the supposed centrepiece of its economic policy, the revenue to capital resource transfer; and it decided to stop producing outturn statements on efficiency savings. Rather than add clarity to the process, all those factors and more have hindered Parliament’s ability to hold the Government to account. I am certainly not trying to pin all the blame for the state of the economy on the Government. I simply want to clarify whether ministers’ actions are helping to reduce unemployment, stimulate businesses or otherwise help create economic growth. I am sure that I have no need to remind members about the First Minister’s enthusiasm to take the credit when things are going well but, as all the evidence in recent weeks and months has demonstrated, things are not going well. Is it not time for everyone in the Government to stand up and be counted for the decisions for which they are responsible? The evidence to the Finance Committee certainly seems to back up that view. Professor David Bell and Professors Armstrong and Peat raised doubts over the Scottish Government’s approach to supporting economic recovery. Professor Peat’s comments in particular focused on the lack of evidence for that. We need action now to reinstate the future jobs fund and to expand it to include the private sector. We must do more with local and national Government procurement to boost the economy. We must stop delaying capital investment projects and bring them forward now. The Scottish Government could do worse than look to Glasgow City Council and the new graduate employment scheme that it unveiled last month, which uses pension funds to invest in local job-creating companies. Our worry is not simply that the Scottish Government makes the wrong choices in the budget but that it has failed to link the budget to its own economic priorities. The Finance Committee’s report goes some way to identifying those weaknesses, but what matters most is the response that the finance minister makes.

Before Mr Wheelhouse moves off the issue of preventative spending, will he tell us whether he thinks that the £74 million cut from colleges will affect the preventative spending agenda from working?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Is the minister claiming credit for reversing a year away from now a cut that he introduced himself?

I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has finally produced some information. He will therefore have no difficulty in naming one project—one project only—in the health budget that will lose revenue and become capital.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The report contains little about individual departmental budgets. For example, cuts to further education colleges do not get much coverage. In the spirit of not pulling punches, would Mr Mason comment on whether the committee agrees with the £74 million cut to college budgets?

Will John Mason give way?

I am sure that the minister will share my concern and that of the various consulates in this country at the decline in the number of foreign language assistants, which in the past five years has decreased from just under 300 to less than 60. One reason for that is that such posts are the victims of cuts at local government level. What practical action can the minister take to reverse that decline and increase the number of foreign language assistants?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would not wish the First Minister to get off to a bad start in misinterpreting my questions, statements or policies, so I will assume that it was a genuine misunderstanding. In the interests of clarity, I let the First Minister know that my plan for the small business bonus scheme would be to take the £130 million and to give it to the same small businesses, but only if they take on an employee. That would not only boost economic growth but reduce youth unemployment by 20,000. I urge the First Minister to look at the evidence from the Scottish Trades Union Congress and others.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what impact its proposed reductions to college budgets will have on widening access to education. (S4O-00397)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that of our further and higher education institutions, our colleges have the best record of serving disadvantaged communities? Is he aware of concerns among some of our most vulnerable learners—those with additional needs—that they are already being disproportionately affected by the cuts?

3. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the Educational Institute of Scotland’s call for a ballot on industrial action about proposed changes to the McCrone agreement. (S4F-00279)

The First Minister’s colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has repeatedly talked about the importance of high-quality teaching and the professionalism of our teaching staff. How does freezing the pay of teachers, cutting the pay of supply teachers and now changing their conditions of employment improve the quality and professionalism of teachers?

What does the minister make of figures from the care inspectorate this week that show that—despite the Government’s intentions—one in four crèches in Scotland has closed down, the number of out-of-school clubs has dropped from 808 to 745, the number of children and family centres has dropped from 142 to 136 and the number of playgroups has fallen from 486 to 416?

Is the minister yet in a position to tell the chamber how many exams pupils will sit at the end of their fourth year, following the end of the curriculum for excellence?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am conscious that members might detect a certain irony in the name that has appeared on their console screens as I rise to speak. All I would suggest is that it shows that the Labour Party can speak with one voice on these issues. [Laughter.] On that consensual note, let me say that it has been a consensual debate and that it is a real pleasure to conclude on behalf of the Labour Party. Helping to address the needs of Scotland’s looked-after children is clearly an issue that has touched the hearts of members across the chamber. In fact, from the minister’s opening remarks onwards, I have been struck by not only the consensual nature of the discussion but the informed contribution of many members, whether they have been from corporate parents such as Kevin Stewart and George Adam, members of adoption panels such as Mary Fee, or adoptive parents such as Richard Lyle and Gil Paterson. I thank them all for their contribution. Members have variously described not only the educational underachievement of looked-after children but how the years of abuse and neglect can leave scarring that results in a loss of opportunity, in damaged lives, in difficulties in making relationships in adult life and in so many setbacks and obstacles to living the full and complete life that other children and families take for granted. I had the pleasure of hosting a 40th anniversary reception for Adoption UK Scotland in the Parliament earlier in the year. It is worth remembering that placing a child permanently with a loving adoptive family is not, in itself, the end of the line. Adoption has changed in recent years. Many of those children have experienced severe trauma in their earliest years and have on-going and complex needs. Those children and families need on-going support and not just the right to assessment, as is currently the case. Unfortunately, too many supposedly permanent adoption placements break down. In fact, the best way in which to approach the needs of adopted children might be to continue to give them the same status as looked-after children, so that they are treated the same way in relation to their educational needs and have the same priority of access to child and adolescent mental health services as looked-after children. The parents and professionals to whom I spoke at Adoption UK Scotland’s reception made a powerful, compelling and emotional case for addressing the needs of families. More than that, they enlightened me about some of the theory and best practice around caring for vulnerable children. I thank Eileen Bebbington and Rena Philips from Post Adoption Central Support for the information that they forwarded to me about the importance of attachment in the earliest years of an infant’s life. The particularly enlightening work that has been done on attachment helps us to understand the behaviour of children as they grow and develop. Claudia Beamish made that point when she highlighted the needs of teenagers in care. The point was also made, in a different way, by Graeme Pearson when he talked of the likelihood of prisoners to have been in care in childhood. PACS has produced a pamphlet that is full of practical help and advice. It talks about the behaviour of children who have experienced emotional abandonment in early years. There are those who perhaps become overanxious to please and are desperate to do anything in order to escape another abandonment, others who act out their chaotic feelings in chaotic behaviour, and others still who turn in on their pain and withdraw, unable to relate to others. I am not sure that anyone who participates in today’s debate needs to be reminded of the importance of secure and permanent long-term relationships in the lives of our youngest children, but the work of PACS certainly helps to reinforce the point. It would be simplistic and wrong to suggest that social workers are somehow to blame for the problems in the current system. Liz Smith, Stewart Maxwell, Richard Lyle and others highlighted that point. Council officers work strenuously, diligently and with compassion to make the best possible decisions in extremely difficult circumstances. Clearly, our sympathies are with them, as well as with the children and families who are at the centre of our thinking. I thank Richard Lyle in particular for sharing his personal experience and insight into adoption and for allowing us to appreciate the positive outcomes and happy endings that result when parents and children are put together in the way in which they have been in his life. Today’s debate has been illustrated by examples of good and bad practice, and I would like to speak about the experience of a family in my constituency. It is rather more disturbing than Richard Lyle’s experience, but I think that it is all too common. My constituents adopted a child when they lived in South Lanarkshire. When they moved to East Renfrewshire and tried to adopt another child, they ran into difficulties because they were over 40. When they made contact with social services, the first thing that happened was that they were advised that they were too old to be given a baby and would qualify only for adopting a two or three-year-old. However, as there needed to be a two-year gap between any child whom they were given to adopt and the daughter they already had—who was three years old at that stage—they had to wait for a couple of years. When they reapplied to the local authority and were finally given permission to adopt, they were told that they could indeed adopt a child aged nought to two. There had been no reason for the delay whatsoever. What most frustrated them was that each decision that had to be taken in the process seemed to take for ever—in each case, it took as long as six to seven months. They have given me a list of different decisions that had to be made that is so long that I do not have time to read it out. They had to endure linking meetings, which are for cases in which a decision must be made about which one of three or four families it would be best for a child to go to. However, in their case, only they and one child were involved. It was only when they attended the linking meeting that they found out that there had been no need for the meeting in the first place. I am sure that all members can appreciate the number of disclosures, checks and references that my constituents have had to undergo. They did all that in South Lanarkshire, and then they went through the whole process again in East Renfrewshire, all at a cost to the taxpayer. Surely if one local authority approves a family for adoption, and their child is clearly healthy and well brought up, there must be a way to shorten the process for further adoptions. The young girl whom my constituents are still hoping to adopt was taken into care at birth. From the point at which my constituents were alerted that they might be considered as adoptive parents for her until now, there has been a year and a half of constant battling. That does not include the time that it took previously for them to be approved as adoptive parents. For all that time, the young girl has been with a foster family. She has been well looked after, but it is little wonder that foster families end up adopting, because after a year and a half with a tiny baby it is almost impossible not to have formed an attachment. The issues are difficult. Claire Baker, Gil Paterson, Mary Fee and others have highlighted that it is never easy to take children away from their birth families. It is a legal process, and we must get it right. However, following the legislation that was passed in the mid-1990s, it sometimes feels as if we have placed too much emphasis on birth being best—which is the point that Stewart Maxwell made. Children have been damaged as a result, but the decision to remove a child from their birth family will always require a balance to be struck. I think that we can agree, as we have done this afternoon, that we need to work on improving best practice; on speeding up the process once a decision on permanency has been taken; and—as the minister outlined in her opening speech—on putting the child’s best interests at the centre of our thinking.

I cannot disagree with the intent behind the minister’s words, but I question the actions that are being taken and the implementation. With regard to post-16 reform, how will the 20 per cent cuts to college budgets—following last year’s 10.5 per cent cuts—help to widen access?

In the middle of that answer, the minister said that the Government is still committed to maintaining student numbers. Could she further clarify that point? Maintaining student numbers was a manifesto commitment. However, her colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, refused to repeat that commitment in the Education and Culture Committee the other day and said instead that the Government would simply meet demand. Meeting demand is not the same as maintaining numbers. Which is it?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to debate attainment and the achievements of our young people. This is the first chance in the current session of Parliament to discuss what is happening in our schools and the direction of the Government’s education policy. At any time, policies will be under development, but I am slightly alarmed that we seem to be moving from one policy to another without acknowledging the change or having achieved any of the goals. Specifically, we are moving from an emphasis on lower class sizes to one on teacher quality. I seek clarity from the ministerial team and a sense of the direction that is being taken to achieve the attainment levels that we all want. We all agree that attainment levels are not high enough. I have no wish to play the blame game, and it is only fair to recognise the attempts of both Administrations. The aim of raising attainment was the key driver behind the reforms that Labour put in place during our time in office. It was behind the investment in the teaching workforce and school refurbishment and rebuilding, and it was behind the schools of ambition programme and our expansion of further and higher education. The motivation behind virtually everything that we did was to try to get more young people, particularly those from deprived and non-traditional backgrounds, to make the most of their abilities. In recent years, the work of Glasgow City Council in establishing nurture groups has been recognised as making a terrific contribution to tackling the lack of opportunity and underachievement. We talk about the tradition of the democratic intellect in Scotland—the idea that the laird’s son has always sat down with the ploughboy—and we pride ourselves that we Scots have an altruistic streak that is slightly more prominent than in some other countries. However, let us not hide the fact that, even in Scotland, education has long been of greater benefit to those with greater economic means. Whatever the attempts and difficulties that we faced in the past, I am more concerned about what we are doing now. In every year in which we were in office, slowly but surely, we reduced class sizes across the estate. The Scottish National Party was elected on a specific commitment to reduce to 18 the class sizes in primaries 1 to 3. I am afraid to say that there is no point in pretending that the Government came close. That flagship policy of the previous SNP Administration was based on the argument that the way to improve results and attainment is to invest in the early years. The argument is still used—the minister used it this morning when she talked about the importance of early intervention and preventative spend. We agree on that agenda, but the new policy on class sizes that was announced in this year’s budget is simply to keep teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers. In other words, no progress can be made in reducing class sizes or, if it is, it can be made only at the expense of rising class sizes in the upper years. I understand the financial pressures that the Government faces, but education policies should not be based on funding decisions alone. The Government is either committed to reducing class sizes because it is the right thing to do, or it is not. Smaller class sizes in P1 to P3 either make a difference, or they do not. Most people who are listening to the ministers would believe that the Government has abandoned its policy on class sizes in favour of an emphasis on teacher quality. I do not necessarily disagree with that, but we should have formal recognition that that is the case. Education authorities, teachers and parents deserve to know what is happening in our schools and what the education minister expects. Unfortunately, the rather half-hearted commitment to reducing class sizes has left a chaotic legacy. We have a legal class-size maximum of 25 in P1. We have guidance, which I believe is still in place, that class sizes should be reduced to 18 in P1 to P3. Most recently, an agreement was forced through—I repeat that it was forced through, otherwise local authorities would have had a less generous funding settlement—under which only 20 per cent of classes in P1 to P3 should be of 18. What a mess. In many schools, that has meant that, as a pupil progresses up the school, he or she is likely to go from a small class to a large one, to a composite class and then back again. It cannot be a good experience for any child to lose their peer group and to go up and down in that way. The education policy reflects decisions that have been taken to cover political embarrassment. The only reason why we have the 20 per cent target was to try to give the SNP cover as it went into the recent election, but there is no logic to the policy whatever. The figure of 18 was pretty arbitrary in the first place and the 20 per cent target is similarly arbitrary. The whole adds up to a picture of confusion. On top of those issues we have the success of the curriculum for excellence in primary schools, but there are huge question marks over its implementation in secondary schools. In particular, there are outstanding concerns over the transition from the curriculum for excellence to the examinable curriculum. How many times do we have to raise that issue in Parliament before we get some answers? I remind the minister and the chamber that one of the reasons for our introducing the curriculum for excellence was that, although those at the top do well—and for them exams can be quite a motivating factor—a huge group of young people are silently disengaged and a similarly huge group at the bottom of the system has very little prospect of getting any exam results at all. Those young people are at the centre of our discussion this morning and as they progress through secondary school, they can become increasingly disenchanted and quite difficult for schools to manage. In fact, I am slightly surprised that the debate centres so much on the term “attainment”, because I thought that we were moving away from solely assessing attainment to talk of broader achievement and fulfilment. Those are the terms of the curriculum for excellence. Teaching and learning have to be about progression, but there is very little progression among that group of young people. If we are to improve attainment or achievement and make the most of curriculum for excellence, it is essential that we get its implementation right. I have argued previously that, in my estimation, the McCrone agreement was one of the most important achievements of the last Labour Government. There are others who believe that we did not get as much return for our investment as we should have done, but we raised morale in the teaching profession, we reaffirmed our faith in teaching as a profession, we put an end to industrial discontent, and we reversed the withdrawal of good will for supporting out-of-hours working by teachers and far more. The net effect transformed our schools. The atmosphere in the staffroom and the classroom changed because we made it clear that we valued teachers. If we are now making the argument that the quality of teachers is essential to improving attainment, the cabinet secretary and ministers have a duty to be a bit clearer about what the post-McCrone or post-McCormac settlement will look like. During the previous parliamentary session, all too often we heard the cabinet secretary saying that decisions are for local authorities and that local government is the employer. I absolutely accept that we have to work in partnership with the local authorities and that it is not for us to dictate to them, but the Government should not use that as an excuse to abdicate responsibility; it should set clear guidance about what is expected. There is simmering discontent in our staffrooms, primarily because of pension changes but also because of anxiety over McCormac and the demands for teachers to become a more flexible workforce. Does the minister agree that supply teachers should be paid the cheapest rate possible rather than one befitting their experience? Will she oversee the end of the chartered teacher programme? That was a huge investment and a similarly huge commitment for many teaching staff. Would it not be more sensible to make the chartered system work rather than get rid of it altogether? Perhaps most important, we are talking about raising attainment but time and again we are reminded that the background from which a pupil comes is the key determinant of how well they will do at school. We have this fantastically equitable school system that is recognised in all sorts of reports, from the OECD to this week’s Sunday Herald. Too often, however, our system fails to overcome the disadvantage of a home that has no books, perhaps no working parent, and perhaps no ambition for further or higher education. Even when children and young people are encouraged to make the most of themselves, children from deprived communities are most likely to go to college, not university, and yet we are now reducing colleges’ funding by a further 20 per cent. The cabinet secretary has accepted that that will not help to widen access so why is the SNP Government doing it? If we wish to raise attainment, why have the minister and his Government decided to prioritise the old universities—institutions that are dominated by the already high-achieving middle classes? The post-93 institutions are being starved of resources and colleges are actually being cut.

Thank you very much. My argument was not that the Government is in hock to vested interests; it was that it is taking a rather elitist approach to education. That is genuinely my worry. We are talking about attainment, but the decisions that the Government is taking—

If the Government were committed to early years intervention, we would be with it entirely, but the trouble is that the talk is there, but the £50 million change fund over four years will not even begin to compensate for the cuts to local authorities, which are the main providers of early years intervention. [Interruption.]

Glasgow City Council, which has been trying for years to invest in nurture groups, is continually criticised by the Government for the work that it does. [Interruption.] The Government criticises Glasgow City Council constantly, and it is taking away far more from local authorities, which are the key providers of support in this area, than it is putting in. The idea that the flimsy £4 million in activity agreements somehow makes up for what the Government is robbing from elsewhere—[Interruption.] The minister constantly boasts about the Government’s promotion of education maintenance allowances, unlike the Government down south, but the SNP Administration has cut EMAs drastically. There is no more of the retention money in EMAs.

The basic EMA is still there, but all the additional money to retain people has gone. Schools of ambition have gone, colleges’ funding has been cut, EMAs have been cut back and local authorities—the main providers—have been hammered. I am not sure that the language, which we support, is backed up by the Government’s actions. I would like to hear from the minister, when he sums up, what other actions he intends to take. I move amendment S4M-01134.3, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert: “believes that more needs to be done to raise attainment and achievement levels among young people in Scotland; remains acutely concerned that even Scotland’s equitable school system fails to overcome socioeconomic deprivation for too many Scots; recognises the success of various initiatives, such as Glasgow’s approach in supporting nurture groups; believes that the Parliament can reach agreement on the importance of early intervention and tackling illiteracy, but, given the abandonment of the SNP government’s flagship policy on class sizes, calls for clarity on which Scottish Government policies will now be the key drivers in raising attainment and opening up opportunity for all.”

Does Mr Wheelhouse simply judge the success or failure of Scottish policies on whether they are better than English policies?

Is Mr Adam guaranteeing that, when a child enters a class of 18 in primary 1, he will stay in a class of 18 throughout his school career?

The word that I used was “flimsy” and I referred to the £4 million that was announced for activity agreements. Does the minister—I am sorry. I meant Mr Mackay. I was looking ahead, Mr Mackay. Does Mr Mackay agree that the £4 million that was found for activity agreements was taken from the mc2—more choices, more chances—fund that already existed?

Will Derek Mackay give way?

I say for clarity that the accusation is that the SNP is elitist—not universities. Before the minister moves off class sizes, will he clarify the Government’s policy on that? Is the policy parked or abandoned? Is teacher quality now the main driver to raise attainment?

Further to the question from my colleague Duncan McNeil, the cabinet secretary will be aware that I have had two constituents who have suffered from PNH, one of whom, Mr Devine, has now died. I was delighted to hear that the cabinet secretary will meet Mrs Juszczak this afternoon. I believe that she will be aware of correspondence from me requesting a meeting with the PNH Alliance to discuss a way forward so that we can resolve the issue of access for patients to the most effective medicines and tackle the whole issue of a postcode lottery across Scotland with regard to this drug. Will she agree to such a meeting?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary clarify his remark that students will not have to pay fees? Does he not actually mean Scottish students? After all, he has introduced in Scotland the most expensive fees in the whole of the UK.

Last week, The Herald contained a disturbing headline, indicating that 1,000 further education jobs have been lost in a year. Although that does not tell the whole story of what is happening in Scotland’s colleges, it gives a little glimpse into what happens when the Scottish National Party cuts 10 per cent from their budget. One thousand jobs have been lost at a time when the country is struggling to get out of recession and when unemployment is at unacceptably high levels; when this Government is supposedly implementing a no compulsory redundancy policy; and in the very area that has most to offer in making our young people more employable. The Scottish Government greeted the news with a decision to cut a further 20 per cent from the colleges’ budget over the next three years. The impact of last year’s cuts—let alone this year’s cuts—has been felt across the sector by students as well as by those who teach them. Colleges are funded to deliver 21 hours of classroom time per student each week, but the only way in which colleges have been able to keep within their budgets and still keep up their numbers has been by cutting the hours on offer to each student from 21 to 16. Is the cabinet secretary aware that colleges are offering their students less classroom time? If he is, did he approve that decision? If he is not aware of it, what does he intend to do about it? Perhaps he thinks that such a cut will have no effect on the quality of teaching and learning. The college closure—I am sorry; the college merger—agenda may look good to the SNP on paper, but I am not convinced that it has thought it through. We are not against mergers where they are necessary, but one of the main reasons why colleges offer similar courses in various parts of the country is that the locality matters to many students. It is all very well telling South Lanarkshire College to close its course offering—Margaret McCulloch spoke about that in the chamber last week—and telling students to go to Glasgow instead, but most students cannot afford that round trip and for some that will mean the difference between staying the distance and dropping out before they receive their qualification. It is not just the students and the communities that they live in that will lose out. The worry is that the vast new impersonal regional groupings could also lose the ability to respond to the local needs and demands of businesses and employers. They could lose the very flexibility that the Scottish Government praised just last year. There is support for public sector reform—colleges themselves have long embraced reform and the Labour Party has championed and supported reform in and out of office—but the SNP is deliberately confusing and conflating reform with cuts. The new term “positive reform” that Mike Russell has coined appears to be another term for huge cuts. It is even more worrying that the cabinet secretary appears to be taking a pretty elitist approach to further and higher education. The ancients—the old, established universities—are protected as much as possible and the newer, more accessible red-brick institutions are given thinly veiled threats to merge or else. Liz Smith referred to Lord Sutherland’s reference to “merger by fax” earlier this week. The poor colleges are treated like below-stairs staff. Mr Russell appears to be auditioning for “Downton Abbey”.

That is a pretty convoluted point, but I think that Mr Doris has just admitted that the University of Abertay Dundee will be closed. I think that that was what he was trying to say. Unfortunately, the First Minister certainly would not own up to that. For the past decade, the Labour Party has been committed not just to expanding, but to improving access to further and higher education. We have worked hard to break down the false divide between academic and vocational options and to build real equity into the Scottish tertiary education system. We have pushed apprenticeships and promoted the skills agenda as being equally worthy of public support as are degrees. I thought that the SNP supported us on that journey, but the decisions and policy announcements that have been made by the Administration over the past few months have rather given the game away. Research funding and a new market in fees for rest of UK students will entrench the position of the older universities while the institutions that are most accessible to their communities will lose another fifth of their funding.

I am delighted that Mike Russell pays such close attention to Labour Party policy and its conference. The SNP has already adopted the sensible Labour Party policy of guaranteeing a place for 16 to 19-year-olds. However, when the SNP adopts our policy, it does not put in place any funding, so all that happens is that older learners are displaced by new ones. What happened to lifelong learning, Mr Russell? I will end with a quote from a lecturer who is a constituent of my esteemed colleague Johann Lamont MSP. They stated: “The proposed cuts will ... significantly affect the education and training opportunities in my community where such provision is crucial in these times of economic hardship. Nicola Sturgeon had the nerve to turn up at Cardonald College on Wednesday morning to open our healthcare training facility and claim positive media coverage from others’ efforts ... in the full knowledge that later that day she would be party to sticking the financial knife into those who were there.” I ask the SNP Government to think again about its cuts to colleges before they damage the life chances of a whole new generation of Scots. I move amendment S4M-00955.3, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “is concerned that these cuts are being implemented at a time when Scotland is once more experiencing unacceptable levels of unemployment, with youth unemployment in particular having risen by 89% over the last four years, and calls on the Scottish Government to explain how cuts to colleges will improve the life chances for this and succeeding generations.”

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking following the loss of 1,000 jobs in the further education sector over the last year. (S4F-00148)

I am intrigued to know how yesterday’s announcement of 20 per cent cuts in colleges’ budgets will help to prevent future job losses. I am glad that the First Minister mentioned college places. Will he guarantee that, despite the cuts, he will meet his election manifesto promise to maintain the number of college places for Scotland’s students over this parliamentary session?

In yesterday’s statement on college mergers, the minister said that he might also consider university mergers. In the small print of the accompanying document, it looks as though the minister intends to use legislative powers to require mergers, which is creating some anxiety. How does the minister envisage using those powers?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. Much of what the cabinet secretary outlined this afternoon could have been lifted straight from the Labour Party manifesto from 2007, let alone 2011. However, late in coming or not, a guarantee of education and training for every 16 to 19-year-old is nevertheless welcome. What worries me is that, while he today outlines his good intentions and long-term plans, the decisions that he has already taken and the actions that he is already responsible for are not helping. I am sure that it has not escaped the cabinet secretary’s attention that youth unemployment has risen yet again. In fact, under the Scottish National Party there has been an 89 per cent increase in joblessness among young people—up 13,000 in the past three months alone. After four and a half years, he outlines his plans in a pre-legislative paper to be consulted on with a view to legislating in a further year. There is clear support on this side of the chamber for action now, so why is there no action now? The decisions taken by the cabinet secretary could actually be making things worse. Last year, the SNP cut funding to colleges by 10.5 per cent, and the number of university places fell. Will he tell us whether today’s guarantee is backed up by funding for new places at college or university? If not, will he tell us what he will do to help the displaced adult returners and other lifelong learners who lose their places because of the welcome offer of support to 16 to 19-year-olds? The cabinet secretary also announced the SNP’s plans for a minimum income of £7,000 for lower-income students—another policy that we have urged on him for several years. Will he tell Parliament exactly at what income level the support will kick in and when students can expect to receive the minimum income?

5. To ask the First Minister what agreement the Scottish Government has made with universities regarding access arrangements for students from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4F-00109)

I remind the First Minister that, in introducing £9,000 fees, his colleague Mr Russell suggested that Scottish universities might wish to show restraint. To date, all universities in Scotland—bar one—have gone for the maximum of £9,000. Is that acceptable? With a fee of £36,000 for a four-year degree, the University of Edinburgh has the unenviable title of most expensive university in the whole UK. Is that fair for middle-income families?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports private rented housing. (S4O-00125)

Does the minister recognise that among the many difficulties that face housing in Scotland are the many problems that are faced by first-time buyers? In particular, for young couples who want to buy their first home in areas such as East Renfrewshire, where house prices are extremely high, getting a 20 per cent deposit—which is often required these days—is well nigh impossible. Does the minister agree that private lets can provide one way for those families to get a nice home and to get established in family life? Is he collecting information on that sector and what is he doing to support it?

One of the many benefits of the education brief in this Parliament is that, for the most part, my education colleagues and I are spared the wearisome and increasingly strident but entirely unconvincing mantra of “If only”—as in, “If only we had the powers, everything in Scottish education would be all right,” or, “If only we had independence, our schools would all be wonderful.” The separatist arguments in other policy areas are similarly unconvincing. Separatism does not deliver one extra nurse, doctor or police officer. However, with education, the arguments spectacularly fail to apply because Scotland already has full control over decision making. Our nurseries, schools, colleges and universities are entirely devolved, which means that the Scottish Government already has responsibility when things go wrong or are not as good as they should be. Indeed, I remind members that it has had such responsibility for the past four years. If parents cannot get access to a nursery or cannot afford childcare; if a local school is being closed or our teachers are threatening to go on strike; if we are reducing the range of courses at our universities or limiting access to those institutions, the buck stops with this Administration. This Parliament and this Government have ultimate authority. That makes the Scottish Government’s education plans—or perhaps I should say lack of them—for the next five years all the more revealing. Education is the key to transforming our country, to giving all young Scots the best start in life, to retraining our workforce, to tackling inequality, to making the most of our talents and abilities and to allowing us all to prosper as a nation. These are the goals to which we should aspire, but precious little has been outlined today in the legislative programme for education to capture those aspirations. Do not get me wrong—I want to give the cabinet secretary some words of encouragement. Although we will question and scrutinise the Government’s proposed legislation, we will certainly not oppose the little that has been outlined. In fact, I can go further. Although we await further detail on the education proposals in the legislative programme, I assure the First Minister that we welcome the findings of the review of post-16 education and the establishment of the review of higher education governance. If the Government wants to bring forward proposals to invest in and improve our schools and make them the best in the world, it will have our support. After all, that is the mission on which we are engaged. What we are concerned about are the areas that have not been covered in today’s programme and which are not the subject of new legislation. The list goes on and on. On class sizes, for example, the current hotch-potch of policy, legislation and guidance is utterly confusing for education authorities and exasperating for parents. The SNP has obliged local authorities to reach a target of 20 per cent of primary 1 classes with 18 pupils or fewer, with the very real threat of a vastly reduced financial settlement if they fail. The rest of P1 will have to make do with a legally enforceable maximum of 25, while unfortunately that rises to 30 in P2 and P3 and to 33 in upper primary. Pupils are being moved about from year to year, from small classes to large or, increasingly, to deeply unpopular composite classes, with no continuity. Where is the leadership or strategic direction? Do the discredited targets of class sizes of 18 from P1 to P3 still stand? Can the minister tell me whether that is still Government policy? Similarly, the teaching profession is extremely anxious about pension arrangements, career prospects and salary freezes, not to mention the McCormac review and what might follow. We know that the single most important factor affecting the quality of our children’s education is the quality of our teachers, but where do teachers figure in the SNP’s priority list? The answer from staffrooms across the country is “Not very highly”. This year’s probationers have been incredibly relieved to have the comfort of a manifesto commitment that supposedly guarantees them the number of available jobs. I can tell members that when the figures are published we will be watching closely to see whether that promise is delivered. We still have not heard what is to become of the past four years’ graduates who have stuck in there, awaiting their opportunity. Are they to be leapfrogged by this year’s intake? Is that really fair? Teachers on supply are being particularly badly treated. As one dismayed teacher said to me recently, “there’s little doubt supply teachers were picked out as a soft target for cuts. It is an affront educationally though. For thousands of young Scots every day, supply teachers ARE Scottish Education. To undervalue those teachers is to undervalue education. After all, is the work of a locum doctor or a retained firefighter of any less value when they diagnose a serious illness or pull someone from a blazing building?” I emphasise the teacher’s parting comments: “If a country is serious about its future then it surely must place a greater value on education than this”. That is what education is all about—the future of our country, improving the skills of our workforce, and giving people confidence in their own abilities—not this obsession with the constitution or the pretence that separation will make things better. Education makes things better right now, and we have the powers right now. Why is the Government not using them? As for the SNP’s much-vaunted commitment to opposing tuition fees, it is difficult to take the First Minister seriously. The SNP is hardly 100 days into office and it has introduced £9,000 fees for rest-of-UK students. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has said that he expects universities to show restraint. Is £36,000 for a degree at Edinburgh restrained? At the very least, the cabinet secretary should have insisted on regulating or approving wider access arrangements at Scotland’s higher education institutions. To conclude, I return to my opening remarks, I am pleased that for the most part the SNP does not try to use education to drive a wedge between Scotland and the UK, but I urge the Government to recognise the opportunity that we are offered right here, right now. No more “If only”, no more excuses.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I also broadly welcome the further information that he has provided on the review of higher education and the announcement of a review of further education. Labour wishes accountability in those areas to be improved, and we look forward to discussing proposals at a later stage. However, I was slightly taken aback by the minister’s comments on charging fees for rest-of-UK students, which prompted more questions than answers. The minister has set the fee cap at £9,000 a year, but will that apply over three years or over the typical Scottish four-year course? Does the cabinet secretary accept that if it is open to principals to set a four-year charge of £9,000 a year, the cabinet secretary will be in the ludicrous position of setting fees in Scotland that are higher than those in England? On the same point, will any university that introduces the new fees have to meet the criteria set by the Office for Fair Access, or will no widening access obligations be attached? On the principles behind his thinking, will the cabinet secretary clarify whether he sees the primary purpose of the new charges as being to deter fee refugees or to generate income? If it is the former—which is Labour’s position—does he plan to set a limit on the number of places that are available to rest-of-UK students? The cabinet secretary began his statement by ruling out a market for higher education for Scottish students. However, by allowing course-by-course and institution-by-institution flexibility over rest-of-UK fees, does the minister consider it acceptable to create a market for English students? There are already widespread fears that some institutions tailor their courses according to available funding streams, for example research grants or the number of postgraduate students. How does the minister intend to prevent those same institutions from offering courses to fee payers from the rest of the UK, which effectively would displace Scottish students from those courses? Finally, the statement was noticeable for the lack of any detail on how the Scottish Government will proceed on charging EU students. Will the cabinet secretary at least assure Parliament that the plan that he has come up with and is working on is lawful as well as feasible within the boundaries of the EU?

Although we are six weeks in from the election, this is the first education debate of the new session, so I begin as the cabinet secretary did, in the spirit of acceptance, by congratulating Mr Russell on his re-election. I also welcome and extend my best wishes to his new front-bench team and to all our new colleagues in the Scottish National Party, the Labour Party and across the chamber. There are familiar faces, too—I am delighted to see Liz Smith back and I welcome Liam McArthur to the education team. It is a matter of regret for me to stand here without my colleagues Des McNulty and Karen Whitefield. I thank them for the substantial contribution that they made to the education debate in the past decade. Similarly, I thank Margaret Smith. Finally, and before I reach Oscar speech proportions, I pay tribute to Adam Ingram, who has not lost his seat but has simply moved. He was never anything other than thoughtful and considerate as a minister. The Labour Party might be in opposition, but we still have a vision for Scottish education and for a system in which everyone has the chance—in fact, repeated chances—to make the most of their abilities. We have a vision of a society and a country that thrive on the collective achievements and accomplishments of an educated population. During the election, much was made of the similarities between the manifesto commitments of the Labour Party, the SNP and the Lib Dems. On student fees, the new curriculum, early years and more, there is no doubt that many of us in the Parliament share common ground. I make it clear from the outset that where there is broad policy agreement, we will have no hesitation in saying so. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks on early years and his intention to make looked-after children a priority. We will certainly support him in achieving that objective. There are challenges. We know that our schools are successful and equitable, but they do not compensate for or overcome social or economic disadvantage. That is at least one reason why Labour introduced the curriculum for excellence and why the SNP has continued in that direction. We believe that our colleges and universities offer opportunities to us all as individuals, and that our culture and economy are communally enriched by higher levels of education. That is why Labour will stand by our commitment to oppose tuition fees. I stressed the broad consensus that exists in the Parliament, but I worry about the delivery of the plans. I worry that, in some areas of education, our progress might be halted. For example, the most pressing and topical issue must be that of teacher employment, or rather unemployment, because the figures that were released from the General Teaching Council for Scotland yesterday are a matter of deep concern. In the past four years, the number of newly qualified teachers who are unable to find employment has more than doubled and the number who are in work with a permanent contract has more than halved. In other words, we have an issue of unemployment and of underemployment among the most recent recruits to the teaching profession. Labour has proposed the immediate recruitment of 1,000 new teachers, which would not only halt that decline but reverse it. If the cabinet secretary is unwilling to follow our lead, we need to know how the Scottish Government will implement its own election commitment to give probationers a job. Will it be funded? Will the promise extend only to this year’s probationers? If so, what about those teachers who have been scrabbling around for four years trying to make do and survive on supply work? I trust that we are not simply going to overlook them and move on to the next generation. Of course, the issue is not just a matter of concern for our teachers: it has a direct impact on how pupils learn in the classroom. Class sizes are all over the place, particularly in early primary school. We have a ridiculous target that 20 per cent of classes should be of fewer than 18 pupils in primary 1 to primary 3, while we simultaneously introduced a legal maximum of 25 in primary 1. Pupils are going from classes of 20 or so in one year to 33 the next, and there are composite classes and classes of 40 or more taught by multiple teachers. During the past few weeks, I have been inundated with letters and e-mails from parents who are alarmed at what their children may expect when they return after the summer break. We must consider the matter rationally, rather than applying a policy that seems to be the result of financial deals that have been negotiated behind closed doors. The issue of probationary employment has arisen at the same time that the minister has established the McCormac review into teachers’ terms and conditions. In England and Wales, strike action from teachers is imminent, and it is fair to say that discontent is simmering in our staffrooms too.

I recognise that the teaching unions in England are predominantly concerned with the pensions issue. I was making the point that teachers have accepted a two-year pay freeze and are very concerned and alarmed at some of the talk that is going around about their pay and terms and conditions. We need from the cabinet secretary a clear statement of intent on teacher numbers, on terms and conditions and on his plans for teacher employment. A second pressing issue that faces the cabinet secretary is the implementation of curriculum for excellence. The first cohort of pupils is coming to the end of secondary 1, and yet, extraordinarily, they still do not know the nature or even the number of exams that they will sit in three years’ time. There remains broad political and professional support for the principles of curriculum for excellence, but it is now a matter of urgency for parents and pupils to know what the reforms will mean in practice. Local authorities are cutting back on the continuous professional development budget at a time when secondary teachers in particular are crying out for more support. The question that has puzzled many teachers, and which has been raised on numerous occasions in this Parliament, is that if there are to be five broad courses in third and fourth year, does that mean that most pupils will sit only five exams? There are significant implications for pupils and for subject disciplines if the point at which the curriculum narrows moves from fifth year to fourth year. It will certainly have implications for the choice of sciences and modern languages. It is also of concern that at this point there seems to be little in the way of evaluation or formal monitoring of the success of the curricular reforms. In fact, the very body that we rely on in Scotland, Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education, has already had to give up its school inspections to implement the new curriculum. The merger of HMlE and Learning and Teaching Scotland highlights the question of distinct roles for an implementation body and an inspection body. Higher and further education is the third area of immediate concern. At present, the number of fully funded places is falling rather than increasing, and higher education institutions throughout Scotland are cutting not just staff, but whole departments. There is a general concern that those decisions are motivated more by the availability of research funding streams and postgraduate funding or by the attractions of wealthy foreign students, than by more disinterested academic or strategic considerations. The First Minister has intervened to praise some strategic moves such as those at the University of Strathclyde, while condemning others such as those at the University of Glasgow. Will the cabinet secretary expand on what he feels the Government’s role should be in helping to shape those policy choices? Colleges, too, are having to deal with even greater cuts to their budgets, and all that comes at a time when Scotland needs to improve the skills of its workforce. If Scotland is to thrive, the solution surely lies in educating greater numbers of graduates. Excepting the Conservatives, there is political solidarity in Scotland on the issue of tuition fees. It is now up to the minister to bring forward his proposals to ensure that our universities do not fall behind those south of the border, and to tell us when and at what level he intends to set the fees for English students. Some of the proposed funding streams that the minister has mentioned have failed to quell anxiety. The plans for charging European Union students, for example, seem to form part of the minister’s calculations but have yet to get off the starting block. Perhaps the minister would care to clarify that point. There is room for agreement on the issue of improving governance, and I welcome the minister’s announcement of a review. Universities may be multimillion-pound institutions, but they are not businesses, and their academic independence and integrity need to be bolstered. There is not enough time this morning for me to cover every area, but I will briefly touch on two issues. First, on rural schools, the minister did not fully address my question about why urban schools are not included in his moratorium on school closures. Urban schools are being closed, as are rural schools, on the arguable premise that reducing capacity saves money that can be better spent on other schools. That is not an educational benefit but a financial argument, and if it does not work in a rural context I do not understand how it can work in an urban context. Finally, I will raise an issue that does not require significant resources but can be addressed even at this time of financial constraint: the importance of tackling bullying. It is unfortunately the case that bullying is endemic in our schools and in our society. It does not have to be that way, but it requires a lead from the cabinet secretary. A very good start would be to implement Labour’s policy to monitor, record and publish every incident of bullying in schools and how it was dealt with. If we are not aware of the extent of the problem, we cannot do anything about it. I would welcome hearing the minister’s thoughts on how he intends to tackle the issue. I have tried to address the serious issues that face our schools, but I do so with a sense of anticipation about what we can achieve. Education is the one service that the state can provide that lifts aspirations, provides fulfilment and allows people to secure prosperity. Our task is to ensure that Scottish education thrives.

I ask the minister to clarify a further question related to the point that Stewart Maxwell raised: will students sit five, six, seven or eight exams in fourth year?

Will the minister take an intervention?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive what estimate it has made of additional costs to local authorities in moving from capital grant to revenue funding for the school building programme. (S4O-00042)

That was an interesting response, given that ministers and Scottish National Party back benchers have repeatedly made claims about the cost of public-private partnership programmes compared with traditional procurement. North Lanarkshire Council, whose area is one of those affected, suggests: “The most significant change resulting from the change to revenue funding support is that Hard FM and Lifecycle must be included in the project but these costs will not be funded by the Scottish Government.” Is that the case? Will the Scottish Government not make up any shortfall? Does it expect councils to do so, or does it expect schools to reduce the facilities that are planned?

Will the member take an intervention?

In keeping with most of the opening debates in the current parliamentary session, it has been a broadly consensual discussion. There is much for us to find agreement on regarding the need to support our broadcast and creative industries and the importance to Scotland of the whole country being able to benefit from digital technology through, for example, superfast broadband. There is one important caveat, however, which several speeches have mentioned directly or indirectly, and it concerns the devolution of further powers over broadcasting. It is a tricky issue, as Labour supports the devolution of broadcasting powers in some instances. For example, Fiona Hyslop cited figures from BBC Wales to support the argument that Wales is more generously funded than Scotland. We, on the Labour benches, would support any argument that approached the discussion from that point of view and talked about fair treatment for Scotland. However, she went on to present three points to try to argue that we need new powers to achieve our shared goals of improving and expanding broadcasting in Scotland. I have to say that I was totally unconvinced by that. I will return to that point later. The bulk of the motion comments on the welcome developments of recent years, in particular the work of the Broadcasting Commission and its successor body, the Scottish digital network panel. With the switchover of many television services coming up later this week, I do not want to tempt fate, but the process has gone relatively well so far. Although some of us occasionally struggle with technology in general—the information technology helpdesk will testify to my needs in that regard—Scots of all generations have not only adapted to the digital revolution but embraced it in a remarkable way. I am not sure whether you are aware, Presiding Officer, but speakers have been alerted to several mobile telephones and BlackBerrys going off in the chamber this afternoon, so we are clearly an example of that process. From an economic perspective, digital access is crucial if we are to compete effectively. I find it interesting that, as Alex Johnstone and David Stewart said, the proven success story of established broadband access in some parts of the Highlands and Islands has already allowed those areas to economically leapfrog other parts of Scotland, such as areas of the central belt. Another recent success story is the launch of BBC Alba on Freeview, to which several speakers referred. Like the minister, I point out that it followed cross-party lobbying from all parties in the Scottish Parliament. I am sure that I do not have to tell members the importance of growing the number of Gaelic speakers in Scotland if we are to ensure that the language is to survive. Alongside the expansion of Gaelic-medium education, access to the language through BBC Alba is crucial. I do not want to teach my grannie to sook eggs but, to grow the language, new learners are needed. In other words, BBC Alba is not a service for those in the traditional Gaelic heartlands alone. By putting the channel on Freeview, we have removed one of the major obstacles to widespread access. I wonder in passing how many new viewers BBC Alba won with its televising of Rock Ness. I was another of those who tuned in to watch it and, like Patricia Ferguson, was hugely impressed by the way that the presenters switched from Gaelic to English and kept all viewers with them. The recent BBC reforms have proved successful. The corporation is, as several members mentioned, well ahead of schedule for transferring production to Scotland. Indeed, the BBC as a whole is on the brink of major devolutionary change, not only for Scotland but for England, in moving production out of London to places such as Salford and Bristol. I do not know whether many members saw that the corporation is talking of selling off BBC television centre, which is an iconic building. The recent election is an occasion of some moment for me because, in this session, I will have spent more time as an MSP than I did as a television producer, which is what I used to be. In fact, I used to be one of the hundreds of Scots who worked out of TV centre in London. Just as I have moved on, so undoubtedly has the BBC. That shift has been driven partly by the technological changes—digital changes—that have allowed the BBC to move out of London, move round the country and reflect our views differently. It has also been driven by specific policy choices that the corporation has made to increase production in Scotland and ensure that its news programmes are more reflective. A number of contributors, particularly on the SNP back benches, talked of that point in a way that caused me concern. Angus MacDonald made the point that we are entitled to a share of the licence fee. The difficulty with that argument is that it implies that the 10 o’clock news, as an example, is a solely English programme as opposed to one that we enjoy and from which we benefit. I do not ever quite accept the argument that the licence fee has to be divvied up individually. Another argument, which Mark McDonald made, was that Scottish programmes would somehow be superior or of greater quality. Of course, the major concern of respondents to the Broadcasting Commission’s survey was a question about the ambition of some of BBC Scotland’s programme making. BBC Scotland is part of a big organisation, fantastic people work there and it has benefited from reforms in recent years.

I am sorry, but I am not sure that I accept or would make that argument; I am not sure that it is the argument that Helen Eadie made. I argue that the BBC in Scotland should produce programmes for a national audience. That is what I want. I want production to expand in Scotland, but not solely for Scotland—I want UK-wide or worldwide programmes to be made in Scotland. I observe that a mixture of the brand-new Pacific Quay building and the increase in devolved production has given BBC Scotland palpable new confidence in its programme making. I return to the motion and I will set out why the Labour Party will support both amendments. As I said, we agree with much of the motion, but it places too much emphasis on what others should do and not enough on what we and particularly the Scottish Government could and can do. One of the Broadcasting Commission’s most important findings highlighted the need to develop our skills base. In speaking to our amendment, Patricia Ferguson made the point that if we do not have the skills base, we cannot produce the content in Scotland. That was a key reason—or excuse—that Channel 4 gave to explain why it did not produce and commission more programmes here. We will support the Conservative amendment, which Ruth Davidson moved, because it reaffirms a central finding of the Broadcasting Commission, which was that any new network that is supported by public funding should not undermine or be at the expense of existing broadcasters. I am sure that most members are aware that STV has returned only recently to a firm financial footing. The on-going success of STV is of great importance to all of us. We also support the Conservative amendment because it would remove the one worrying line in the Scottish Government’s motion, which calls for broadcasting responsibilities to be transferred to the Scottish Parliament. In discussing that point, we have heard two lines. The cabinet secretary tried to reassure us that the motion was simply about investigating new powers and not about demanding them, but every other SNP member has talked about control and demanding editorial control, which worries me deeply. Historically, the SNP has campaigned to break up the BBC—that has often been used as a proxy argument for the break-up of Britain. The tactic might have shifted to incremental accumulation of powers, but I do not believe that the people of Scotland want the break-up of the BBC. I suggest that the Broadcasting Commission pulled off a remarkable feat in uniting us all around its conclusions on what is normally a divisive subject. Let us return to the commission’s central aims and unite to expand and improve Scottish broadcasting as an additional service, rather than a supplementary to UK broadcasters.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I welcome his announcement. There are still too many battles between parents and local authorities over school closures, and the more we can remove uncertainty from the process, the more confidence all sides can have in reaching a decision. I admit that I am intrigued that the first substantive item of education policy to be brought before us in session 4 is the Scottish Government trying to correct one of its own mistakes. I remind the cabinet secretary that in his first speech following his appointment to his present position he said: “I am glad, therefore, that my prescience and support led to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which was passed unanimously in this chamber—I regard the campaign on that as a success.”—[Official Report, 3 December 2009; c 21804.] I wonder how many members would describe themselves as prescient and successful in their first contribution. Leaving that aside, where has it all gone wrong? If the legislation was such a success, why has it not worked? It is difficult not to suspect that the cabinet secretary’s personal interest in getting elected in a rural constituency that faced a large number of school closures helped focus his mind. Will the minister clarify whether he believes that parents should have the right of appeal to the Scottish Government if a local authority proposes or agrees a school closure? Does he recognise that the Government sends out two messages to our councils—to save money and to protect local schools—which are often in direct conflict? Councils argue that closing a school will reduce capacity and therefore provide for the most efficient use of resources, and that the most efficient use of resources will produce an educational benefit. Does the minister agree with the central logic of that argument? Most parents certainly do not. Finally, why has the minister not announced a moratorium on urban school closures? Is the legislation working well in such cases? I declare a personal and a constituency interest—I see no educational benefit coming from the closure of a successful and popular school such as Robslee primary in East Renfrewshire. Do parents and pupils in urban settings not deserve the same protection and the same clarity of criteria as those in rural areas?