I thank Jenny Marra for bringing this important debate to the chamber. The cause is worthy. The international day of zero tolerance for female genital mutilation is an important marking point. The minister took an auto-defence approach, but I make it clear that we do not blame her personally. What we say is meant not as criticism but as comments on how to go forward. I hope that she accepts what is said in that spirit. In 2013, UNICEF established that more than 125 million women and girls from 29 countries worldwide have been affected by female genital mutilation. The origin of the practices is unclear, but it is clear that they have been undertaken for thousands of years and that they will not disappear overnight. The point of having an international day of zero tolerance for FGM is to take a strong approach and share the information that we have. We will learn from that and tackle the problem in Africa, Asia and Europe—including the United Kingdom—and in other parts of the world. A constituent brought FGM to my attention when I became an MSP. I was horrified and disturbed, to be frank, when I began to read about it. I come from a culture in which I saw circumcision and various other mutilations that happen as a child, but I was particularly disturbed by FGM and by the fact that it is happening to very young girls. They have no choice and not only are they scarred for life but they might develop health complications, which they cannot do anything about, because the procedures are irreversible. I therefore feel very strongly about the issue, and I have discussed it with many people. I have picked up clearly that the issue is kept very close in the community and that a lot of pressure is applied to young people, who are told that FGM is a must for them and they should not talk about it because people will not understand. Various excuses are used. The young girls are told that they will be unclean and not pure if they do not go through the process. They are almost made to feel that it is something to be proud of and they must have it done. That is a ridiculous attitude, but people have practised FGM for so long that they believe that what they are doing is right. That is why it is important that we have stiff sentences for people who put our young through such an experience—and they are our young; there are young Scots who live here and who have to go through the experience. I spoke to a doctor from Kurdistan, who actively campaigns on the issue. He told me that he had been surprised to find that FGM is widespread in Iraq and in particular in Kurdistan. He said that the Government there has taken robust steps to deal with the issue, through public information and conferences and by talking about the matter on television. Most important, the Government has sent out the right signal by outlawing the practice. That was a brave step for the country to take. Although we are part of the way there, in that we have already legislated, it is unfortunate that we have not grasped how to penetrate communities and protect people. I have heard some good ideas about sharing information in schools and setting up a task force to deal with the issue more robustly, and I hope that by next year we will have had some success—I am not holding the minister responsible today, as I said, but I will certainly do so in a year’s time if there has been no success. It is important that we send out the right signal and tell our young that the Government cares for them and will take all necessary measures to ensure their health, safety and quality of life. That is paramount. I agree with all the sentiments that members have expressed in the debate.

When I was a city councillor in Glasgow, I was honoured to be given the opportunity to be part of the bid team for the Commonwealth games. The team ran a fantastic campaign that ended with our winning by a large margin the opportunity to host the Commonwealth games in Glasgow. James Dornan suggested that I was perhaps in the Trongate to hear the decision, but I have to disappoint him on that, because I was actually in Sri Lanka fighting for our bid with the First Minister, the leader of the council and other colleagues. I cannot express the feeling that I had when I met people from the Commonwealth who spoke highly of Scotland and the United Kingdom and who talked about how, historically, we had cared about people around the world. Two comments will never leave me. One of them was when a member of the Commonwealth games team said, “We don’t know Nigeria, but we know the UK because, in times of trouble, you have always been there for us.” That made me really proud of being British. The other comment was, “Nigeria might have the money, but it does not have the will of the people behind the bid.” I took that comment to heart, too. When the announcement was made and the BBC was covering the events, I remember a news item from Nigeria from which I could see that the local community did not really know anything about the games. That aspiration was missing, which is perhaps one reason why Nigeria was unsuccessful. It is hard to believe that seven years have passed since that day in Sri Lanka and that we are only a few months away from the opening ceremony, which will showcase the best of Scotland and what it has to offer, and—most important—Scotland’s people and the friendly atmosphere that I am sure everyone will enjoy. We must congratulate Glasgow City Council, which has risen to the challenge and used the opportunity of the games to create substantial jobs through the Glasgow guarantee, new affordable housing and world-class sports facilities. That will be the legacy of the games. Glasgow has done well to achieve that, despite the setback of the Government taking £150 million from the city. We must not be complacent. The legacy is fantastic and offers many possibilities for young people in Glasgow. We must build on it and ensure that everyone in Glasgow can participate fully. This will be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for many people. The games will be hosted in other parts of Scotland. We should be proud to have the opportunity to share our heritage and culture with the 6,500 athletes, from 71 countries, who are expected to arrive in Glasgow this summer. I know that they will get a friendly welcome from Glaswegians, in particular. Glasgow is increasingly multicultural. I am very proud of that and I am keen that our visitors take that on board.

The member offers a glimpse of what we hope to achieve. What is important is that, whatever people’s culture, faith and background, they will come to a friendly host city, which is proud of its history and its engagement and connections with people around the world. I believe in my heart that a main reason why we were successful is the friendship that we share with other people. What is important is the message that people take away. We say, “Haste ye back”, and I hope that every participant comes back with their family. The games are for Glasgow, in particular, but I am a little fearful that they might be hijacked by others. There is a huge temptation for other cities, and for people who have perhaps not been fully involved, to try to hijack the games. We need to recognise that, in the main, it is Glasgow that has done all the running for the games.

Although I have no difficulty with accepting the fact that the Government is putting in 80 per cent of the cost, and I have no problem with other parts of Scotland celebrating the games, I will have a problem when other people take the credit for it. When a city has made the running and taken up the challenge, that needs to be recognised. That is important. I do not agree with the minister or agree that other people are making a contribution at this late stage by coming in with the resources that belong to Scotland and that that means that they can take the credit for it.

Yes—but I do not want to be interrupted in that way.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. All I really want to say is that, when all is said and done, Glasgow and the people of Glasgow have made a huge sacrifice. They have been planning and running throughout the bid system. They have made huge sacrifices, and I do not want someone to steal the lollipop from them at the end.

You mentioned the Glasgow mela. Did you know that the Scottish Government does not provide funds for the Glasgow mela?

All I was really trying to say is that these are Glasgow’s games. I am fearful that Johnny-come-lately will rain on Glasgow’s parade, which I do not want to happen. I want proper recognition of Glasgow and the commitment that it has shown to the games.

I thank Stewart Maxwell for securing this historic debate on Holocaust memorial day. Despite all the recorded history, there are still a few people who question whether the Holocaust took place. That, in itself, is quite horrible to me. I have seen films and documentaries and read books on the subject. As a child, I used to wonder how human beings could treat other human beings in such a way. I could never understand it, and I still do not understand it, despite the fact that I am a part of a minority community and have had a slight glimpse of what can happen when things go wrong. I have seen the heart of Europe being torn apart, and genocide taking place in the modern world. It is, therefore, not very difficult to understand and believe what happened in relation to the genocides that took place—the horror, the suffering, the pain, the inhumanity to humans. I have to say that I am still moved, to this day, when I think about the difficulties and the hardships that people went through. I was particularly moved when I saw films that showed the effects on young children. I am sure that those children carried the scars all their lives and that it was difficult and challenging for them to live fruitful and meaningful lives after those experiences. It is shameful that, despite the experiences that we have seen, people still continue to hurt one another. I still do not understand why it happens. Kenneth Macintosh is right to point to the horrors that happen in Africa and other parts of the world today. I always ask myself why we are not learning the lessons and why these things are still going on. The United Nations does its best, under difficult circumstances. There is a lot going on in international politics. However, what happened in the Holocaust was beyond what is happening in the world today. It is very important that we never allow ourselves and other people to forget that, if we allow hatred to perpetuate, it can go to that extreme. That is something that I have always carried in my heart. I will always be a witness and I will always remind others of the slippery slope that people can allow themselves to go down. Hatred and the horror of continuous barbarity towards human beings need to be challenged at all times. My friends, Judith Tankel and Henry Tankel, were my heroes. They were an example of a Jewish family who worked in the community tirelessly, and I turned to them on many occasions for advice and guidance. Their loss will always be a loss to me and to the community. Today, I want to say that we should always remember our past and guard against repeating it in the future, to ensure that we do not allow human beings again to go down the route that they did at that time. All that I want to add to the fine words that people have spoken today is that we should always stand up and be counted and always remind people of the horrors that took place, so that we do not allow them to be repeated.

I congratulate Joan McAlpine on bringing the debate to the chamber. The Big Burns Supper is an important event, not only because it is part of homecoming, and not only because Dumfries and Galloway is celebrating it, but because it is part and parcel of our history, which is important. We sometimes forget how important history is to people. The value of the history and culture of any nation are often underestimated. Joan McAlpine will be pleased to know that the city of Nuremberg in Germany, which is twinned with Glasgow, celebrates with a Burns supper every year. She will also be pleased to know that the event is a sell-out every year—in fact, the tickets for the Burns supper are normally sold out a year ahead of time, so if you want a ticket, it is almost the case that somebody has to die before one can get one. I am considering the possibility of holding a Burns supper in Lahore, which is Glasgow’s twin city in Pakistan. One reason is that the Burns supper now offers so much more than it used to. We can now get halal haggis and vegetarian haggis, which opens doors for more people to participate in and enjoy the event fully. As a councillor, I have enjoyed haggis in Glasgow city chambers. It has been either vegetarian or halal, but nevertheless I have been able to enjoy the full ambience of the Burns supper, which is important. We need to take an international perspective. There are a lot of expatriates living all over the world, and most of them celebrate with Burns supper events. However, those celebrations are not joined up, and I am keen that we should help them to do that. It is important that our overseas cousins in places such as North America, Australia and New Zealand join up not only among themselves but somehow with us in Scotland through our tourism industry, so that we can participate with them and they can participate with us. Then it will become a homecoming in more ways than one. When the homecoming was first launched, I thought that it was a wonderful idea, but that homecoming should not only be about people from overseas coming to Scotland, but about a homecoming for Scots who are here. It is important that we realise that we have many diverse cultures in Scotland; we tend not to enjoy them to the full. I have always felt that Burns suppers are celebrated too much by small organised groups and are not open to the general public—to my mind, that aspect has always been missing. The festival in Dumfries at the weekend does that—it reaches out to the community, which is wonderful. I am keen for us to do more of that, so I wish it the best of success. I also wish the local council success, because it is a huge undertaking and responsibility to organise such events. They are not easy to organise. I am sure that, these days when we are strapped for cash, it can be difficult for people to decide to hold such events. However, the festival brings home the reality that we care about our culture and that we want to promote and celebrate it. We should open it up to everyone and not just to a few chosen ones. I wish the event the very best and I hope that it will encourage others to follow suit.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. The fact that I have 17 years’ experience as a local councillor and chair of development and regeneration services means that I have seen the planning process up close and appreciate that reform was needed. I agree with the bill’s intention of securing more favourable business conditions in Scotland and delivering benefits for the environment. As always, there have been disagreements on how to achieve that. At stage 1, serious reservations were raised about the proposed duty on regulators to contribute to the achievement of sustainable economic growth. In handing regulators conflicting remits, that provision is, at best, unhelpful. Since then, the Scottish Government has given reassurances that the duty will not prioritise sustainable economic growth over other important regulatory objectives such as health and safety. Many of my concerns stemmed from the lack of clarity about the meaning of the term “sustainable economic growth”. Therefore, I welcome the Scottish Government’s intention to provide definitions of sustainable economic growth and sustainable development in its guidance. Although I supported Alison Johnstone’s stage 3 amendments that sought to address the issue, the Scottish Government has provided sufficient reassurances and concessions to allow me to feel reasonably confident in supporting the bill as a whole at decision time. On the issue of penalising poorly performing local authorities, Derek Mackay confirmed to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that the Scottish Government would provide a planning authority with assistance before removing resources from it. Unfortunately, my colleague Margaret McDougall’s amendments to make that undertaking part of the bill were not fruitful, but I will be interested to see how that measure is implemented when already cash-strapped councils are struggling to make ends meet.

I do not disagree with the minister about improved performance, but I have reservations about the cost, which is important to local authorities. I thank Murdo Fraser for his captainship of the committee. He has done a marvellous job during consideration of the bill. His chairmanship has been helpful in the short time for which I have been on the committee.

In case Annabel Goldie is watching, I personally thank her for securing the debate and allowing us to share the fantastic and worthwhile good practice that is happening in HMP Greenock. I genuinely wish her a speedy recovery and I hope to see her very soon in the chamber. Over time, I have had the opportunity to visit many prisons around the world in places such as Pakistan, India, Iran, Iraq and Kurdistan, and I would never wish it on anyone to be a prisoner in any of those prisons. Gone are the days when people in prison were treated as less than human and gone are the days when we expected our prisoners to live on bread and water. Experience in our country has shown us that if we take our prisoners seriously and treat them as human beings, there is half a chance that they will not reoffend when they come out. That is important. It is also important that we allow people to readjust to family life, because prisoners often have wives and children, and they all need one another. For a family unit to be successful, it is necessary for people to be supported through what is a difficult time. Sometimes, people go to prison who are in extremely difficult circumstances and it takes a lot of support and wisdom to help them to get back on the straight and narrow. The throughcare support that is provided at Greenock prison is an exceptional example of that, which I think that we can export, not only to other prisons but internationally. It offers an opportunity for people to learn about a worthwhile practice. Over the years, there has been a lot of debate about whether prisoners should be treated as less than human and with unkindness because they are in prison to be punished, but there has always been the argument that prisoners are human beings. If they have erred or made a mistake, they should be given the chance to rekindle their lives, to readjust and to become valuable citizens. I am of the same mind—people should always have an opportunity to better themselves. When prisoners are released from prison, it is important for them to be able to readjust to society. Whether they are part of a family is not important; what is important is that they realise that they are human beings whom we care for and who are valued members of our society. Time and again, I see projects such as the throughcare project at Greenock prison enriching people’s lives. In enriching those lives, we are enriching our communities. If anyone who has been affected in that way receives such support, it means that society does not have to bear the whole burden and that people can recover sooner rather than later, which is extremely important. A guilt factor sometimes comes into play, whereby people can be hesitant about admitting to the fact that they have had difficulties. Jackson Carlaw made a very good speech. I am sure that Annabel Goldie would be proud of him for delivering the speech that he did on her behalf. You have done a good job, sir—thank you very much. On a serious note, supporting our prisoners is like supporting our school kids. It is essential that we support our people when they are at their most vulnerable.

I am honoured to speak in the debate. Veterans and veteran issues are close to my heart, as I am an ex-Territorial Army soldier myself, having served in the 71st Royal Engineer regiment reserves and sponsored units. The first paragraph of the armed forces covenant acknowledges that our armed forces and their families make huge sacrifices for our country. In return, we have a duty to give them and their families our respect and support. When veterans sign up for the ultimate sacrifice for our country, that is the least we can do. Veteran issues are separate from our thoughts on war. We can strongly object to and oppose a war but, once our troops are there, it is our duty to support them through whatever problems and difficulties they experience during their time there and on their return home. We are failing our veterans. They are often left to rely on charity hand-outs, which, in the current financial climate, can no longer be guaranteed. Therefore, the announcement of a commissioner is welcome. However, I would like him or her to have the powers to ensure that actual support is given to the veterans who he or she will be appointed to help. Last month, I helped to organise a curry night in the Mosque Kitchen restaurant in Edinburgh for ABF the Soldiers’ Charity, which is a fantastic organisation. In 2013, it helped 170 veterans in Glasgow, spending £80,000 for their wellbeing. Worryingly, it has seen its case load rise over the past three years. It is particularly important to note that the charities that currently support our veterans face huge pressures and challenges. Therefore, I am happy to support the motion, which mentioned support for veterans. I hope that we go on and ensure that we have a strategy in place that supports our veterans throughout the services that they normally look for. I look forward to the commissioner making sure that our veterans’ needs are looked after better than they currently are. Many of our veterans go through a lot of hardship and their families suffer with them. That needs to change. Although I welcome the announcement of the commissioner and the resources to fund the post, I do not yet see the commissioner being given the strength and power to ensure that he or she will be able to carry out the job effectively, ensuring real support for our veterans. I hope that I will see that in the near future.

First, I thank Paul Martin for bringing this topic to the chamber. I genuinely believe that it is a very serious issue and I know that he has very serious concerns about it, particularly in trying to help his constituents to overcome the difficult period that they have gone through. As a young boy, I had some horrific experiences with dogs. I have seen people breed dogs for the sole purpose of making them fight each other. I have seen breeders breed dogs for the sole purpose of being violent guard dogs and the like, with no consideration whatsoever for what the outcome would be if the animal attacked an innocent person or whether the dog itself would be in danger, let alone human beings. It is horrific to experience such violent dogs and the experiences that I had will never leave me. I was once chased by a dog like that, and I can assure members that it is not a pleasant experience. I think that what most people are now concerned about is seeing an end to there being victims of dangerous dogs, particularly in the home. I am a politician and, like the postman, I have gone to many letterboxes. I can assure you that when a dog jumps at you at the door, it gives you a fright—even at my age. There are therefore issues about how the animals are kept. Members have suggested that it is not the fault of the animals, which is right: it is not. It is the fault of us, the human beings who are supposed to be controlling, helping and supporting those animals, training them appropriately and ensuring that they have the right attitude for living among children in particular and in human society in general. Our youngsters are at risk from dogs and we know that because we have the facts in front of us. People who have been viciously mauled by such animals carry that experience for the rest of their lives. We need to take this topic very seriously, and I am glad that Paul Martin has brought it to the chamber today. It is important that all dogs be chipped, but I think that we need to go further than that. The people who perpetrate what I call the crime of breeding dogs specifically to hurt each other and to hurt people are the ones who will not chip the animals and who will still slip through the system. It is important that we ensure that that is not allowed. I have known people breed dogs in farms and backyards without registering or training them but deliberately making them violent and training them only to be aggressive. That happens all round the world, but we in Scotland need to take the lead once again and ensure that we address the problem in a positive way. We need to get a grip on it, not just in relation to animals coming into Scotland but in relation to farms, businesses, security firms and the like. The police and armed forces represent a good example in that they have highly trained dogs that do not go around mauling people. It is possible and doable, but we need to have the tools of the trade, and we need to give people the tools to ensure that the problem is eradicated. We need to visit farms and kennels and ensure that shop owners and those who trade in the business are responsible and chip any animal that they sell.

First, I want to congratulate Glasgow City Council on being awarded a city deal. That is a UK Government initiative that allows cities to earn back money that is invested by councils through income tax, corporation tax, VAT and the pay-as-you-earn system, which is more than the Scottish Government is doing to stimulate the economies of our cities. In the absence of such action on its part, the Scottish Government should support cities such as Glasgow, which are doing a lot to improve the job situation and revitalise our industry, which will help to improve our economy. Although employment numbers are up, they are nowhere near pre-recession figures. I am keen to know what steps the Government is taking to protect people from zero-hours contracts, and I would welcome the cabinet secretary outlining the steps that he has taken and the improvements that he can demonstrate that he has achieved. The Government suggests that independence will greatly enhance our economy. However, its own white paper suggests otherwise, as the suggestion that we would keep the pound and the Bank of England as the central bank clearly suggests that Scotland’s economy is better placed in the UK. Please, let us not kid ourselves; more importantly, let us not try to kid the people of Scotland. We need to be clear and not mark time. Keeping Scotland on hold is not in anybody’s interests, and I assure members that it is no solution. We need to be realistic. We have enjoyed more than 300 years of economic unity. It will not be easy to unpick all of the complex links in our economy, and it will not be cost-free or trouble-free. I have looked through the white paper and seen a wish list, which concerns me. Many of the items on that list have not been agreed or substantiated. There is no evidence to support them, and I do not want to follow the pied piper down a cliff. I do not want a fragile economy; I want a strong economy. I am sure that the people of Scotland agree, so I say “No, thank you” on that point. I will list some of the issues that concern me, to which there clearly are no answers—the cabinet secretary may correct me if I am wrong. I understand that the SNP wants to keep the pound, but it has no agreement to do so. It wants the Bank of England to be the lender of last resort, but there is no agreement in that regard. On monetary policy, page 404 of the white paper says that regulation will be discharged by the Bank of England, not by Scotland. The SNP wants HM Revenue and Customs to continue to operate across the Scotland and the rest of the UK for a transitional period after independence, but there is no agreement in that regard. I am not aware of any agreement for there to be a joint or co-ordinated financial compensation scheme after independence. Is there an agreement with regard to motor service agencies, including the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency? I am not aware of one. Where are the services going to come from? I do not know of any agreement on the electricity and gas market, including renewables.

Yes.

Thank you very much. What about telecommunications? The list is endless. It goes on and on, and it really worries me. I saw that we will not be able to do anything about the lottery system. What does that mean? Does it mean that the SNP will not be able to run a menodge? Surely to God it is not suggesting that. What about passports? The other thing that concerns me is the share of public sector debt. How much will that be? Where will it come from? Who will pay it?

I ask the SNP, if it will be so kind, to explain to me how it will provide all those services without agreements in place.

Good afternoon, Presiding Officer. I thank Jackie Baillie for securing the debate. It is tremendous that she has taken the opportunity to lead a members’ business debate on the issue. Just because Christmas is a time of good will and happiness for everyone, we should not allow that to confuse us about the extent to which the Home Office’s latest campaign has upset many among us in the community. In all my life, I never imagined that a British Government would allow one of its departments to be so cruel, crude, unkind and out of touch as to run such a campaign. I was ashamed, disappointed and shocked. I could not believe that, in this day and age, people would stoop to such levels, but they did. I hope that many other departments—not only in the UK, but elsewhere in Europe—will learn that such behaviour is unacceptable and that it will not be tolerated. It does not represent our people or our nation, and it certainly does not represent humanity. It has been said that there is not enough evidence that the type of message that the campaign sends hurts people’s feelings. I do not need evidence to tell me that. Why? I have experienced that hurt for myself—I have real-life experience of it. I do not need to prove to any out-of-touch department or secretary of state that the campaign has hurt people’s feelings. Many organisations—including the Scottish Refugee Council—and politicians around the world have advised the Government of the fact that its actions were ill designed and desperate. It is unbelievable that the safeguards that are in place in relation to equality issues and the legislation that is there to protect the vulnerable have failed to work in this instance. People talk about freedom of speech, but at the same time we have laws in this country to protect us against racial harassment, intimidation and bullying, and I am surprised that no one has gone down that route to take the UK Government to task over its campaign. Consideration needs to be given to the taking of such action, not just against the Home Secretary, but the people who put together the campaign. Members have shared some of their experiences. When I was young, people would say to me, “Why don’t you go home?” I would say, “Well, I’m going home later on.” For me, home was Glasgow; it still is. However, people see you differently. That is the issue; that is the issue about harassment, prejudice and discrimination. We have to learn, live and teach and change the hearts and minds of people. Such a campaign does little to support or help with that. That is why it is important to challenge the campaign. Even now, people will say, “Where are you from?” I say, “I’m from Glasgow.” They say, “Yeah, but I mean, where are you actually from?” I say, “Well, I’m from the west end—Maryhill.” They say, “No, no, I mean—”. I say, “Well, I was born in Govan.” They say, “No, I mean—”. I say, “What do you mean, you mean? I am telling you where I’m from—I’m from Glasgow.” However, that does not satisfy some people. This type of propaganda encourages that type of attitude. That is why it is important for everybody to be absolutely clear about what they want to do. I hope and I wish and I pray that the fact that we are debating the issue will send the right signals to the UK Government and to all Governments around the world that we have to resist the temptation to go down that route. I commend the motion.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what stakeholders have contacted the Minister for Housing and Welfare regarding the white paper on independence. (S4O-02732)

The minister stated in the housing debate on 4 December 2013 that she was busy speaking to stakeholders, listening to their concerns and taking action, but she has not yet brought anything to the chamber. Should the people of Scotland who are homeless or living in overcrowded or poor housing assume that all those issues are a figment of their imagination and that everything is hunky-dory?

The member suggested that there was no evidence that people were opposing the four-year period. However, many organisations, including Money Advice Scotland, said that, in this economic scene, it did not make sense to increase the period. There was disagreement.

I am honoured to be given the opportunity to speak on the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill. We recognise that it needs to strike a fine balance between helping people who are in financial difficulty to manage their money and helping creditors to get the money that is owed to them. Mandatory money advice might be a good idea in theory, as that would mean making advice compulsory before someone enters any form of debt solution, but I have doubts about its practical application, as the free advice sector is shrinking and does not have the resources to deal with increased demand. A shortage of good-quality advisers might cause delays in people accessing proper solutions or lead to people taking poor advice. I suggest that money advice should not be compulsory for first-time applicants. There are other components of the bill with which I do not agree, not even in theory. One major stumbling block is in section 4. The proposed debtor contribution order, which will require the debtor to make payments to his or her creditors over four years rather than the current three years, is unhelpful. During the evidence sessions, no one gave any explanation of why the period should be increased. There was a lot of opposition to the proposal, however, and a range of organisations suggested that we retain the current three-year period. Money Advice Scotland went so far as to say that “it does not make economic sense to increase the period of bankruptcy” from three to four years. People may say that we need evidence. I stress to the minister that, as an elected representative, I may get three or four people coming to me for bankruptcy advice in a month, but the people who work at the coalface are getting three or four people a day coming to them for advice. I cannot imagine anybody more expert in the issue than them. They understand and take on the responsibility, and they understand people’s wishes. They understand the difficulty that vulnerable people go through and see the hardship at first hand. So, when they say that three years is appropriate, I take that seriously—I do not dismiss it out of hand.

All that I can say to the minister is that, when I listened to the evidence that was given to the committee by the experts, who explained to me the difference that one year would make to a family, that made sense to me. It made me understand the real plight of vulnerable people in our society. Although he and I are fortunate not to face those difficulties and hardships, with sleepless nights and children going without, those people do—they face those things day in, day out—and when the experts explain that to me, I listen, understand and take on board what they say. I hope that the minister will do the same. An open letter has been released that highlights the deep concerns of those who work at the coalface, who say that the bill is unhelpful. A number of signatories to the letter have suggested that it is not right. Money advisers from across Scotland, led by Govan Law Centre, have said so, and those are the people who work in the field day in, day out. [Interruption.] I have to take that on board, and I have to recognise the voices of people who are concerned and the voices of those who are going through hardship. There is no point in representing people if we are not going to take on board the needs of our communities. Reducing the bankruptcy fee from £200 is £100 is going in the right direction, but I genuinely feel that some people cannot afford even that. Perhaps we can reconsider the fee and possibly do away with it altogether. There are still people out there who cannot afford it, and because of that they will not enter voluntary bankruptcy. As a result, they have to endure more hardship. I am not convinced that the bill is balanced as it should be or that through it we are going to represent those in our community who need support and help. I make a plea, for them, that we consider the issue seriously, taking on board their concerns. [Interruption.] We must represent their needs by looking again at flexibility and—[Interruption.] The increase in the threshold from £10,000 to £17,000 is a good idea, although the Government may want to index link that so that we do not need to amend the legislation later on. However, the period of four years is unfair and unreasonable.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Nobody is suggesting that people who can pay should not pay. The suggestion that is being made is about people who cannot pay: people who are vulnerable, need our support and need a leg up to start afresh. For those people, we are saying, “Do not change the law.”

This is an important subject. The census data is used to inform and plan a wide variety of services such as employment, health and housing. The census is our main source of information about major changes in demographics in Scotland. The number of people from ethnic minorities in Glasgow has grown by almost 50,000, from 41,900 in 2001 to 91,600 in 2011. As a percentage of the population, there has been growth, from 7.2 per cent in 2001 to 15.4 per cent in 2011. I am glad to be focusing on information about the increasing diversity in Scotland in general and in Glasgow in particular, where it has been a reality for a long time. Glasgow started taking in large numbers of asylum seekers in 1999. Upon being granted refugee status, those people found work and set up homes across Scotland. Did we really need to wait 14 years for the evidence that Scotland is becoming much more ethnically diverse? My argument is that, unfortunately, we did. There seems to be a disconnect between the changes in Scotland and the services that we provide. Whenever a community asks for support, it is required to produce evidence. The information that is available is in the census, which cannot give a good indication of emerging need and is often dismissed as being out of date as soon as the information is released. I have several examples from Glasgow. One is that pupils in Glasgow’s schools use up to 40 different languages. Schools are genuinely struggling with a lack of resources. I am sure that the Scottish Government could assist with that. Another example is the work that I am doing with my colleagues in support of women who have been subjected to female circumcision and mutilation. I know from people working in the field that despite the fact that thousands of women from countries that practise female genital mutilation now live in Scotland, many front-line health and child protection workers do not believe that it is an issue in Scotland. I do not understand that. The census data shows that we have a lot more ethnic minorities living in Scotland now than we did 10 years ago, although that does not automatically make Scotland a diverse and vibrant place. Effective policy making and on-going monitoring of changes need to be coupled with evidence-based policy making. I call on the Scottish Government once again to use the census data to ensure that all people within our communities receive equal opportunities in employment and service provision, which currently is not the case. I hold John Swinney to the commitment that he made on 9 October 2013 to take action on the underemployment shown in the 2011 census.

I welcome the opportunity to speak about the bill. We can all agree that the bill’s aim is to create a system of high-quality care that is seamless and effective. In my many years as a Labour Party councillor on Glasgow City Council, and now as a member of the Scottish Parliament, constituents have regularly come to me as they have slipped through the cracks in the system. Such cracks are caused by a lack of joined-up thinking and practice from social care providers and health boards up and down the country. That situation must end. The bill does not go far enough to provide integrated health and social care. Many council departments up and down Scotland have merged and renamed themselves as health and social care, but apart from rebranding, little has been done to integrate the different cultures and decision-making structures. A person who was cared for by a mental health team came to me for support when his case was closed by a doctor who said that his personality disorder was untreatable. That diagnosis completely ignored the possibilities that social workers in that person’s team could offer him. That complete lack of joined-up thinking led to a vulnerable person feeling as if he had been abandoned by the system.

My friend makes a fine point, which I will go on to address. I described a complete lack of joined-up thinking, which leads to vulnerable people feeling abandoned. The bill does not properly deal with the major differences in eligibility between the health system and the social care system. Healthcare provision is a universal service that is free at the point of delivery, whereas social care provision is subject to eligibility criteria and charging. We need to ensure that the bill sets out clear and transparent decision-making criteria for eligibility in which service users and their carers are involved, so that services are provided effectively. On joined-up thinking and working, Glasgow City Council had a structure; it had a committee, with area or regional committees that dealt with doctors, healthcare workers and others to provide services, but it was done away with. I am not sure whether the bill will redress that. Quite frankly, I say that our doctors need all the support they can get, because they are working under a lot of pressure. I have gathered over the past two years that our doctors seem to be doing more and more in terms of service provision. They are also doing a lot of work in communities, which is welcome. Clarity about services is the most important element of the bill. If people continually fall through the cracks, we are missing the point. There are far too many agencies trying to grapple with providing services to individuals. If one of those agencies lets down the client, patient or individual, the whole structure fails. We must try to ensure that that does not happen. I call on the cabinet secretary to lodge an amendment to the bill that will secure the fundamental right to services, so that we force all the partners to work together to ensure that service provision is appropriate.

I thank Murdo Fraser for bringing this important subject to today’s members’ business debate. I welcome the time and effort that has been put into contributing funding for medical research in Scotland because I believe that it advances our medical knowledge and technology, thereby contributing to the maintenance and importance of human health and wellbeing. The MRC has funded research that has led to faster and more effective ways of medical research so that it can flourish at all stages—from working to understand fundamental science without having specific health questions in mind, to tackling some of the most pressing health issues that face society today. The MRC has created and established jobs and sustained a competitive environment for world-class medical research in Scotland, which has boosted our economy and put Scotland on the medical world map. In particular I would like to mention the MRC’s strategic investment of £28 million investment in the centre for virus research in the University of Glasgow—my home town. The centre is to train scientists to tackle the health problems posed by viruses now and in the future. It has a strong collaborative network with scientists in Edinburgh, St Andrews and the rest of the UK and has produced very valuable findings. We are proud of the MRC’s achievements and wish it well in the future. I hope that it will continue its investments in Scotland. I need to respond to a couple of comments that have been made about the future. If there is an independent Scotland, where will the research money come from, if not the UK? If there is not independence, the minister does not need to worry about that, but I would be interested to hear his answer in any case, if he has the opportunity to give it.

One of the points that Bob Doris is missing is that we might not be in the European Union and, therefore, not qualify for such a partnership. That is an issue.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

What protection can you guarantee if someone challenges our decision in the European Court and we lose?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I just want to point out that that is the fourth member who has not taken an intervention despite having made all sorts of accusations.

I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing this important issue to the chamber. The opportunity to discuss the issue must give many parents relief that someone cares. I give special thanks to Jackie for securing the debate. There has been a lot of debate recently regarding our young having easy access to inappropriate materials. In September, a leading retail chain banned lads mags from its shelves after the publisher refused to put them in sensitive, modest bags. Last month, Channel 4 aired its thought-provoking documentary “Porn on the Brain”, which looked at the effect that the availability of pornography is having on our teenagers. In Westminster, the idea of pre-set internet filters to protect our children has been debated. It is a very live debate and is happening all over the place. However, what we are not achieving is the goal, particularly in relation to The Sun. I worry that the casual acceptance of what is essentially porn in family newspapers is harming our children. When a young boy sees his father reading The Sun—I use The Sun as an example, but I hasten to add that it is not the only one—it normalises the idea that one of the main purposes of women is as sex objects. Looking at naked women and commenting on them becomes a normal activity, which is okay because dad does it. That in itself speaks volumes. Even more disturbingly, young girls see that it is okay to pose naked for pictures because it is in the paper at home. They see it regularly and they do not feel intimidated. How can that not twist the minds of our children? How can it not make them confused about what is and is not appropriate? Why are steps being taken to eliminate searching by children for inappropriate materials when they can find such materials at home? One of the questions that I take on board—Christian Allard alluded to it briefly—is: how do we feel about our family members’ pictures ending up in the newspaper? We have aspirations around equality, dignity and nationhood. Such pictures in our newspapers do us little credit. If the newspaper editors are not prepared to listen to reason, we need to take positive steps by boycotting newspapers such as The Sun. It is shameful for a newspaper when its editor is told by our young that enough is enough. That is fantastic. I am really proud of our young people who took the initiative, and I am proud that they took the initiative before we did. I genuinely wish them every success in what they are trying to achieve. I am sure that the Scottish Parliament will do everything to assist them and that it will be one of the first organisations to take steps to cancel that newspaper if it continues to produce such photographs.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how the recent report by the carbon disclosure project on the climate performance of FTSE 350 companies impacts on Scotland. (S4O-02515)

Given that important Scottish companies such as the Wood Group and Cairn Energy scored badly as they failed to disclose information or to respond at all, how can the Scottish Government persuade Scottish companies to take the monitoring and reduction of climate pollution seriously?

I welcome the opportunity to speak about the landfill tax and its implications for Scotland’s long-term future. Taxation and waste are not issues that capture the public’s imagination, but Tesco’s recent publication of the amount of food that it wastes—as part of which it was revealed that more than two thirds of bagged salads are thrown away—has shocked many people. I use the example of Tesco, as a substantial part of such waste occurs in the processing of food. For waste to be reduced, processes will need to change. We must take steps to reduce that element of waste. For many companies, the reduction of waste is a matter of medium-term planning. In addition, the financial investment that is required for waste companies to develop an alternative strategy will involve positive long-term decision making. That is why the uncertainty over exactly what the landfill tax rate will be beyond 2015 is an issue that we need to grapple with. When the cabinet secretary was questioned by the Finance Committee, he said that such decisions were independent of the landfill tax rate and were to do with whether the Scottish people throw away things that those companies can make profit from. My understanding is that both things are important for companies to make long-term financial projections and plan investments such as alternatives to landfill. It is much easier for the Scottish Government to increase certainty by setting the landfill tax rates three years in advance; whether we need a crystal ball to estimate what Scots will chuck away is another issue. On another note, the consultation responses show widespread support for the landfill communities fund—the LCF—which is funded by landfill tax. The fund allows managers of landfill sites to give money for environmental, community and built heritage projects within a 10-mile radius of landfill sites or operational depots. I believe that the 10-mile radius rule should be more flexible to enable a wider group of community organisations to access the funds and make good use of them. One or two colleagues have suggested that the radius should be extended particularly in rural areas, but I think that we would benefit from it being done right across Scotland. The bill will allow us to develop a clear management structure, and there should be regular updates on the fund’s administration to avoid the current duplication. The tax tariff on landfill should be flexible, which would allow realistic taxation that would encourage industry to participate and invest, and allow alternative use of landfill sites so that we can have a better future for not only our industry but our citizens. Last but not least, it is important that we recognise that the amount of waste in Scotland places an unnecessary burden on the nation’s resources. It is therefore important that we continue to ensure that we play a serious role so that industry does not carry all the burden. The Government has a responsibility to share its views and aspirations with industry and to work hand in glove with it to ensure that we take full and proper advantage of reducing our waste; the current landfill sites; the taxation levels that will be in place; and the prediction that the landfill taxes will reduce in the future. That is a good sign, but it will affect the funding of community groups, so we will need to see how they can continue to be supported in the future.

Will Stewart Stevenson give way?

My interventions are usually brief. Stewart Stevenson has talked a lot about the past, which is helpful, but I will take him to the future, in which landfill will be used less and less. I draw his attention to the landfill communities fund. Where will such funding for community groups come from as the proceeds of the landfill tax reduce?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what programmes it has to reduce underemployment among black and ethnic minority people and support them into employment. (S4O-02474)

Although the ethnicity and employment information from the 2011 census has not come out, analysis based on the 2001 census showed that unemployment rates were higher for all visible minority groups. The figures for some particular groups were double those for the indigenous community. If the 2011 census analysis shows that the pattern persists, will the cabinet secretary commit to positive action on employment for Scotland’s growing ethnic minority population?

I congratulate Jenny Marra on her new post. I am sure that she will do everything to support the Parliament to achieve its vision, and I wish her good luck with that. I welcome the opportunity to speak about developing Scotland’s young workforce and to comment on Sir Ian Wood’s interim report. The commission is looking at ways of improving, from education to employment. I whole-heartedly agree that greater emphasis on vocational qualifications is important and that industry should have an input to what is taught to ensure that its needs are met. On a recent visit to Irvine with the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we heard evidence from Barr Construction, which was eager to work with colleges to provide higher-quality industrial vocational training. I believe that the Scottish Government is guilty of undervaluing vocational education and have serious concerns about how recommendations by the commission can be implemented, given the savage cuts to our college funding. I feel that there is a large gap in youth employability and the skills needed to apply for jobs. I have a young constituent who was interested in applying for a place on the Commonwealth apprenticeship initiative to be a plumber. The application process was entirely online and the young man had great difficulty with doing it as he had no training to do so online. He did not have skills from school nor was his family in a position to support him. Just because a young person confidently uses social media and email does not mean that they have the skill to apply for a job or an apprenticeship online. I would like to highlight an excellent example of youth employability in my constituency. Move On is a charity that runs FareShare and received a lottery grant to run the FareShare volunteering employment project, which helps vulnerable young people in Glasgow to make the transition from a care system or homelessness to stable adult life. It aims to run the project for over five years, to help young people. The participants help the FareShare Glasgow project. They learn transferable skills, build confidence, acquire training, gain work experience, create curriculum vitae, for example, and have other opportunities. To return to my original point, I am deeply concerned about colleges’ ability to offer an employability focus on vocational courses due to the lack of resources. I continually remind the Government about the waiting lists for college places, but it does not seem to be in any rush to resolve the issue. Instead we make even greater demands on colleges.

I do not want to sound harsh but that is a little insulting. It is not just my constituents who are on waiting lists. If the cabinet secretary is serious about his portfolio all he has to do is to ask the colleges and they will advise him of the lists. I am happy to provide him with lists that I have received from colleges. It is quite shameful to suggest that the waiting list is only in my constituency. It is more important to focus on employability. If my constituents cannot go to colleges, they cannot go to universities or get vocational training. That is quite important. The issue for me is that I see long waiting lists for colleges but the Government does nothing about them. What are you doing about them? Why do you not create some sort of committee to deal with the issue? If you have got it wrong, just admit the fact that you have got it wrong and let us go and fix it. As for this idea of my giving you names—why should I have to give you names?—why can my constituents not simply go to the college and get a place?

I am hopeful about the report. It moves in the right direction and encourages us to do the right things. It has made us realise that we must work more and more with industry, which we have not done historically. That is a very good point to take on board. I genuinely believe that we need to sit down with our colleges to come up with solutions to resolve this issue so that no one in our society is denied an opportunity for further education. The idea of people having to give other people names is wrong. What we need to do is to resolve the problem, rather than name-pick.

James Dornan got some things wrong, too, about nursery places and so on. Glasgow City Council introduced them before he even got there.

It is a great pleasure for me to celebrate Westerton and the fact that it is the first of its kind in Scotland. It is a proud moment for me because I have always been very keen to promote all that is good in Scotland and this is a prime example of that. It shows the commitment that people had over a century ago. Mr Carlaw mentioned the quality of the buildings—the quality of the example that is in front of us, which is not like the matchboxes of today. He is absolutely right. I remember the Gorbals flats being opened by Her Majesty. I was there; I took photographs. I went back to Queen Elizabeth square to take photographs of the flats being demolished. I agree with Mr Carlaw about the quality that was laid down in Westerton. People cared about people—they cared about Glaswegians, they cared about their country, they cared about the city. Sometimes I think that that is an example to promote to our citizens today—they ought to be thinking in those terms. Sir John Stirling Maxwell also made a huge contribution to society and there are many examples of people making huge contributions in days gone by. When I first passed the display this afternoon, I was impressed. Impressed by what? I was impressed by the commitment of the people who are engaged with Westerton, even today. I was impressed by the quality of the construction and I was impressed by the fact that we were celebrating 100 years of Westerton being there. These are small chapters of our history that we need to be proud of and that we need to celebrate more often. We miss many opportunities by not promoting such achievements from our past. One of the things that delights me is to look at all the constructions from the past in our cities. When one looks up at or goes into buildings such as those of some of our city councils, one sometimes says to oneself, “My God, this is a beautiful piece of engineering. This is a beautiful building—a strong, sturdy, honest-to-God building.” That is what we made in times gone past, and we need to be proud of that. We should celebrate that more often in relation to all the buildings as well as all the various organisations that were set up to support communities such as the one that we are celebrating today. Up until I saw the display outside the chamber—I took a photograph there as well—I had not intended to speak in the debate. The reason that I was drawn to that display is that it shows the commitment that some people made such a long time ago. Sometimes we do not praise such people while they are alive and we realise how much they did for us only when we have lost them. We are always looking at ways of bringing people down rather than lifting them up, and I think that we need to start reversing that trend. I genuinely believe that, having seen how the housing association contributed to society and what it was trying to achieve by bringing in new ideas and concepts. That is wonderful. I am proud that we can celebrate that today. I hope that we will encourage more people to come forward to be represented in this way so that we can celebrate them. We should put on record that we have celebrated all that those people achieved in the past. I had not realised that being a city of parks was unique to Glasgow. I have learned something today—something that has really made me happy—and I wanted to share that with members in the chamber and with everyone else in Scotland. Thank you very much for the opportunity.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on securing this debate on the University of Edinburgh’s great achievement, and I thank him for bringing it to Parliament. I am proud that several of Scotland’s universities improved their position in the QS World University Rankings. If Jim Eadie does not mind, I would like also to commend the University of Glasgow for improving its position by three places. I am proud of the university in my home town, and the University of Glasgow and its students would not forgive me if I did not say that they too have achieved something to be proud of. It gives me immense pleasure to mention them. The University of Edinburgh and the University of Glasgow have benefited from support from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. That is good news, but we cannot say that the provision for colleges in Scotland is good news. On 24 October and on 13 January, our Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, said that there are no queues for college places. Since then, I have witnessed college after college having a list of students who have not got a place. We must address that, otherwise our higher education system will suffer.

I did not want to go into great detail on that topic today, because I want to discuss the positive side of education. However, out of courtesy, I am happy to respond to the cabinet secretary. I have mentioned the issue before in the chamber, and the cabinet secretary is aware that there are lists. I mentioned that, at one college, there were up to 600 people waiting for one particular subject. I am happy to write to the cabinet secretary in detail on the matter. That will not be a problem.

Yes, of course, Presiding Officer. I did not really want to get drawn into that issue—that was a passing remark on something that affects higher education. On a positive note, Scottish universities continue to face all sorts of challenges—from immigration to a reduction in subjects, and so on—yet the universities have done a marvellous job in maintaining student numbers. I congratulate, in particular, the staff of all the universities in Scotland, who have done a fantastic job not only in ensuring that student numbers can be accommodated, but in increasing and improving Scottish universities’ standing. That is a huge achievement by them and we are all very proud of them.

1. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02382)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the shocking results of the survey that was carried out by the Royal College of Nursing Scotland, which revealed that patients were being cared for in cupboards, in offices and in dining areas last year due to lack of space. Can he guarantee that that is not happening now and will not happen anywhere in Glasgow or Scotland in the future?

I was just wondering whether the minister was going to make a statement in terms of an increase in the budget, particularly since the Commonwealth games are coming to Glasgow and Scotland. I was hoping that you would actually give us some good news today. Is there any good news in that area?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will try to be brief. I am grateful for members’ positive speeches. Does the member agree that all national assets should be—as many are in Glasgow—free to all? Should the trusts that we have remain as they are, so that they can serve their communities independently?

I thank Richard Lyle for securing today’s debate. I am honoured to speak on the upcoming 100th anniversary of the first world war next year. It is estimated that, with 300,000 recruits, Scotland had the largest proportion of volunteers in the United Kingdom. It is thought that Scotland lost more men per head of population than any other warring nation, with the exceptions of Serbia and Turkey. Scotland made a significant contribution to the war effort in men, women and materials, but we should not forget the soldiers from the Commonwealth, who were also heavily involved. As Glasgow will host the Commonwealth games during the 100th anniversary, it is important that we take a moment to consider the people from Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the Indian subcontinent who fought and died in large numbers during the war. In particular, 1.5 million volunteers came from the Commonwealth group of nations in the Indian subcontinent. They won some 13,000 medals through their involvement in the war. It is important to include sepoy—that means soldier—Khudadad Khan from Punjab, which is now in Pakistan, in our thoughts. He was the first of twelve men from the Indian subcontinent to receive the Victoria cross during the first world war. I ask also that we remember the 55,000 men and women from the African colonies of the British empire who served and the 10,000 who died during the war effort. We sometimes forget the horrors of war, but we must learn from that experience. I am an ex-territorial soldier—I used to be in the Royal Engineers. I assure members that I and the many who, unlike me, have practical experience do not wish to see war repeated. War is a horrible evil of the human race. Every effort must be made to resolve issues around the world through dialogue rather than war. War leaves a lot of innocent people without loved ones and many innocent civilians die. We see that today in places such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria. Dialogue is important; we must support our politicians to engage. Last but not least, I want to ensure that, through our schools, our children are made aware of our past and recent history, of the horrors of war and of the positive results that can be gained through dialogue and talking to people. I am grateful that the motion is before us, but I am saddened to learn that we do not have a memorial. We should have a memorial that recognises the contributions that all our serving men, women and children have made throughout history, so that we can mark the event annually and learn from our history. If we can do that, I have no problem in supporting the French effort.

I agree with the cabinet secretary that there are many memorials in Scotland. I am particularly proud to see them in small villages and places where regiments were based at one time or another. However, what I would like to see is one single focal point for all our losses in Scotland. That would be a great gesture for our men, women and children who lost their lives. It is something to consider.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when the first phase of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme will be delivered. (S4O-02269)

Does the minister agree that, after cutting one third of the budget last July, to describe the continuing Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme as being “on track” is a little misleading, particularly given the recent statement that passengers will not benefit from shorter journey times and longer trains until December 2018, which is a full two years after electrification? I press the minister to give assurances that he will make every effort to ensure that the programme catches up so that it can be delivered on time.

I was very happy when my motion was selected for today’s debate as I had wanted an opportunity to discuss how we in Scotland can challenge negative racial and religious stereotypes. I congratulate Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre on its I speak for myself campaign. The campaign was created to encourage Muslim women to share with fellow Scots messages about anything that they feel is important. More than 400 Scottish Muslim women have participated and shared messages as part of the campaign, which came out of the work that Amina did in 2011 when it visited some 25 secondary schools in Scotland and was shocked to find that 70 per cent of young people associated words such as “terrorist”, “uneducated”, “foreign” and “oppressed” with Muslim women. The travelling exhibition encouraged dialogue and promoted understanding of a misunderstood community and faith. I am pleased to say that 55 members of the Scottish Parliament and three ministers have pledged their support to standing up against intolerance and prejudice, by speaking out against discrimination and contributing to making a fairer Scotland. The work in schools is funded only in Glasgow and Dundee and it is not really possible to accommodate requests to engage that Amina receives from schools outwith those areas. I suggest that if other councils want to take part, they should contact Amina to try to resolve that issue. Since the campaign began, there has been a shift in communities. With the murder of Lee Rigby in Woolwich, there is a greater than ever need to promote understanding between communities. In my opinion, the best way to do that is to speak to people from different communities and to let them speak for themselves, as the campaign has tried to do. In the discussions in schools as part of Amina’s research on efforts to combat negative stereotypes, I was surprised to learn that little was brought up by students in their normal classes. However, when it came to religious education classes, students were more open about their views and were willing to share those views with the rest of the class. That suggests that there is still a lot of work to be done, even with our young people. Why, however, are we dealing with stereotyping of Muslim women separately from other forms of discrimination? I would like to see the work that Amina is doing in a framework in which all such organisations work together. On paper, those organisations are meant to work across equalities strands, but for some reason we are not doing that. We tend to deal with bigotry separately, but I do not understand why. In addition to that, bigotry in football is treated as a special case. Again, I ask why equalities organisations do not work together, because it is important to appreciate that all forms of discrimination are equally unwelcome. I believe that work on challenging stereotypes with regard to racism, sectarianism or even to redheads—whatever kind of prejudice—should have benchmarking to help progress the work so that there is a clear vision for its direction and we can see whether we are, in fact, improving our lot, if one can use that phrase. We need to start with the foundation that we are all human beings and that we are all different in many ways. I read somewhere the statement that “you are unique, just like everyone else.” That is what our young people need to understand first, then individual organisations can bring their separate skills together to assist one another. The issue now is that there are many organisations that have people with marvellous skills, but unfortunately because they work in isolation those skills are not transferable to other organisations and, as a result, we do not benefit from them. I congratulate Amina on doing such a marvellous job in working among minority communities, but especially with our women, who have real issues in bringing up young families and facing up to the most difficult challenges, not only in the home but in the workplace. We must congratulate Amina on bringing to our attention the difficulties that our young people face. I make a plea that we, as the Scottish Parliament, take all possible measures to assist our vulnerable communities in working together to become a fairer and clearer nation, so that we all benefit equally.

I am, as Mr Glasgow, a friend of students, so I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. On my people’s behalf, I am passionate about widening access to education and support for poorer students in our communities. I start by welcoming the steps that have been taken by the University of Glasgow to create up to 800 places over the next four years for students from low-income backgrounds. The university has received money from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to create 200 extra places a year from 2013 to 2016. The places will be open to students from the 40 per cent most deprived areas. Although welcome, the impact of such schemes to widen access is limited. However, the difficulty is that not only do poorer students face instability, but they cannot sustain themselves with the available financial packages while they are in education. A lot of attention has been paid to fees, but not enough has been paid to student costs. Therefore, I am glad that the debate will look at support for students entering higher education. Students are supported by grants and bursaries that they do not have to pay back. However, they must pay back loans, as a percentage of their earnings, later on in life. With the planned cuts to grants this autumn, poorer students will have to borrow more, despite their being disadvantaged to begin with. The new arrangements will increase the amount of cash that students can borrow without means testing. That will be much more useful to students from more affluent backgrounds than it will be to those from poorer backgrounds who start off, as I have said, from a disadvantaged position. For students from lower-income households, the new arrangements will mean that what they are given with one hand will be taken back with the other, so it is even more difficult for those people, simply because they are poorer. Students who are disadvantaged will continue to be disadvantaged; I do not see how they will benefit. However, students who come from affluent backgrounds will always have an advantage over our disadvantaged students. I have always believed that it is our job to ensure that our student community has a level playing field. Day in, day out, I see a lot of students who have been disadvantaged not only through lack of resources, but through the choice of subjects. That has become a serious issue for Scotland. I have always believed that we are a nation that is here for our people, that we would deliver for our students and ensure that everybody has opportunities. When I was at school, my mother went to university. She was able to do that because she had free access. That situation is changing because students are not getting places in colleges and the people who are affected are the people from the poorest parts of our communities. Those students are going to be betrayed again: they will not get the full package of grants because of the proposed cuts. I support Hugh Henry’s motion.

Will George Adam take an intervention?

Many young constituents who come to me cannot get a place in college. In fact, I have a letter from a college that says that my constituent is in the 108th position for being considered for a place. If my constituents cannot get a place in a college, there is no way that they will get a place in a university. How can the cabinet secretary help me with that?

I welcome the opportunity to talk about access to services for people living with chronic pain. I have personal experience of the issue. As I come from a family of four generations, with a great-grandmother, grandfather, father and son, it is fair to say that we are regular customers of the health service in one form or another. The 2012 report, “Update Report on Scottish Pain Management Services” from Healthcare Improvement Scotland states that “... pain is not consistently managed across the whole health and social care system at present”. I was shocked to read that, according to the report, the average waiting time in Scotland for the first referral appointment is 11 weeks. Even that is not the full picture. Based on my personal experience of waiting for appropriate treatment for several months, it is extremely debilitating if that is the real fact of the matter, given that some patients are sent from pillar from post and are often confused about what to do and where to go for real help. Patients can feel that their problem is not being taken seriously. In my case, I felt uncomfortable being given higher and higher doses of medication, while a proper solution to my problems was not being addressed—as I felt—immediately. At one stage, a doctor suggested that I consider going private. As a member of the Labour Party, I was astonished that an NHS doctor would make such a suggestion. The doctor to whom I was speaking knew that I am a socialist and would never consider that option. I put that point to him and added, “You do appreciate that I’m a Muslim; despite that, if the press got hold of this, they would crucify me.” The doctor appreciated my dilemma and sought other ways in which he could help me. I am glad that the Scottish Government has begun to deal with the issues around the inconsistency of chronic pain services. However, these are the early stages: the first steps. I genuinely wish the Government well, because a lot of people are suffering unnecessarily. The postcode lottery in the provision of chronic pain services needs to be addressed. A lot of people use the phrase “postcode lottery” and assume that everybody understands. However, I think that the people who suffer really understand when they see the indifference that exists in communities, which can create a lot of ill-feeling. Not only is one suffering, but perhaps one also feels not as well looked after as other members of the community are. Waiting times for access to chronic pain services need to improve. That has been demonstrated and we are aware of that. I thank Jackson Carlaw for the description that he drew today of people who suffer from migraine. My wife suffered from migraine for years and until today I had not realised how badly I have treated her. I have never taken her ailment seriously. Today I will apologise to her, now that I realise how badly she suffers. When she moves around the house like somebody in outer space, I will now be able to understand why. I thank the member for that description, which I take on board. I want to say to the cabinet secretary: sir, the Labour Party’s amendment is very reasonable. Our suggestion is not one that will challenge the cabinet secretary in accepting it, so I genuinely hope and wish that he will take it on board before the end of business. The issue is not party based; it is about caring for communities. I am a sufferer, and many others in the chamber today have shared their experiences. We are not looking at reports, or at the fancy graphs that consultants produce; we are talking about real people with real issues. We are speaking from experience and from our hearts. We wish the cabinet secretary well in what he is trying to do, and hence I cannot emphasise enough how important the amendment really is. I hope and wish that members will take on board our amendment.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a local difficulty. A person wishes to open a chemist but some of the bigger boys—in particular, Boots the chemist—who sit on the NHS board continue to refuse the application. Can something be done to allow small independent chemists to open without harassment from the bigger players in the field?

First I say, “As-salam alaykum”—may peace and blessing of Allah be upon all the Muslim community in Scotland and, in particular, our guests in the public gallery. I thank Sandra White for securing this important debate. Attacks against the Shia community are on the rise across the world. Although the motion targets Quetta and Iraq, I assure members that those are not the only places where the Shia community are victims of violence. The issue is a serious one. I accept that the Shia community is not the only community to have come under attack in the Asian sub-continent. For example, the Sunni community in Iraq and the Christian community in Pakistan have also frequently been targets. However, the latest attacks on the Shia community have been of concern because in Iraq and Pakistan, which are the two main countries in which the Shia community has been targeted, the Governments seem to have been helpless to stop matters. That is of serious concern because, when Governments let people down, sometimes the wrong message goes out that the targeting of a community is acceptable. Quite clearly, that should not be the case. I hope that the new democratically elected Government that is now in office in Pakistan will take the issue more seriously than the previous Government in helping to put a stop to the violence against the Shia community. If we can be of any assistance, please advise us because this is a common challenge and we should not be afraid to work together in a bid to stop the senseless killing of innocent civilians. I am happy to work with any Government that is willing to work towards bringing the communities together. I personally pledge that I am willing and able to work with any Government to fight against discrimination, bigotry and religious intolerance. We must remind those Governments that fail such communities that they will suffer instability and insecurity to the degree that the nation is weak and the population uneasy and insecure. That situation is harmful to all people, regardless of who they are. Let us pray today that sense prevails and that people across the world will learn from history that violence is no solution for peace. Therefore, I look forward to ensuring that hypocrites do not rule people but that—inshallah, or God willing—people of substance do. Sandra White was absolutely right that all our communities play an important role in Scotland, and it is important that we do not allow discrimination. Time and again in history, we have seen how issues that have started off very small have turned out to involve major loss of life, limb, property and solidarity, which is unacceptable in this day and age. Bosnia was just one recent example in which large numbers of people were killed simply because they were of the wrong faith or belief. The Shia community is an integral part and important element of the Islamic world and, like all other segments, it must be treated with respect. Therefore, in today’s important debate, I wish to assure the Shia communities not only in Scotland but elsewhere in the world that, if I can be of help to them in any way at any time or anywhere, I will be there with them shoulder to shoulder.

Good afternoon, Presiding Officer. I am really privileged to take part in this debate and I thank Anne McTaggart for bringing it to the chamber. Mary Barbour was born in 1875. She was one of seven children and her father was a carpet weaver. The year 1896 saw her marry David Barbour and settle in the Govan burgh of Glasgow. She joined and became an active member of the Kinning Park co-operative guild, which was the first to be established in Scotland. That, in itself, is impressive. Mary joined the Independent Labour Party and the socialist Sunday school, and the Glasgow rent increases during the first world war brought her to the forefront of local political activity. The Glasgow Women’s Housing Association was born in 1914 in Govan, which is also my birthplace—like Sandra White, I was born in Govan. It is a very special place. I thought that I would add that for good measure. It is important that we recognise the incredible appreciation that we should have for women not only now but who in that era faced up to huge challenges. As a working-class housewife with two children and a husband, Mary Barbour was well qualified to be engaged in many of the activities that soon spread to the whole of the Clydebank area. In 1915, in one of the largest demonstrations in Glasgow’s political history, thousands of women marched through the streets of Glasgow along with thousands of shipyard engineers. As a result of that, the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act 1915 heralded a change in housing systems for the city of Glasgow, and the same progress was made throughout the United Kingdom thereafter. Maria Fyfe, whom Anne McTaggart and Patricia Ferguson mentioned, was also a hero to me and I learned a lot from the challenges that she faced as a woman. Mary Barbour was the first woman councillor for the Labour Party elected to represent Govan on the then Glasgow town council. During her term as a Labour councillor, she fought for a range of policies and pushed for things such as wash houses, launderettes, public baths, free milk for school children—I am old enough to have benefited from that—child welfare centres, play areas, pensions for mothers, home helps and local banks. Between 1924 and 1927, she served as the Glasgow Corporation’s first woman baillie. I can relate to that, as my wife, Haleema Malik, was one of the first Pakistani women to be elected to Glasgow City Council and she also served as a baillie of the city. I recall the challenges that she faced—and, believe you me, they were some challenges. If my wife can have to face those challenges in this day and age, I cannot imagine the challenges that Mary Barbour had to face. I have a lot of respect for the lady for achieving as much as she did. Given the fact that Mary Barbour passed away on 2 April 1958, she deserves more respect from the city than we have given her to date, and I have absolutely no hesitation in supporting the bid for a memorial to her. I commend Anne McTaggart’s motion and personally appeal to Glasgow City Council to consider what it suggests, as that is a wonderful idea. I thank Anne McTaggart for bringing the debate to the chamber today.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s debate on electricity market reform. I have grave concerns about rising household electricity bills. The dominance of a small number of companies, concerns about the security of the electricity supply and the falling levels of spare electricity capacity—which mean that, unless urgent action is taken, costs to the consumer will continue to escalate—must be checked. The £300 increase in household energy bills since 2010 means that reform of the market is very much needed. I support some of the measures in the UK Government’s Energy Bill, but it lacks clarity and is not ambitious enough. It is a lost opportunity. In principle, increasing investment in low-carbon and renewable energy through contracts for difference—that is a technical term that is used in the bill—could provide a sound structure to meet our electricity needs. However, further detail is needed on the contracts for difference and what the process will be for setting a strike price—that is another technical term that is used in the bill. Those reforms are for the medium to long-term future of the electricity market. The current structure needs to be radically reformed to increase competition and reduce the cost to consumers—particularly our vulnerable, who depend heavily on having an energy supply at a reasonable, fair and affordable cost and on being able to access good advice and services from their providers to ensure that they have every opportunity to address difficulties in the future. Six companies have 99 per cent of the market share of household energy bills. The question arises: why only six companies? The ambitious proposals to place a requirement on energy companies to pool the power that they generate and make it available to any retailer would break the dominance of the six main energy companies and allow price flexibility rather than possible price fixing, which some of our oil companies are being accused of. Another question that has always puzzled me is why we allow energy companies to charge a surcharge if a customer wishes to move to another provider. Surely that is unfair and unreasonable. People should be free to move around and go to the best company that they wish to deal with, particularly as they pay for the service; it is not free. I genuinely believe that, in theory, flexibility is very important, but it is even more important that the community and our vulnerable people have more than just affordable energy; they should also have companies that they can trust and which can support them in ensuring that they get good advice and information about how they can best save energy, because saving energy is a very important element. It is in the best interests of our country—although perhaps not of the companies that provide the services—that our communities are well versed in the opportunities that are available to them. I ask the minister to address a question about the bill. Will there be additional support to communities and community groups in particular? I recently visited the Glasgow athletes village and was very impressed by measures that had been taken there to reduce the energy bill and make systems cost effective. Will any other schemes be introduced in the near future to support our communities in addressing that issue?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s members’ debate on reducing reoffending, and I congratulate Mary Fee on bringing the debate to the chamber. The Audit Scotland report, “Reducing reoffending in Scotland”, which was published in November 2012, states with regard to reoffending that “Rates have remained relatively static ... over the past” decade. I felt very uneasy when I read that, because it suggests that there has been no improvement in the past decade. The report also states that 30 per cent of offenders reoffend within one year. The fact that the rate has been static for a decade and that 30 per cent of offenders are reoffending must lead us to ask where we have failed them. One of the most striking comments in the Audit Scotland report is that “there is a mismatch between what is currently being delivered and what is known to be effective.” We know what is effective, but we are not doing anything about it. That rings alarm bells about why we have failed so far. One of the report’s major recommendations calls for “more flexibility to meet local needs and priorities”. I hope that the project in HMP Greenock will go on to meet the local needs of prisoners and their families. Engagement with families is important, because many families abandon offenders due to shame, stigma or other issues. The cost of reoffending to Scotland’s economy has been estimated at approximately £3 billion a year. However, the real costs can be calculated not in money, but in social deprivation and the shortcomings of society that result. The use of prisoners’ assets to fund programmes is a way of getting extra resources, but I believe that the quality of the programmes is much more important. Mary Fee was correct to highlight the role of family and friends in ensuring that ex-offenders get the kind of support that they might not have had for a long time. I want to make a point about offenders from minority communities. Historically, people from such communities who have been in prison have far greater stigma attached to them. Their families are usually in denial and will not accept the fact that a member of the family has been in prison. The usual excuse for a person not being around because of that is, “Oh, he’s gone home to visit relatives,” which could refer to anywhere in the world. Although that may seem like a good excuse at the time, it does their kin no justice. A person who finds themselves in difficulties, who offends and is prosecuted and incarcerated, needs support. I suggest that we emphasise that not only families but appropriate agencies support those people—in particular, people from minority communities and first-time offenders—in order to try to ensure that they re-engage with society and can play a full role in it. I am grateful to Mary Fee for the debate today. I knew some prisoners when I was a councillor and I found that they benefited from receiving support. I wish the project in HMP Greenock and everybody involved in it the best of success.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to reduce carbon emissions in Glasgow. (S4O-02050)

I thank the minister for that response, most of which was welcome. I congratulate Glasgow City Council on the progress that it has made in reducing the carbon emissions from its buildings. In 2011-12, it reduced those emissions by 16,000 tonnes. However, I am keen to learn what private industry is managing to achieve across Scotland, and what support the Scottish Government is providing in that area. Given that the Government failed to achieve its targets last year, what extra emphasis has been laid on helping private industry to achieve those targets?

How does Sandra White square the fact that members of her party make it clear that they oppose some of the cuts with the fact that, when it comes to decision time, they shy away from that position? Are the people of Scotland to believe that we are not to trust her party any more?

I join my colleagues in welcoming the national men’s and women’s cricket teams of Japan, and I acknowledge that this is the teams’ first official visit to Scotland. I congratulate the head of the Japan Cricket Association, Mr Alex Miyaji, who has done important work in promoting cricket in Japan. I acknowledge Alex’s efforts in promoting links between Japan and the UK in sports. I commend, in particular, his efforts to promote the sporting relationships that Scotland has now enjoyed with Japan for many years. The impact of the visit for Scotland in international relations, especially in promoting a positive relationship with Japan, is worthy of note. The promotion of intercultural and international ties with Japan will be extended to other countries, and we will continue to build ties to promote cricket and other sports across the world. This type of engagement is significant and will have an important impact on Scotland, especially given the fact that the Commonwealth games are coming to Glasgow, my home town next year in 2014—something of which I continue to be immensely proud. I hope that the Japanese teams will enjoy their visit and will return to Japan with fond memories of Scotland, and that their visit will encourage other national teams to visit us. Fostering and strengthening our relationships with Japan and other countries is important, so we welcome the Japanese teams, and we hold up their visit as an example for others to follow in visiting us in the near future. More important, I would like the teams to take some important messages back home with them: that the people of Scotland are friends of Japan, that we have welcomed their visit and that we hope that many more of their teams will visit us, which will give us an opportunity to host them and welcome them here, so that they can appreciate our fine food and culture and the tapestry of good will that we will extend not only to the Japanese cricket teams, but to other national teams and—even more important—other visitors. I know that there are huge international issues surrounding the Japanese, particularly with regard to their neighbours. It is therefore even more important that we continue to live life as normally as possible. The fact that the Japanese have decided to make the visit is important. I invite them to look to the future and to continue to live life as normally as possible, thereby encouraging the building of good relations around the world. The teams who are visiting us are not just teams of cricketers: they are ambassadors. They are immensely welcome, and we genuinely wish them a very successful and fruitful visit. We hope and pray that our cricket team will one day visit Japan, to reinforce the friendship and the relationship that we are hoping to build. I once again welcome Alex Miyaji, who has done so much work in this field. The fact that he is part Scots makes me happy, as I am more than part Scots and am a cricket fan myself. I appreciate the hard work that he has done for his country.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate, headed “There is Still Such a Thing as Society”. I want to refer to Margaret Thatcher’s statement to Woman’s Own magazine in 1987. I want to look at what she said, then I will discuss what she did later. She said: “I think we’ve been through a period where too many people have been given to understand that if they have a problem, it’s the government’s job to cope with. ‘I have a problem, I’ll get a grant.’ ‘I’m homeless, the government must house me.’ They’re casting their problem on society. And, you know, there is no such thing as society. There are individual men and women, and there are families. And no government can do anything except through people, and people must look to themselves first. It’s our duty to look after ourselves and then, also to look after our neighbour. People have got the entitlements too much in mind, without the obligations. There’s no such thing as entitlement, unless someone has first met an obligation.” I respect the Thatcher family’s loss of a mother and grandmother and I offer my condolences at this time. However, I cannot agree with her policies; we will not rewrite history because she has died. Under the Thatcher Government, poverty and inequality increased and unemployment hit levels that the UK had not seen since the great depression. Her belief in a small state and in the deregulation of the financial markets amounted to selective prosperity. It left many, including mining and steel industry communities and working families at large, feeling misled and ignored. Margaret Thatcher may have died but, unfortunately, Thatcherism lives on. It will take decades to recover from its impact on Scotland and on the people of Scotland: unemployment rose by 16 per cent; interest rates rose in November 1990 to 13.88 per cent; poverty increased by 13.4 per cent; and inequality increased from a ratio of 0.25 to 0.34—and we are supposed to wonder whether there is such a thing as society. Societies are built by love, care and guidance, not by destroying communities and their livelihoods. What was done by the Thatcher Government to the people of Scotland was nothing less than criminal. Destroying our fruitful steel industry and growing mining industry was unforgivable. It led to devastated communities, and we recognise that we need to rebuild our society as we know it. So, what is society? What are society’s responsibilities and who is responsible for building societies? That responsibility lies on our shoulders—on all of us collectively. Governments will come and go, but the responsibility for building a society ultimately lies on the shoulders of individuals and communities. More important, people say, “I didn’t vote for the Thatcher Government,” but we all voted; we may not have voted for her, but we all had a democratic vote. We all then suffered or succeeded, depending on where we were. The vast majority of people in Scotland did not benefit from the Thatcher Government, so there is a lot of ill feeling towards it. We lost a booming industry. I remember the time when I was doing my degree, when the steel industry at Ravenscraig was closed down.

Yes, I do, but we need to look at why it was closed down. What was the root cause? [Interruption.]

The root cause was quite clear. The European Union had told the British Government at the time that it needed to rationalise the steel industry, and the rationalisation was sought by the Conservative Government. There were three factories in the UK and the only one that was making money was Ravenscraig. What did the Government do? It closed Ravenscraig. The member should not try to lay the blame on somebody else’s shoulders. That was a direct result of Margaret Thatcher’s Government negotiating badly for us. There was no replacement for the jobs that were lost in the industry. The community was devastated at Ravenscraig—and not only there, because right across Scotland the jobs of many highly skilled workers were allowed to disappear without any compensation or reskilling.

Scotland did not benefit from the policies that were implemented and we are still trying to recover from them. Now that the responsibility lies on our shoulders, we have to ensure that we do not make the same mistakes. I therefore ask the current Administration to do its best to ensure that we do not make the same mistakes with the cuts that are being introduced.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister mentioned the bedroom tax. The Scottish Government can change that and intervene to stop the Scottish community suffering from it. Why is it not taking steps to do so?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it will give to Glasgow City Council to help raise levels of educational attainment. (S4O-01987)

Glasgow City Council has been successful in tackling the issue and raising educational attainment in the face of poverty and deprivation. Innovative projects such as nurture groups support children in nurseries and schools while involving their families. All the evidence shows that poverty is a barrier to educational attainment. Given the council’s success in tackling that barrier, will the Scottish Government consider providing additional assistance to support Glasgow’s commendable efforts to raise educational standards?

I thank Bob Doris for securing today’s debate. I would like to start with the words: “Bismillah-hir-Rahman-nir-Rahim”. For the record, that means: “In the name of God, the benevolent and merciful”. I also add: “As-salam alaykum”. That means: “Peace be upon you all”—and in particular upon our guests today in the chamber and their brothers and sisters at home in Kurdistan. I add my voice to the debate and urge the Scottish Government to recognise formally the genocide of the people of Iraqi Kurdistan. I also encourage the European Union and the United Nations to do likewise, as many of the perpetrators seem to have escaped prosecution. Doing so will enable the Kurdish people—many of whom are in Scotland—to feel a sense of achievement and justice after their loss. The United Kingdom Parliament has already recognised the Kurdish genocide after the campaign led by Bayan Abdul Rahman. I congratulate her and her team on that achievement. The genocide went on for decades—in fact, since early 1963—and it involved the deportation of ordinary Kurdish people, the use of chemical weapons in the 1970 and 1980s, and then the campaign of 1987-88 in which hundreds of thousands of innocent people died. Families were torn apart. More than 4,500 villages were destroyed between 1976 and 1988 alone—genocide at its worst, while the whole world sat back and did nothing. That we allowed that genocide to happen in our day and age is a shame upon us. On a positive note, I am very fortunate to have made at least two visits to Kurdistan in recent years and I am planning a third. I have received six delegations from Kurdistan, who have had meetings with people including the First Minister, the justice secretary, the education secretary and many officials and members—all in a bid to do our bit in trying to correct history. I have written two reports that explore how we can offer support to our friends in Kurdistan—one of which I have presented to the First Minister—and a third report is being done just now. On education, we are looking at establishing university campuses in Kurdistan and at students coming to Scotland to study. We are also looking at law and order and policing, as has already been mentioned. I had the privilege of visiting the police training centre in Erbil and I was very impressed with the level of training on offer and, more importantly, the feeling that I got from the young students there who felt an ownership. They felt that they could work with the community rather than the community feeling dictated to and abused by the police force. That is a new concept in policing. We also looked at water supply and water treatment issues, and at gas and oil exploration. We are now exploring the possibility of ministerial visits to Kurdistan, in a bid to bridge the gaps between our communities. Kurdistan is similar to Scotland. It has a population of approximately 5 million and it is a mountainous region. The shame is that, in the genocide that took place, it was the innocent people who suffered. The people who were scratching a living on the barren, hard land with no irrigation facilities were targeted with poison gas weapons. I still cannot understand how the Iraqi Government got away with it. I still do not understand why we human beings allow such things to happen internationally.

I thank the member for that intervention. I agree with him, which is why I suggest that the UN must take that proposal on board. We continue to see genocide taking place around the world, and we need to say that enough is enough. We must learn the lessons. Young Parliaments such as the Scottish Parliament have an important role to play in adding their voices to those of all the world’s Governments in saying that we, too, want the UN to take that proposal on board.

I also voted against the war in Iraq, but unlike many in the chamber I have actually been to Iraq since the war. I would like to know what you have actually done to improve the lives of Iraqi citizens today.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank you, Presiding Officer, and the chamber for allowing me to come back again—this time with my microphone working. I want to reiterate what the cabinet secretary said about protecting the Scottish brand, with particular regard to the misleading marketing of products that come from overseas, which damages our economy and puts it at risk. Does the cabinet secretary agree that we need stiffer penalties for companies who mislead people and try to profit from that? Do we need to look at measures such as removing export licences from companies that do that to us?

I do not see why Sandra White should get all the glory on the issue of housing. When the new bedroom tax comes into effect, a lot of hardship will fall on a lot of families, particularly elderly families and, more importantly, on minority communities. Does the member agree that the committee should explore the difficulties that communities will face so that they can deal with those challenges before rather than after the event?

I am delighted to be able to speak in the debate. Many challenges will arise as the Scottish population ages. People feel that some politicians cannot see beyond the next election, but I believe that long-term planning is essential. In his evidence to the committee, the cabinet secretary John Swinney expressed his belief that planning beyond three years is difficult, given what the UK Government sets out, and there may be some truth in that. However, he will be aware that the City of Edinburgh Council has developed a 10-year long-term financial plan for key factors that influence the cost of service delivery and calculations for the overall level of savings that are required to achieve delivery. Hats off to the council. I genuinely pray that it is successful in its hopes and aspirations, because the plan is a long-term look at what it will do. The City of Edinburgh Council depends on funding from the Scottish Government, as the Scottish Government depends on the UK Government. Why can the Scottish Government not deliver a similar long-term plan to the one that the council has developed? What plans does the Scottish Government have in place—if any—to deal with the projected funding gap? It is essential that we recognise that there will be challenges and we really need to consider a long-term strategy. I also have concerns about the lack of long-term vision and clarity in current planning for demographic change. In a report on social protection in Scotland that was published last month, David Bell states: “There are areas where Scottish government and DWP policy clearly conflict. A notable example concerns free personal care”. Free personal care is important to many people. Because we are going through a change in our cultural norms, more and more people tend to live independently and more and more people do not have the ability or facilities to look after their elderly. Therefore, more and more of the elderly depend on the state to support them. David Bell continues: “the role of different funding streams to support frail older people lacks clarity.” When a number of different streams support our elderly, people tend to use each other as excuses for not delivering. Therefore, there is a danger that people will fall through the gap.

I am not suggesting that. What I am saying is that, at present, our elderly are serviced by a number of different packages and people are likely to use one organisation rather than another to facilitate what they need. For example, councils can quite easily say that a care provider is unable to provide care. What happens if one carer cannot do that? The person has to go to somebody else, and that can take time. When there is such a time lapse, people can genuinely be without care. Those are my concerns. We need to focus on how we package services so that they are easy for people to use. My point is meant not as a criticism but as a warning. We need to be aware that there are issues out there that we need to remedy. I know of at least two cases of people falling through the gap and I am concerned that if we do not rectify the situation, more people will be victims. That would be unhelpful. The other question is: what is the anticipated role of preventative spend? NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde stated that it will be difficult to fund and support preventative spend and early intervention due to “immediate pressures of demographic change”. If it is having that difficulty, what are we going to do to support the board to overcome it? It is not that health board’s difficulty but our difficulty—it is a shared difficulty, and we have to do something about it. I have not seen anything in any of the papers that addresses that. At present, there are no studies that look at the growing elderly minority communities and how the issues will impact on them. I am keen to know what studies, if any, are planned or are under way that will address the issues on those communities’ behalf. Rather than wait until it is too late, we should do the studies beforehand. That would be helpful. There are challenges, and I accept that they are jointly ours. There are challenges from organisations and there are also areas in which people need to streamline services. The best way forward is to ensure that the streamlining is in place so that the elderly are not disappointed.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to stop the reported fall in the number of Scottish postgraduate students. (S4O-01835)

I will not make the usual sabre-rattling comments such as, “Too little, too late,” or, “What has the Government been doing for the past year in not dealing with the issue?” I genuinely welcome the announcement. However, I am interested in how the Scottish Government will help to fund wider access for students who are from more deprived backgrounds, because—as the cabinet secretary will agree—they are the most challenged.

Just last week, the European and External Relations Committee considered a report on the latest developments in the EU budget. Depending on the final settlement, nearly €1 trillion will be available to do good work through investment in infrastructure, energy, small business development, our fishing and farming industries, broadband and research. There are huge opportunities. We must do all that we can do to ensure that Scotland can draw down as much of the funding as it can do. We might not get the full €1 trillion—albeit that it will not be for the want of trying—but we must ensure that everyone knows that funds are available and helps to secure them. My committee has also been investigating teaching of foreign languages in primary schools. Our convener, Christina McAlpine, touched on that—[Interruption.] I beg her pardon, I meant Christina McKelvie. Just the other week we learned that every year there is an underspend in the European budget—funding that would support teacher and pupil exchanges. That will not do. We must redouble our efforts to ensure that we take advantage of money that is available for good work. The people of Scotland must know that members of their Parliament are on the ball and up to date. They must have confidence that we know that money is available and, more important, how to help people to get it. The people of Scotland must also know that we can bring about change. That is an important element. When a European law is not working, the people of Scotland must have confidence that we will do everything that we can to fix the problem. That is our job. During the debate I got the impression that each committee member is dedicated to ensuring that the EU works for us in the best possible way. I am encouraged by that positive sign. Let us not forget that Scotland has much to offer the European Union, whether through our colleges and universities, our primary schools or the can-do attitude of our businesses, which are at the forefront of the renewable energy sector and are pushing the boundaries in that regard. Scotland has a lot to give to the European Union family. We heard from committee representatives about the initiatives and action that their committees are taking. We heard about the seven-year European Union budget and the future of the common agricultural policy and what it means for our farming industry, our landscape and even our dietary needs. We should not forget our equality duties. My committee is the first—if not the only—committee to undertake equality training. I encourage other committees to do that. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has stressed the need for change. There are opportunities and challenges to Scotland that are afforded by developments in the energy sector, including a North Sea grid to connect Scotland’s energy generation to Europe, or the various proposals in renewable energy. EU infrastructure policies, whether on broadband or ferry links, will have a significant impact on peoples’ daily lives. What happens next? The committee’s work is on-going. The debate has offered only a snapshot of what is possible. I, too, am passionate about what we can achieve and the differences that we can make by being in the European Union. Let us see how much of that €1 trillion budget can be brought home to Scotland. Why am I keen to see that happen? Many of our small and medium-sized companies are hungry for investment. We need to encourage and support not only small and medium-sized companies, but community groups that bring so much to, and do so much valuable work for, our communities. That support may come from agencies, and Humza Yousaf referred to two organisations that support minority communities. I am also keen to see what other organisations can provide support not only in identifying funding, but in supporting people in acquiring it. The bottom line is that we need to ask where the funding is going and why we are not getting the most benefit from it. Our committee is working hard to ensure that we not only identify means of bringing the funding home, but that we ensure that the funding delivers on the ground. I hope that other committees will support our work—as we support their work—in ensuring that that happens.

9. Good afternoon, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to ensure that equalities groups and smaller community groups will receive support from the Glasgow 2014 celebrate fund. (S4O-01807)

A number of my constituents have approached me to ask how they can get involved in holding cultural events leading up to and during the 2014 games. I have first-hand experience of explaining how and helping community groups to apply for funding. However, I am concerned that many small groups in Glasgow do not have the capacity and capability to apply for such grants, so doing so would place an additional burden on them. Some of them may be left out—in particular, genuine community groups that wish to participate. What assurances can the minister give me on how such groups can tap into support if they need it? Where will that support come from?

Although the bulk of the statement and press reports have focused on horsemeat, the cabinet secretary may be aware that there has been at least one case of pork being found in food that was labelled “halal”. That is obviously of high concern to those who adhere to religious dietary requirements. Although I am very pleased that Scottish meat is trusted over meat from other countries, can the cabinet secretary assure Parliament that, along with checks for horsemeat, he will ensure that meat in Scotland is not wrongly labelled “halal” or “kosher”?

The minister has made a very interesting point. Does he not have a TV in his office?

I am pleased to take part in the debate and to support the Labour Party’s amendment in the name of Ken Macintosh. The debt arrangement scheme has been an important statutory tool over the past nine years, and we recognise that fact. However, the economic situation has changed since the creation of the scheme, and not just banks but other high street lenders are now on the scene—high street stores, building societies and the like—which present many opportunities for many people to acquire debt. When people need money urgently, even a 1,000 per cent interest rate does not put them off if they do not know other places to go to. Communities among the minority communities, in particular, suffer greater hardship. I am referring to communities who are not very good at English, incomers to Scotland, refugees and the vulnerable in society among us. Data from citizens advice bureaux state that 400 people a day are coming to them for debt advice. That gives us some idea of the number of Scots who are currently worried about debt. The misery created when people go bankrupt or when families suffer hardship is untenable. People who find themselves in that trap always find that there are fewer places to go to for assistance and, without better financial literacy, things could get much worse. With the introduction of universal credit, I fear that many vulnerable people will choose to pay off high-interest debts rather than their rent and that, in itself, that will have huge implications, which could include family evictions, homelessness and all sorts of difficulties for our society as we know it. We need to recognise that a lot of people out there have difficulties in managing resource and that, without statutory assistance, they will face even greater difficulties. Hence, introducing proper legislative safeguards is important. I believe that raising awareness of affordable alternatives such as credit unions is a matter of urgency, on which we must take action. In the past, many people perhaps felt that credit unions were for small debts that might be incurred by families in housing associations or by the vulnerable in society. I can assure members that credit unions provide a vital support line for many families in Scotland today. Given the user-friendly attitude of the credit unions, they need to be commended for the work that they do. They do fantastic work, which many families benefit from. Therefore, I believe that credit unions need to be supported even more now than they have been in the past. In conclusion, debt is a serious issue, so I am glad to take part in today’s debate on the motion and our amendment regarding what is a really worthwhile scheme. It is very important that we support our communities, and the debt arrangement scheme is one of the best things that we can do. We must move forward and ensure that we have everything in place to support our vulnerable communities.

I am a little puzzled. The minister says that we cannot legislate on pegging interest rates, but I thought that we in the Parliament could legislate on how far we would allow banks to go on loans. Will he shed more light on that?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for taking an intervention so early in his speech. Does he agree that, rather than have an annual check to monitor progress, we should perhaps have six-monthly checks, which would focus us and, I hope, help us to regain lost ground?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

There is always a fear of job losses and an indirect impact on jobs in the supply chain when a large-scale merger is planned, but the proposed merger of BAE Systems and EADS needs to be looked at in a different context. The fact that it is not to be allowed means that the proposal had shortcomings. I agree with the motion that we cannot assume that all mergers are good—or that they are all bad—and that we need to look carefully at the detail of each case. In this case, as in others, the merger would have impacted on more than just the companies involved. It would have impacted on suppliers—small companies—that engage with them. Sometimes that effect is not clear and the total number of job losses cannot be calculated. In the cases that are cited in the motion, such as the merger of RBS and ABN AMRO, the devil was in the detail. In a time of economic instability, lessons need to be learned about the weaknesses in the system of regulating mergers and acquisitions. I believe that the House of Commons Defence Select Committee’s inquiry into the merger and its potential impact on Scottish jobs was important, but the big threat that was perceived to exist to jobs on the Clyde was the uncertainty caused by the lack of defence orders and the threat that Scotland might leave the United Kingdom. We need to protect our industry from those fears, so it is important that we ensure that Scottish firms, in particular, are encouraged to engage with one another rather than look elsewhere. In addition, when mergers are considered, the Government has an important role to play. Historically, Governments have not played that role. We have allowed companies to make commercial decisions by themselves, but when a merger would impact on jobs and the growth of industry, I think that we have a role to play, primarily to provide assistance. When companies go overseas, all sorts of shortfalls are left in Scotland. I cite the example of the wind farm manufacturing industry that we no longer have in Scotland. Although we might be one of the leading countries in the world when it comes to renewable energy, we do not have a leading manufacturing position. In many cases, imports are being considered. We need to export; without exports, we will not grow. The Scottish Government needs to have a policy that sets out what it is willing to accept as far as mergers are concerned. Although I agree in principle with the motion, I believe that we need to ensure that we support our industry more than we have done and that we do not simply rely on Scottish Enterprise and others. The Government must play a bigger role. We must support our industry. If we do not, we will not be able to support and maintain jobs. Therefore, I ask the Government to look at how it can make a positive contribution in that area.

Does the member agree that portrayals in the media, particularly in television and film, of the perpetration of violence against women should be outlawed in Scotland and that the Government should introduce measures in that regard? After all, such things encourage people to justify their own violence against women.

Good afternoon, Presiding Officer, and a happy new year to all. There can be no pride in the fact that the proportion of our young people who are not in employment, education or training has stagnated since 1996. I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s debate on improving employability. The Finance Committee’s report focuses on youth employability and mentions those who are experiencing high levels of multiple deprivation. However, there is a great deal of diversity within that group and one size does not fit all: it never has and never will. I whole-heartedly agree with the report that there is a need for a support package that is flexible enough to deal with the variety of needs that young people face. One issue that should be recognised is the large impact of youth unemployment among ethnic minority young people, as the unemployment rate is approximately twice that of the indigenous community. Modern apprenticeships are a good first step towards combating that, but Skills Development Scotland figures show that visible ethnic minority communities have only 1.2 per cent of young people in modern apprenticeships, which is very sad. We in Scotland need to get our act together and work to reduce unemployment. The Government needs to get out there and find companies that would be interested in investing in Scotland and in giving our skilled, willing and hard-working workforce an opportunity to prove themselves. Businessmen such as Willie Haughey, and Glasgow City Council, have supported the modern apprenticeship scheme. Those efforts are very welcome and they are to be encouraged right across Scotland. Time and again, we fail to recognise the important role that industry can play. We fail to recognise and understand the contribution that is made by many businesspeople. We have never gone out of our way to encourage them or to congratulate them on the efforts that they make on our behalf. I also ask the cabinet secretary whether the youth employment policy has been equality impact assessed. It would be interesting to see the findings of such an assessment. Many of the schemes that are mentioned in the report are focused on school leavers, colleges, and people who are dropping out of higher education. However, the report does not address many issues in other communities that still have young people who have left their first-time employment and have not been able to get re-employment in jobs that they are trained to do. I remind the cabinet secretary about the cuts that have been made to college funding. I know that it is a sore point, but it is an important one. It has been recognised that there was a shortfall in funding and the First Minister had to apologise for that. Although I do not wish to ask the First Minister these questions, I have absolutely no hesitation in asking the minister and the cabinet secretary what they are going to do about that. The shortfall was recognised. Will they reinvest that amount in our colleges? Will they add that amount to next year’s college budget? Let the First Minister’s apology not be a hollow one; let us put things right. Our colleges do a wonderful job; no one has questioned that. Our colleges have done much, so it was quite sad when the cabinet secretary suggested that some courses were perhaps not worthy of support. I do not believe that there is any college course that is not worthy of support. People talk about flower arranging not being important but, believe me, they soon find out how important it is when they try to get someone to put together a bouquet for them. No training course should be undermined. We insult our young people when we do that. Not everybody will be a rocket scientist, but everybody is part of the community, they are part of our responsibility, and they are part and parcel of the structure of Scotland. They must be supported. If they want to go to college and do such courses, that is exactly what should happen. As a nation, we have proven ourselves time and again. There is absolutely no doubt in my mind or, I am sure, in anyone else’s, that, given the opportunity, our young people can produce, perform and outdo anyone else. That is a matter of record. I am not boasting just because I am Scottish. It is down in black and white and it is part of history. We can do it if we are given the opportunity. Let us do that.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss possible ways forward. That is a very positive move. The cabinet secretary suggested that an assessment has been done, but that is not reflected in the figures. That is the point that I tried to make. Perhaps the discussions with him on how we can improve matters will make a difference.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde regarding its waiting times data. (S4O-01625)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that an NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde audit of waiting times data found that failures in the quality of the data made it difficult to verify the validity of the “unavailable for treatment” classification of patients. Will the cabinet secretary give me a clear guarantee today that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is not involved in the waiting times scandal? Will he also be so kind as to publish the audit today so that we have an opportunity to see it before tomorrow’s statement?

I am delighted to be able to speak about the Commonwealth games in 2014 and the progress that is being made in preparation for them. The first issue that I want to raise is about the lessons on equality and inclusiveness that can be learned from the London Olympic and Paralympic games. The Glasgow 2014 website says: “We want to use the power of the Games to change attitudes by celebrating diversity in everything we do and by delivering a truly inclusive sports programme”, but it gives no indication of how that will be done. An initiative that I believe should be studied closely is the London 2012 equality and diversity forum, which brought together the main 2012 partners to monitor and champion equality and diversity in all aspects of the 2012 games. The forum looked at a number of issues, including accessible transport, the food strategy, volunteering and the ticketing strategy. We need to look at the forum’s work in detail to see what can be learned from the successes and mistakes of the London games, including the mistake that gave rise to anger about empty seats at sold-out events. On the food strategy for the Commonwealth games, I welcome the appointment of a food project manager—or a food tsar, as the newspapers call her—whose remit will include helping Scottish food and drink suppliers to tender for contracts at the events. I urge the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council to ensure that the provision of specialist products such as halal food is given careful consideration as part of the strategy. The London 2012 equality and diversity forum supported the launch of a website—www.inclusivelondon.com—that highlighted a range of accessible services, hotels and modes of transport. I feel that such a resource would be useful for people who want to come to the Glasgow games, and I would like to know whether anything along those lines is planned. I have some questions about the inclusiveness of the Glasgow 2014 volunteering strategy. The volunteering publicity says that people can volunteer only if they are eligible to work in the UK. That means that people from the A2 countries—Romania and Bulgaria—who are not eligible to work in the UK at the moment but who will be eligible to do so from 1 January 2014, will not be able to register to participate as volunteers in 2014. That issue needs to be looked at. I turn to the question of who owns the games. I listened carefully to John Mason, who, like me, is a former member of Glasgow City Council, and I am surprised that he wants to take away the credit for the games from Glasgow. They are Glasgow’s games. It was Glasgow City Council that bid for the games and which worked hard to win them. That does not take away from the fact that a number of other people made a contribution, including the First Minister, who went to Sri Lanka and fought hard for Scotland to win the games.

In a minute. The games are primarily Glasgow’s games; they should not be hijacked. We should not try to hide the fact that Glasgow City Council successfully managed the bid to stage the games, and Glasgow should take the credit for winning them. That said, I accept that other cities in Scotland will participate fully in the games and that Scotland as a whole will benefit from them.

I totally agree. Indeed, I would go a step further and say that the games belong to the whole Commonwealth family; I encourage everyone in the Commonwealth to feel that the games are their games. However, I think that Glasgow has taken the lead and should get the credit for winning them. I would not want anyone to try to steal that from Glasgow.

Yes, Margo.

I totally accept that. I agree that Glasgow deserves the credit and that the rest of Scotland is part and parcel. I would not want to take that away from anybody in Scotland, but the point that I am trying to make and emphasise is that we should not run away with the idea of who got the games. Margo MacDonald quite rightly pointed me in the right direction and reminded all of us where the idea came from, and I am grateful to her for that.

I just want to point out that minority communities are missing out on an opportunity in that regard. We should remember that all those people who are volunteering today will not necessarily be available for the games themselves, so we definitely need a large number of volunteers. However, a lot of communities are still not engaging with us, and we need to bridge that gap somehow.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The Scottish fishing fleet has made the biggest sacrifice in Europe by giving way to European legislation, so if the EU wishes to compound the situation by freezing our stock limits, perhaps it would invest in inshore fish farms to compensate us. Perhaps we should be looking for investment from the EU to compensate our fishing industry.

Will James Kelly give way?

I believe that Scottish people are going through a renaissance in terms of searching for and finding their identity. Music for children is vital to that. I totally agree with what Clare Adamson says, but I think that the call for the Scottish Government to assist in this process is important. We should look for ways to encourage our young people to come forward and develop their skills, so that they can identify with their nation and not be Americanised or anglicised, but be Scottish.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in today’s debate on Scotland’s national day, the St Andrew’s public holiday. The St Andrew’s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007 was first supported by the Scottish Labour Party under Jack McConnell MSP’s Administration, following a member’s bill by Dennis Canavan. St Andrew’s day is Scotland’s national day. The Labour amendment reflects that the St Andrew’s flag belongs to all Scots, “regardless of origin, current residence and political beliefs”. That is an important point to take on board. The amendment also notes that St Andrew’s day marks the start of Scotland’s winter festival season, which ends on Burns Night and includes the Christmas, Hogmanay and New Year celebrations” and other cultural festivals that take place at this time of year. At a time of economic downturn, festivals are particularly important as an opportunity to attract more tourists to Scotland and promote Scottish products. Some members have touched on that. I welcome that. Let me show members another side of St Andrew’s day celebrations. In Nuremberg, there is a Burns supper every year. It is so successful that anyone who gets a place at that Burns supper is considered lucky. As some members have already done, I suggest that the cabinet secretary pursues that type of activity around the world, not only in the USA but in all the countries with which we have twinning agreements, all the countries with which we engage and all the countries that are friendly with Scottish culture. Such links are important. There has been some talk that we in Scotland seem to have fallen behind in our overseas activity. We cannot engage with people around the world unless we are willing to get up and do it.

I look forward to the cabinet secretary going to Pakistan to do similar work. Glasgow is twinned with Lahore and we have a close and wonderful relationship. I hope that we will hold a Burns supper in Lahore, which she could lead. We hope that, in the years to come, St Andrew’s day will become embedded in Scotland’s culture, of which the Burns supper is an important element. Burns suppers have become popular; we can offer vegetarian haggis for all those who have issues with meat or who require halal food. How many events among minority ethnic communities to celebrate St Andrew’s day has the cabinet secretary or any other MSP visited? I do not think that any such visits have been made; I certainly have not made any. We must deal with that issue and encourage our minority communities to participate in St Andrew’s day. Our schoolchildren do that—that is wonderful and positive, and getting to the younger generations is marvellous. However, we need to celebrate St Andrew’s day equally with hogmanay and Burns suppers. It is important to look towards building such relationships. If the winter celebrations are to be truly national, people should not be excluded from them. My comments about engaging with communities to encourage celebration of St Andrew’s day and what it stands for relate to Scottish Labour’s amendment and its comment on Historic Scotland’s decision to allow free access to some of its facilities. I do not understand why only that Scottish heritage organisation is taking on that challenge. I encourage all organisations—including private museums and other centres—to do the same. I am proud that Glasgow City Council is supporting free swimming for our youngsters at school and for over-60s. I do not understand why the same thing cannot be done in all of Scotland. I encourage that to be done, starting from St Andrew’s day as a benchmark position. There is a charge for entry to our castles, which I do not believe our schoolchildren should pay. If we are talking about heritage, promoting Scottish history and engaging our communities, we need to provide facilities.

Thank you, but I am almost out of time. Glasgow City Council provides free entry to all its museums and free swimming for children and the elderly community. We should replicate that across Scotland, to encourage engagement and the learning process.

Good afternoon. I am pleased to have the opportunity to take part in this debate, particularly as I have campaigned for Pakistan International Airlines direct flights between the twin cities of Glasgow and Lahore. Air passenger duty for that route would now be £65 for an economy passenger, which is an increase of more than 8 per cent in the past year. I am convinced that there is sufficient demand for the Glasgow to Lahore route, and there is certainly spare capacity at Glasgow airport, but the recent above-inflation increases on already high aviation taxation make it hard to encourage airlines to invest in Scotland. It is important that we take steps to address that issue. The Scottish air route development fund was one of the great success stories of the previous Labour-led Administration in the Scottish Parliament. An independent study in 2009 by the transport consultancy Scott Murray put the total net economic benefits to Scotland of the Scottish air route development fund at over £450 million over a 10-year period, including nearly £35 million of benefits from the setting up of the Glasgow to Dubai link. There were real benefits. The fund grew tourism, sustained businesses and created jobs. Therefore, it was very disappointing that the first act of the incoming Government in 2007 was to scrap that fund. The Government could do more to overcome the obstacles. It has been in power for the past five years, and there is still little sign of any progress in that direction. Surely there are ways to meet the European Commission’s concerns. The Scottish Labour Party proposed an air route marketing fund, and I would be delighted if the Government took up that idea. Glasgow Chamber of Commerce’s top priority for air is not air passenger duty, but route development activity. It argues that, to increase both the number of direct flights and access to major air hubs, Glasgow needs international promotion. That in turn would grow both inward and outward travel markets. I agree with Glasgow Chamber of Commerce that air passenger duty is only one part of the jigsaw, and again encourage the Scottish Government to engage positively with the European Commission to bring forward proposals to develop more direct air routes from Scotland, particularly to developing markets. It is not only about our air links; we also need infrastructure. During my term in Glasgow City Council, I promoted the Glasgow airport rail link. It is critical that, if we are to become a successful partner on the world economic stage, we need a proper infrastructure that supports our airports and air links. That in turn will increase our productivity and employment opportunities and, more important, business opportunities. We need to encourage businesses to look at Scotland as a destination. It is very good for us to say that we are open for business, but we need to have the tools for people to come in and do that business. I recall a particular incident in which an Australian businessman came to Scotland to develop and build a hotel in Glasgow. The first thing that he complained about was the transport from the airport to the city. That disappointed me, as I had gone to a lot of trouble to encourage him to come and take up a project and develop it in Glasgow. It disappointed me that he opened his remarks not with the words, “How are you, Mr Malik?” but with “That’s a terrible situation you’ve got here. You can’t even get to the city from the airport.” I remarked to myself that there were quite a few ways of getting there, but nevertheless, the point was made. It has always remained in the back of my mind that such issues are important. Scotland’s infrastructure and our air links are important, and the duty and the increased levels of duty that have been proposed are unrealistic. We are already isolated from the rest of Europe. We need to be able to control the cost of people coming to and going from Scotland. One of the biggest challenges for us is that the aviation companies need to have a free hand in competing fairly and reasonably across Europe. Therefore, I suggest that the minister should bring forward proposals on how he will address the issue with the European Union to try to assist us in overcoming those difficulties.

I draw the member’s attention to the reality in life, which is that, when people travel long haul, they have to go via routes in the UK, which means additional flights, which contributes more to pollution. When we encourage long-haul flights from Scotland, we are helping to reduce that.

I am delighted to speak in the debate, because I have always been involved in higher education. I wish Stow College well. I hope that it overcomes the issues that it currently faces, and I hope that the situation does not affect staff morale and students’ academic futures. I have always been keen to promote the value of Scottish colleges, in Glasgow, in Scotland and internationally. Scotland’s Rural University College works in Lahore and other cities in Pakistan, and the City of Glasgow College works in Karachi and Lahore. We have a proud history of engaging with cities and countries overseas, and I thank our colleges for the wonderful job that they do and for facing up to the current challenges. There can be no doubt that colleges provide access to education to a diverse range of people, through flexible learning models and a broad subject choice. That flexibility has an effect on social mobility. People from minority communities and people with disabilities benefit from college education, and students from diverse areas attend colleges and universities. Several college mergers have taken place, and there will be more. In previous mergers, there has been support for our colleges to enable them to transfer to the new model, but that will not happen on this occasion. We are saying to our colleges that they will have to deal with those issues with current resources, and that is a huge challenge for colleges in a time of cuts. We are going through such a harsh economic situation just now, and saying to colleges that they must deal with the matter themselves places a huge burden on them. As young people have to compete in an increasingly harsh labour market, there is a rising demand for college places. We have heard that there is a waiting list of people who want to go to colleges to retrain. I have heard various comments today about “hobby courses”, but I do not know what those are. To me, any learning is learning, and when people learn, they can apply themselves. We give a lot of credit and credence to industry and businesses, but we do not seem to understand that we are a country of entrepreneurs. There are people who are self-employed, who earn a great deal of respect and money for this country. They also need education, and such education does not need to be focused, as we need people to be able to choose subjects. Flexibility and choice of subjects are important, as the fewer subjects we have, the less we have to offer and the more we deny our young the opportunities that they need. I do not really care what happens down south, or in Ireland, Iceland or the Netherlands. I care what happens in Scotland, and in Glasgow. I know that our young need jobs, and that they need to be professional. If we want to attract industry from overseas, we need a professional workforce, and for that we need colleges and courses. To pretend anything different is useless, and we should not go there. It is very important for us to ensure that we represent the needs of our communities. The idea of pulling parties down and trawling through people’s figures is not what this is about. We need to do a job, in the sense that we want to provide for our young and for our future, and we can do that only if we provide a service. There are challenges with regard to how we deal with those issues. One or two members in the chamber have asked Opposition members, “What would you do to fund colleges?” The Government should not bring forward a policy, go through this charade of a debate, and then just pass it on. It should speak to people and share ideas, and come up with conclusions and solutions that are fit for purpose. We all say that we have free education in our universities, but what about our colleges? If people cannot get into a college, they will have to pay to go somewhere else, so it is not free. Free is only free if someone can get access and can have the opportunity to study, and they will not get that if we go down the road that we are going down just now.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We must come up with solutions, but they have to be genuine. We must work with people with open hearts and minds. Young people deserve the best that is available. We know that we can provide that, as we have a rich history in the area. We do not need to prove to ourselves that we are in a position to do it. We can do it, we have done it before and we will do it in the future, but we must be focused. We should forget the narrowness of party-political broadcasts and actually deliver a service to the people who need it.

I just want to confirm that I take every member in the chamber seriously, including Mark McDonald. I do not want him to think for a minute that I do not. However, I am seriously disappointed at the lack of SNP interest in such an important debate. Also, some members have not taken interventions, and that is a shame. We are here to do a job of representing our people to the best of our abilities, and when we do such things, we fail them. I am a patient with diabetes and my sight is now failing. Rather than receiving treatment, I have been given another appointment to come back in a year. I wonder why.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what the Lord Advocate’s priorities are for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service for the next two years. (S4O-01442)

I thank the Solicitor General for a very detailed response. Given that the Lord Advocate is likely to be asked his advice on a range of issues that relate to independence, how will balance be achieved in how the priorities will be met? For example, how do his comments to Ruth Davidson on 30 October—that the Government documents that state that an independent Scotland would continue to be a member of the European Union were “underpinned by legal advice”—tally with Nicola Sturgeon’s comments on 23 October that the Scottish Government had “not sought specific legal advice”?—[Official Report, 23 October 2012; c 12408.]

It gives me great pleasure to speak in today’s debate on an issue that is close to my heart. Twenty-three per cent of Scotland’s looked-after children are in Glasgow and Glasgow has the highest proportion in Scotland of its children being looked after, with 3.2 per cent of the under-18 population in the care of the local authority. That figure is more than double the Scottish average of 1.5 per cent and is higher than the figure in any other part of Scotland. Last year, I spoke about the incredibly poor education outcomes for looked-after children. The evidence shows that establishing stability and permanence early in a child’s life can generate an improvement in their life chances. I welcome the efforts that have been made to improve the quality and consistency of decision making on permanence but, along with Barnardo’s and the NSPCC, I would like major improvements to be made in the speed of the process. There are three areas in which further improvements are required. The first is in establishing a care plan for permanence. It is vital for the welfare of a child that early and effective decisions on permanence are made once that child enters the looked-after children system. Secondly, a study by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration found that, for 92 per cent of the children in its sample, it took more than two years from their first becoming involved with services for them to be adopted. In one case—as has been highlighted—the process took more than 10 years, which is a ridiculous amount of time. The third area in which improvement is required is in assisting with the adoption process. I would be interested to hear from the minister what steps are being taken to encourage the minority communities in Scotland to participate in the adoption scheme. If she does not have the answer today, I will be happy to receive it at a later date—I do not want to put her on the spot. Many of our communities in Scotland have traditionally been welcoming of looking after siblings and other relatives. That care package is extremely important. We need to stop the bureaucracy taking too long. I will give an example of my experience of the process. After two years of interviews—including interviews of my children—training, visits and people coming to my place and my parents’ place, I was eventually told that I was not a suitable adopter. The reason that was given was that I work too hard. I got very worried, because I have two children. I said, “You’re not taking my children away, are you?” My children are okay—they can stay with me, even though I work very hard—but I cannot adopt anyone else. That is an interesting phenomenon.

I thank the minister very much. I do not know whether my children would agree with that. However, they have achieved good academic results, so I must have got something right. The number of looked-after children in Scotland has grown by 46 per cent over the past decade, and the number of looked-after babies under the age of one has almost doubled. As has been said, that puts a major strain on social work departments. It is essential that local authorities be adequately resourced so that decisions on children becoming looked after are made in the best interests of those children, rather than as a last resort when the situation has reached crisis point. Barnardo’s has expressed concern that, too often, decisions are based on resources rather than on need. It argues that early intervention by local authorities and social work departments can save money in the long run. I sometimes feel sorry for social work departments, because they are doomed whatever they do. They are in an extremely difficult position—resourcing is an issue for them. What will really turn things around for us is the time factor. We need to be more sensitive about how we deal with the issues and need to shrug off the ancient historic ways in which we have dealt with them. I genuinely believe that timing and promotion of the issue are important. I look forward to hearing in the minister’s summing up what other support local authorities will receive in that regard.

Will the minister consider, under secondary legislation, changing that period of time—for small businesses only—from three months to six months? It is a short period and my desire is really to try to support small businesses because often when small businesses change hands it can take up to three or four months simply to change the suitability of the premises. Small business owners would welcome that relief.

I make two subtle points. Membership of the EU is not guaranteed. Turkey is an example in that regard. Having said that—[Interruption.] Will members please allow me to finish? I do not imagine that Scotland would be denied membership of the EU. The question is, what price would we have to pay?

The member should congratulate the council.

I am delighted to speak in the debate. I will focus on two main areas: our transport infrastructure and the impact on services for our elderly and vulnerable citizens. As members will be aware, Transport Scotland is required to take steps to prevent snow and ice from endangering the safety of pedestrians and vehicles on our public roads. For trunk roads, Transport Scotland performs the duty by contracting companies to keep our key national routes open. I have looked at the winter service plan for south-west Scotland, which includes the city of Glasgow. I am impressed by the level of detailed planning that appears to have taken place, to the extent that the contractor Amey is able to outline in great detail in the plan which vehicles will treat which routes and how long treatment will take. Although I welcome that level of detail in the plan, Transport Scotland and its contractors were found wanting in the winter of 2010. As I see it, despite the impressive plans, one area in which we could fall short is that of co-operation between different contractors, agencies and local authorities. I would be interested to hear from the minister what is being done to encourage joint working. I am talking about in particular the deployment of plant and manpower from less affected areas to assist in other areas that are trying to cope with severe conditions. What systems are in place to encourage that? I welcome the commitment made by ScotRail to give passengers faster and more accurate information regarding train service disruptions. I hope that ScotRail will also inform the Indian lady Alex Johnstone referred to so that if he calls, she will be able to give him that information. Turning from land-based transport to water, members may be aware that great progress has been made in recent years in regenerating the Glasgow to Edinburgh canal. I would be interested to hear from the minister what steps are being taken to deal with the canal freezing over. The canal is once again a great asset for the city of Glasgow, but I have concerns about the risk to children who might be tempted to wander on to the ice. There is more work to be done to inform our young people about the potential dangers of our waterways in the winter. I will focus the remainder of my remarks on the impact of cold weather on the elderly and the vulnerable, particularly given the citizen’s advice bureaux figures that show a rise over the past year in the number of people coming to them who are struggling to pay their energy bills. The Government’s cuts to the central heating and insulation budget, which is down to £48 million last year from £71 million the year before, will make it hard for many households to cope with the effects of a severe winter this year. Last year two of my elderly constituents were denied a central heating system after the SNP Government moved the goalposts to make it harder for households to benefit from the scheme. Such cases should make all members of the Parliament ashamed. I also have concerns about local authorities, which will be placed in a difficult position as a result of the year-in, year-out squeeze on their budgets. I would like the minister to assure the Parliament today that councils have sufficient funds to do the job. I now come to roads and road safety. Our motorways and trunk roads are suffering because of a lack of maintenance and a lack of joined-up work between contractors. I give the example of the M8, where there are hardly any cat’s eyes and white lines are missing or have been totally eroded, so it is in a dangerous state. I want the minister to explain why he has allowed that level of poor workmanship on the M8. I travel on that road frequently and I find it quite dangerous during the hours of darkness. Last but not least, we have a responsibility to continue to build on the good practices that we have developed over our historic years. Resource will be a huge issue for service delivery. Many members have mentioned potholes. It is easy to say that potholes are local authorities’ responsibility, but if we do not give local authorities money, they cannot do anything about them. I would appreciate the minister’s commitment to assisting councils around the country to achieve the goals that I have mentioned.

Good afternoon. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. Although I do not speak Gaelic, I come from a bilingual family, meaning that I have an understanding of the value of languages. As a councillor, I was delighted to be at the opening of Glasgow’s first Gaelic-medium school, in my ward of Woodlands, in 1999. Such was its success that the school had to be relocated to a larger premises in 2006. I am sure that members will join me in commending Glasgow City Council’s commitment to Gaelic-medium education. With that in mind, I will focus on the education sector. Members have already mentioned that the national Gaelic language plan sets three main targets for the schools sector: a doubling of the number of children enrolling in Gaelic-medium education by 2017; a year-on-year increase in the number of pupils learning Gaelic in primary and secondary schools; and an expansion in the availability of Gaelic-medium subjects in secondary schools. Although I welcome those objectives and do not doubt the commitment of members of all parties to Gaelic, the reality is that providing Gaelic-medium education is the responsibility of local authorities, and everyone knows that local authorities are having to make tough spending choices as their budgets get squeezed. I would like to hear more from the minister about how the resource to meet those targets will be found. I welcome the commitment to promoting more opportunities for communities and networks of Gaelic speakers to use Gaelic in their day-to-day lives. I am regularly involved in community activities that use Urdu or Punjabi, and I can testify to the effectiveness of such activities in making those languages living languages in our communities. I am interested to know how the minister is going to support local authorities up and down Scotland to achieve those goals. They are nice things to have and nice targets to reach, but how are we physically going to resource them? I remember Glasgow City Council struggling to provide those facilities when things were good and we are now in challenging times. I would like to hear the minister’s views on that.

Please allow me to finish this sentence. I will be very proud and happy, the day I walk down Allison Street, Maxwell Road or the Great Western Road and, as well as Punjabi and Urdu, I hear Gaelic being spoken. Achieving that will require a huge commitment.

I absolutely agree with the member, and I want to work to achieve the goal of recruiting those people. That is a challenge for us as a nation. It is not only about language; it is also about culture and heritage, and language plays an important role in that. However, it is a fact of life that, to do what we want to do, we need to find the resource for that, and I want to know where that resource is coming from.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I reiterate what I said in my speech. Does the minister agree that we need to find more resources for education in our schools? If so, where will those resources come from?

17. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress has been made with preparations for the 2014 Commonwealth games. (S4O-01322)

I thank the minister for that full response. Many members—including no fewer than 37 Scottish National Party back benchers, I am pleased to say—have expressed concerns about the work capability assessments for employment and support allowance that Atos Healthcare is carrying out and the company’s role in denying ill and disabled people benefits. Given those legitimate concerns, does the minister consider Atos to be an appropriate sponsor for the 2014 Commonwealth games?

I thank John Mason for securing the debate. As many members have said, gambling is a reserved matter and the Parliament does not have the power to regulate betting shops. However, as a former councillor in Glasgow, I am aware of local authority licensing boards’ responsibilities in granting gambling premises licences under section 153 of the Gambling Act 2005. There is a strong case for giving local authorities increased powers and more flexibility to limit the number of betting shops in their areas. Gambling might not be a direct responsibility of the Parliament or the Scottish Government, but we are right to discuss it, because it affects our people and their quality of life, particularly when people develop a gambling problem. The most recent gambling prevalence survey pointed to a number of facts that increase a person’s risk of developing a gambling problem. Of particular interest to me was the fact that people from an Asian ethnic background are three times more likely to have a gambling problem than is someone from a white ethnic background. The issue is also one of social justice. People who are in poor health are four times more likely to have a gambling problem, as are unemployed people. Those with severe money problems are 12 times more likely to have a gambling problem than are those with no money worries. The motion refers to Harriet Harman’s acknowledgement that the pendulum has swung too far in respect of the number of gambling premises. Her main concern is about the growth in high-stake rapid-play B2 machines, and I support her call for lower limits on stakes for those machines and on prize pay-outs. We must take all possible steps to safeguard our communities against the dangers of gambling. As I come from Glasgow, a major issue for me is that some areas have so many gambling shops that social activity is limited and so people feel obliged to gamble. John Mason referred to the frightening way in which gambling shops encourage customers—especially younger people—to gamble. More and more machines are being used to attract young people, who sometimes mislead themselves into thinking that they are playing a game, although real money is used. They do not have enough resources to start with. I press the minister to share with Westminster our fears and concerns about the legislation and to ask for the issues that we face in Scotland—and, I am sure, throughout the country—to be addressed. I would very much welcome hearing the minister’s comments and how she can support us.

Will the Government consider rolling out free places for our schools to enable youngsters to participate in sporting activities? More important, will the Government ensure that all the small groups and clubs throughout Scotland have facilities given to them free of charge until the Commonwealth games? That would be a good pilot project to enable us to see whether youths take up sport and to establish the benefits that would be created if we continued such an initiative in future.

6. Good morning, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that cities and towns beyond Glasgow benefit from the 2014 Commonwealth games. (S4O-01271)

I thank the minister for that positive response. As a Glasgow MSP, I am delighted that the 2014 Commonwealth games will showcase that great city. However, they also present a unique opportunity to sell the whole of Scotland to the world. I want the 4,500 competitors to return home to the four corners of the globe singing the praises of Scotland as an historic and holiday destination. What consideration has been given to providing athletes from the 72 competing nations with concessionary travel within Scotland and what consideration has been given to Scotland’s marketing ability?

I welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her new post. Although I wish her well in some of her activities, she will forgive me for not wishing her well in all her activities. I am pleased to take part in today’s debate because I believe passionately in the benefits of economic growth, which include providing opportunities, enriching communities and improving people’s quality of life. I associate myself with Ken Macintosh’s amendment to the Scottish Government’s motion. When the Scottish Government talks about capital investment to support infrastructure and growth in the economy, Scots need to know that in the case of the Forth crossing the procurement process is growing the Chinese economy, and not ours—Ken Macintosh is absolutely right to highlight that in his amendment. We in Scotland are famous for our engineering abilities and our good engineering deeds around the world, so why oh why did we give the contract to China? Why did we not do it ourselves, given our proud history?

I am disappointed with that view. I would have thought that Mr Hepburn, of all people, would have supported an engineering project that was wholly constructed in Scotland—100 per cent and right across the board—rather than one that has been a case of picking and choosing bits and pieces. However, I will move on. The latest figures of the Committee of Scottish Bankers show that the number of new business accounts in the most recent quarter dropped by 8 per cent, compared with the same quarter in the previous year. I am particularly concerned about the 27 per cent slump in new business accounts in the construction industry, which bears out what Ken Macintosh’s amendment says about the pressures faced by that particular sector. The cabinet secretary is quite right to point out that there are issues there, which I accept. We need to address those issues and we are not doing that adequately. It is therefore very important that the issues are revisited and that investment is encouraged in that area. The construction industry had hoped that promises that were made would be kept, but, of course, they have not been. I am concerned that the Scottish Government’s motion is complacent. It talks about “taking direct action to tackle unemployment”, yet the number of Scots who have been unemployed for a year or more has almost doubled in the past 12 months. There are now more than six unemployed Scots for every Jobcentre Plus vacancy in Scotland, which is a worse figure than that for anywhere else in the UK. The so-called plan MacB is not working and neither are hundreds of thousands of Scots. That needs to be addressed. I return to the issue that I raised about small businesses and, more important, empty property rates relief. Last week, the Minister for Local Government and Planning suggested that he had consulted small businesses. I found that difficult to believe, so I carried out my own survey in Glasgow. Nicola Sturgeon will be interested to know that in her constituency, none of the shop owners to whom I spoke agrees with the minister’s findings. They all say that they would rather have a longer period than the suggested three months, and that the percentage drop will actually discourage investment. People in small industries, companies and organisations are terrified of having their properties lying vacant. A business’s property becomes vacant only when a business fails. It is very difficult to restart a business, and it is unrealistic to expect businesses to turn around in the speed that has been suggested. That is the verdict on the street.

I agree with John Mason absolutely. Like him, I was one of the councillors who were very unhappy with that situation. However, I am not talking about big business—I am talking about small business. Small businesses are the bread and butter of many families up and down our city of Glasgow, and small businesses do not agree with what we are suggesting for them in Parliament today. Big businesses are an issue, but I am quite comfortable with pursuing big businesses because—believe it or not—they can afford it, in most cases. I am looking for something unique and new. We cannot afford to continue to give chances to other organisations and other companies in other countries, although we should be proud of anything that will be developed in Scotland, and it is important that we build on that. However, small businesses in particular do not agree with Nicola Sturgeon. I am sure that she will be able to answer to some of the businesses directly.

Angus MacDonald made an excellent point about the need to protect small businesses throughout Scotland. That particularly applies to Glasgow, given the type of city that it is. Has anyone consulted the small independent businesses as opposed to the larger ones?

I want to reiterate that because small independent businesses have not been consulted, we are rather short on the facts. As Sarah Boyack said, so many details are missing that we cannot make a decision. I cannot emphasise too much that small businesses in cities up and down the country are being blocked and bogged down, and no one is talking to them. We are talking to institutions—unions and federations—but we are not talking to people who are at the coalface delivering a service. I ask the minister to address that point.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what the impact on colleges is of the reductions in their funding. (S4O-01186)

Good-quality education will be essential in growing our economy and allowing people to fulfil their potential. The Educational Institute of Scotland says that 1,800 jobs have already been lost in Scottish colleges. How many colleges have, as a result of the cuts, reduced real subjects, by which I mean courses on real topics, not those without any qualification value?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To assist the minister, I understand that, under the equalities legislation, all employers must produce a report that demonstrates figures for equality in terms of gender and so on. If that is the case, the legislation would surely accommodate such a requirement.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate, because tourism is a key part of the Scottish economy, as many members have said. A vibrant and thriving tourism industry is essential if we are to grow our economy in the years ahead. The additional conferences that Glasgow has recently won, with the conference bid fund’s support, are welcome. That underlines Glasgow’s status as one of the best conference destinations in the UK. I congratulate Glasgow on that. The Scottish Tourism Alliance recently published “Tourism Scotland 2020”—a strategy document that highlights the pressing need to increase the number of direct flights to and from Scotland. I have worked to reinstate the Pakistan International Airlines route between Glasgow and Lahore, which are twin cities, and I share the alliance’s enthusiasm for new routes. I am very supportive of driving that element of our business aspirations. Mr Ewing’s motion refers to devolving air passenger duty, but it fails to mention that the Scottish Government scrapped the air route development fund, which would have supported new air routes. Through that fund, the Scottish Government had the power to support new routes and grow our tourism. It is worth reconsidering the decision on that fund, and I look forward to the minister’s comments on that point. The Federation of Small Businesses estimates that 23 per cent of its Scottish members come from the tourism, hotel, restaurant and bar sectors. The Scottish Government refers in its motion to “industry leadership”, but I am not fully convinced that the tourism leadership group is truly representative of the tourism sector. I implore the Scottish Government to use every effort to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises are properly represented at the top table when our tourism sector is being discussed, whether inside or outside the leadership group. The quality of goods that are sold in Scotland is another issue that we must address. When visitors to Scotland purchase goods from our museums, visitor centres or shops such as those on the Royal Mile, we must ensure that they are of good quality. However, more important, we should encourage them to sell Scottish goods.

Dennis Robertson is going to get me into trouble with my imams. United Kingdom Border Agency immigration clearance officers have not been helpful with visa applications; they have refused many applications, which has offended our friends overseas. We need to address that situation, so I ask the Scottish Government to make representations in that regard. We must try to encourage tourism rather than discourage it.

Again, a member is trying to get me into trouble. The issue is the policy on immigration rather than who makes the decisions. Tourism is important for us because it is such a big part of our trade. However, the current policy means that we sometimes face the wrath of friends who have been here in the past and who we hope will return in the future. The refusal of visa applications offends families, which we should not be in the business of doing. I have one or two other observations. I congratulate the Glasgow City Marketing Bureau, whose chair is Councillor Gordon Matheson and whose chief executive is Scott Taylor. They and their board have made great strides in that area of work. It has taken them many years of hard work to get to where they are. However, we need to recognise that they have got there. I hope that their achievement will encourage other cities to try to match their aspirations, which I think is important. Glasgow welcomes many tourists and visitors from around the world, and it enjoys the luxury of having modern, up-to-date visitor attractions such as the Riverside museum and the Kelvingrove art gallery—recent figures show that they have both attracted around one million people. There is also the Glasgow gallery of modern art, which has attracted 600,000 people, the People’s palace and the Burrell collection—the list goes on. The beauty is that all of those places are free to enter, but we sometimes do not tell our visitors about such places. I am keen that the minister address three of the points that I have raised: the difficulties that some people face in coming to Scotland; how we can encourage new air routes to be established; and, last but not least, the issue of the quality of goods that people purchase when they are here. If we continue to sell to tourists goods of the quality that we currently peddle, it will reflect badly on our tourism industry.

The minister is quite right about equality and diversity. Annabel Goldie made a good point about gender and how one’s sex should not really matter when it comes to equality and equal opportunities. Does the minister recognise the fact that visible minorities are in the same position?

Will the member take an intervention?

No.

Thank you very much. I am not sure that Humza would appreciate that, but I certainly do. [Laughter.] I compliment Mark McDonald for what he said about victim support. Does he agree that there should also be support for people who speak different languages? So many languages are spoken across Scotland today and huge challenges are faced in that regard. I hope that he will agree that we need to concentrate on that and ensure that we get it right so that victims are fully supported in dealing with the difficulties that they face.

I am a realist and I know that some court buildings have outlived their usefulness. Nevertheless, local people—particularly victims—still need local courts where they can go. Sometimes, we take our eye off the ball in supporting our victims, especially the vulnerable, the very young and the elderly, and local courts are very important. I am open to the idea of refurbishing buildings or selling some of the older buildings that have outlived their usefulness in order to develop new ones. I know that it is a challenge, but I am sure that we can work something out.

Iceland is currently fishing stocks that we in Scotland helped to build up. I hope that there will be compensation for our fishermen and women, who preserved the stocks and must see someone else reaping the benefit of their efforts—unjustly, I may add. What penalties, if any, are being imposed on Iceland?

I, too, thank John Mason for bringing the debate to the chamber. He spoke eloquently about the plight of people around the world and not just in India. Balwant Singh Rajoana’s case is not a single issue; a big issue is involved. India is surrounded by hostile countries—Pakistan, China, Burma and others—and there are huge pressures on its security and wellbeing. Since gaining its freedom and independence, India has struggled to secure its borders. I understand the challenges that the Indian authorities face but, unfortunately, I cannot agree with them on the death penalty. As far as I am concerned, taking a life is not an option. There are huge issues in communities. As a child, I saw a film with a story about a father and husband who was found guilty of a crime. He was given a death sentence and, after he passed away, the truth that he was innocent came out. That has stayed in my mind since childhood, when I realised for the first time that, if such a sentence is given wrongly, it cannot be fixed. Once a life has been taken, it cannot be brought back, as Humza Yousaf was right to say. Such issues are very important. Democracies around the world have a huge challenge. They have the challenge of ensuring their citizens’ wellbeing and securing their borders, but they must also show compassion and show that they are above what others do. That is important. I see much indifference in countries around the world and I see the hypocrisy of some laws that are out there. I cannot justify people resorting to taking lives. That is why I wrote to the President of India. India is the largest democracy in the world, and a big brother—I do not call it a small brother, but a big brother. It is full of history and tradition, and it is rich and diverse. I have had the privilege and the pleasure of travelling in India, and I am nothing but impressed by what I see there. I had the opportunity to visit the Golden temple before and after its storming, and to visit other parts of India. I have always come back enriched by and impressed with what India has to offer its people. I request the Indian Government to consider removing the death penalty from its statutes, as that is important and fundamental. The Sikh community in Scotland, in the UK and around the world is fighting for not only one individual, but a just cause, which is that we should not be taking life. I wish the community Sat Sri Akal for joining us in the public gallery today. It is always a pleasure to work with the community, which has done a lot for Scotland and for the United Kingdom, and it is right that the community looks to the Parliament to support it in its hour of need. I reiterate that I would welcome the Indian Government’s decision to withdraw the death penalty for all its citizens, and I wish the community luck with that.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to tackle unemployment. (S4O-01062)

Three out of the four Scottish constituencies with the highest rate of people on jobseekers allowance—Maryhill and Springburn, Pollok, and Provan—are in Glasgow. Although there was a small and welcome fall in the claimant count last year, the number of people without a job for a year or more, including women and the youth workforce, rose by 11 per cent in Glasgow in the last year. What is the Scottish Executive doing to address that extremely concerning trend in Glasgow?

You talk about overseas investment. Do you think that there is any mileage in having Scottish bonds to encourage overseas investment in Scotland as a safe haven?

I refer to the issue that I raised in the debate on educational attainment on 11 January 2012. Recommendation 6 of a session 3 report by the European and External Relations Committee stated that the committee was concerned about the “poor linguistic performance” of the Scottish people. In that debate, I spoke of there being no provision for Punjabi speakers in our schools. I also noted SQA claims that there are not sufficient Punjabi speakers and that there is insufficient demand for the language—despite the fact that Punjabi is, after English, the most widely spoken language in Scotland. I asked the Minister for Children and Young People to explain how the SQA could reach such a conclusion. She said that Alasdair Allan would speak to me about what could be done, but no information has yet been forthcoming. I again ask the minister and the Scottish Government to take serious note of the issue and to acknowledge that there needs to be a broad base of language skills in Scotland for international trade, and to support families and service users who speak languages such as Punjabi, Polish, Arabic, Urdu and Cantonese. Although it is possible to gain standard grade and higher qualifications in Urdu and Cantonese, no such qualifications or teaching are available for the Punjabi language, even though it is the second most commonly spoken language in Scotland and despite the fact that there are more than 2 million Punjabi speakers in the UK. In Glasgow, very little Punjabi is taught in mainstream secondary schools. No SQA exams in Punjabi are available at school or national qualifications level. When students wish to sit exams in Punjabi, they must do so through an accredited centre for the Assessment and Qualifications Alliance, which is an English examining body. Although there is some provision for language learning outside school—for example, there is some community provision in mosques and gurdwaras in Glasgow—no non-native speakers undertake Urdu at secondary level, although there are some non-native speakers at primary level. Why is that not being continued into secondary education? Our challenge is clear. We face staffing, recruitment and maintenance issues, and require the SQA to examine the issue in depth. We also need to look at and be more vocal on how speakers of any non-standard language in Scotland are treated.

I thank the minister for that. It is very welcome and I will take him up on the offer. We must acknowledge the increasing number of languages that are spoken in Scotland today. The use of Chinese has grown over the past five years, which seems to be a response to the interest in the booming Chinese economy and the relationship between our countries. At least some people feel that some knowledge of the language is a good opportunity for trade in any country. That, and the need to support students, families and communities in order to raise the level of language learning should be aided by the SQA and the Scottish Government. I am also keen to find out what is being done by the British Council. What is its role in supporting the learning of languages in Scotland? I would appreciate the minister’s investigating what other support we can get from the British Council for our endeavour to support language learning. A Punjabi speaker would say that his Punjabi is just as loved and valuable as any other language. I will say that in Punjabi, if I may. The member spoke in Punjabi. That is from a Scotland-born lad, and it shows that I learned that language outwith the school curriculum. I was lucky; I had the opportunity. Opportunities are still available and, as has already been pointed out, we have communities who have come from all around the world whom we could take full advantage of in order to help our pupils through twinning arrangements, or however we want to do it. That would be very helpful. It is important for us to demonstrate our willingness to engage in learning other languages because it plays a vital role. During my travels overseas, I have learned that when a person speaks the language of the country that they are visiting, they receive a far more welcoming reception than they would if they did not know the language.

I agree with what the member says about language provision at the University of Glasgow. The cuts have obviously had an effect but, rather than make a negative comment, I will make a positive one. We need to look at ways of funding universities so that Scots continue to have the opportunity to learn such skills. One possible way forward would be to encourage private industry to step in and support universities locally. Perhaps the minister could shine some light on that.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to reduce waiting times in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S4O-01015)

Health boards are required to ensure that the minimum length of time from arrival at accident and emergency to admission, discharge or transfer is four hours for 98 per cent of patients. However, none of the A and E departments in Greater Glasgow and Clyde is meeting that standard. What will the Scottish Government do to address that?

I am a bit of an expert on the subject, in which I have practical experience. One issue in relation to obesity is that proper care is not provided at the very early stages. When I was a child, my mother fed me double doses of milk, which the NHS did not really pick up or follow through. That means that I have been overweight throughout my life. Does the member agree that, to prevent obesity, we need to tackle that important issue at a very early stage?

How will the council exchange views with the new police force? At the moment, representatives go before a board. If, as the member suggests, the whole council will be involved, what shape will that involvement take?

I am keen to ensure that the quality of service provided by the fire service and the police force locally in some areas is not only retained but rolled out across Scotland. Some fire brigades and police services have achieved very high-quality standards that I would not want to see eroded by some of the other services that perhaps have been lagging behind and are trying to catch up to that standard. It is important that the local authorities that have made huge investments and have been prudent and professional do not feel that they have lost a quality of service that has taken a long time to build. It is important that confidence remains in place. I have had discussions with various people and I had the opportunity to sit on the Strathclyde police authority and the Strathclyde fire and rescue board. The amount of work and the diversity in the services is amazing. Policing is not only about attending to a fight in a back court or chasing a robber in the street. It is about everything from community safety to liaison and supporting communities. Our officers are overstretched as it is. When an officer comes on duty, he or she has almost back-to-back inquiries. Because of the huge challenges that they face, officers do not really have the opportunity to mix with communities that they had in the past. However, the job is one that most officers enjoy and they do it well under difficult circumstances. Obviously, our job is to ensure that we protect that historic engagement with communities. I learned amazing things about what Strathclyde Fire and Rescue does for communities while I was on the board: fire alarms, community safety—things that were not done in the past. Those things have helped to save many lives. The credit for that goes to our officers in the field. That is why it is imperative that we continue to build on the standards that we have achieved historically in Scotland. I am pleased to say that I genuinely believe that our services are envied around the world because of those standards and the level of quality that we provide. We have an opportunity to ensure that we can share that good practice by selling quality training to people around the world. We can do that by ensuring that our training facilities are in place. Strathclyde Fire and Rescue is building a purpose-built centre for training its own officers. That facility could also be used to deliver services to others. Tulliallan could also be used—it is a place that delivers the finest training opportunities. It has done so for people from overseas in the past. I want to see that service retained and built on so that our officers can share good practice around the world. That would not only support us here on a national level but promote our badge overseas as being a country that engages with people in a positive way. We used to do it, but that role changed over time and we need to rekindle that effort. I also believe that there will be opportunities for our young people when we have a national service—we can be more focused on what we deliver for them. There is a lot of youth unemployment and we need to try to change that trend. The Government promised another 1,000 officers on the beat. It has been suggested that most of them are working in back offices—yes, that happens, but it is not our job to micromanage. Our job in the Parliament is to ensure that we put the mechanism in place to deliver that service. It is up to the senior officers to ensure that they improve that service. If there are shortcomings, it is our job to support those officers so that they can overcome those difficulties. We need to be positive and focused and, when people bring shortcomings to our attention, we should deal with them. We should not be ashamed of doing that. I wonder whether there is also an opportunity to enhance the service in terms of our ambulance services. Currently, the Scottish Ambulance Service board shares its medical director with the NHS 24 board. Why are we not doing something similar elsewhere? Is there any mileage in the proposed Scottish fire service being amalgamated and merged with the Scottish Ambulance Service, or in the Scottish Ambulance Service merging with NHS 24. At the end of the day, we are talking about our uniformed services and about services to our communities. We are talking about focusing our resources to ensure that we have the best of services on the street, so that our communities benefit from the most efficient services possible. Let us not restrict ourselves to the fire and police services—we should also examine the Ambulance Service. That would enhance the quality of the service that we already have. It would also allow us the opportunity to look at the Ambulance Service from a different perspective and to see what mileage there is to enhance that service’s quality as well, because that service is also overstretched. I believe that there is a job to be done there as well. I am keen to hear whether the minister will comment on that—

Finally, if I am allowed to, I was wondering—

Thank you.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to take part in the debate and I welcome the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report on the 2012 commitment on homelessness in Scotland. I will focus on Glasgow, which is the area that I represent. Glasgow City Council pointed out in its submission to the committee’s inquiry that in 2010-11 the city received 19 per cent of the total number of homelessness applications, although the area’s share of the population is only 11 per cent. Although the council has made good progress towards meeting the 2012 target, one of the main barriers that remains is the shortage of quality social housing. It is important that the 10,000 new homes that housing associations promised at the time of the Glasgow stock transfer are delivered. The city council is working in partnership with Glasgow Housing Association and other registered social landlords and charities to secure a greater number of lets for homeless households. The council’s job has been made more difficult by the UK Government’s changes to housing benefit funding, which have forced the council to make savings from its homelessness services budget, including through staff reductions. I therefore warmly welcome paragraphs 44 and 47 of the report and the recommendation that the Scottish Government include “money advice and debt counselling as an integral part of the housing support to be made available to persons who are homeless or threatened with homelessness”. I commend the work of the prevention of homelessness partnership, which is led by Govan Law Centre. The partnership has done a particularly good job. The 2012 commitment has already improved the lot of homeless families in Glasgow and beyond, but I concur with the committee’s conclusion that challenges remain and that councils will need support from the Scottish Government if they are to meet those challenges and resolve the issues. Housing associations are under pressure in relation to property sales, but the resource from sales does not go back into associations’ coffers. That is stunting opportunities for housing growth in Scotland. I suggest that the money from sales should go back to the housing associations, with a view to it being spent on the construction of new homes. That would contribute to the Scottish Government’s commitment to have more houses on the ground.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides to encourage bus travel. (S4O-00905)

First bus services in Glasgow will suffer deep cuts and fare rises of up to 28 per cent at the end of this month. The managing director of First has said: “Decisions taken by the Scottish Government to make substantial cuts to the funding it provides Scottish bus operators have triggered fare rises and service cuts across Scotland. Unfortunately, similar action at First Glasgow is unavoidable.” Fifty-eight per cent of Glaswegians have no access to a car.

Will the minister think again, put Glasgow bus passengers first, revise his bus funding cuts and, as a Glaswegian would say, give us a break?

Before I speak in support of the committee’s report, I congratulate our convener, Christina McKelvie, on arranging equalities training for our committee, which is a first in the Parliament. It is a historic event, and I take this opportunity to thank and congratulate her. It is right that we are debating the key European issues today, as much of the business of the Scottish Parliament’s committees is affected by decisions that are taken in Brussels. The people of Scotland must know that its Parliament in Edinburgh is looking after their interests and that we are listening to their concerns and adding strength by carrying their message to Brussels. To fulfil that role, we must always ensure that the people of Scotland know what is happening in Brussels and how it affects their lives. We must use all the resources that are at our disposal, including our officials in Brussels, our representatives in the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments and our members of the European Parliament. I take on board the comments that Patricia Ferguson and Jamie McGrigor made about the timing of the report to the Parliament. In our role, we must listen carefully to what is going on and consider how things can be developed. Once we know what is going on, it is essential that we get into the right rooms in Brussels—the rooms where the issues are prepared, debated and ultimately decided on. We have the resources at our disposal to do that job. We have heard from representatives of other committees about their intentions to act, and we heard from Christina McKelvie and Fiona Hyslop about how we intend to take forward our programme. We heard about the common agricultural policy, which has such an influence not just on our farmers but on our countryside and our environment. The common fisheries policy—there is a lot of fishy stuff going on there, by the way—is undergoing much-needed reform, and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee is working to ensure that the changes are right for Scotland. Also important to Scotland are the opportunities and challenges that are afforded by developments in the energy sector, be they in the North Sea grid initiative to connect Scotland’s energy generation to Europe or the various proposals in the field of renewable energy. We must develop strong and positive links in that area. Europe is an essential funding source for Scotland. As has been highlighted, my committee is currently engaged in examining two major funding streams: the structural funds and the horizon 2020 fund for research and innovation. We will report to the Parliament in due course on those funding streams, but it is important to note that they will be vital for Scotland’s recovery. EU policies on infrastructure for broadband and ferry lines will have a significant impact on the daily lives of the people of Scotland. We will monitor progress on those issues. Jamie McGrigor mentioned the importance of broadband in rural areas. I assure everyone here today that broadband is important for us all, throughout Scotland, because we are competing in the international arena and the speed and reliability of broadband are critically important in that regard. We need to work hard to ensure that we deliver a positive service. What happens next? This debate is only a beginning. The serious work for many of us has already begun and we have not a moment to lose. We must ensure that Scotland gets its fair share of funding; that its voice is heard and understood in Brussels; that we are able to warn of impending challenges and upcoming opportunities; and that we play our part in building the Europe that we want to live in. I have noted a reluctance by UK ministers to engage fully with the Scottish Government, which is very unhelpful. We are partners and it is disappointing that that happens in a partnership. Communication between partners is important, but currently it is at best poor and sometimes non-existent. An example of that was the use of the veto by the UK Prime Minister, with no consultation or notification for the Scottish Government. I think that that was outrageous at the very least. We live in a new world with new challenges, with people demanding higher levels of accountability. The Governments in London and Brussels need to recognise that new reality. We have to learn the lessons that other Governments have failed to learn. When Governments fail to listen to their people, they pay a very heavy price. I hope that we do not have to do that. I am grateful to the members of our committee. It has been a huge pleasure to serve on the committee, because very valuable and positive work has been done. We have had many presentations from witnesses, who gave us expert advice. However, it is important to recognise that the reluctance to which I referred earlier means that we sometimes undersell ourselves. We cannot afford to do that. My message to the Government is that we need to ensure that we are a strong team, but we can do that only if we talk to each other. The cabinet secretary may wish to comment on that. However, she has already given a very good presentation on the issue.

This is an interesting topic. I have witnessed huge amounts of difficulty overseas, in particular for farmers who have smallholdings. When an inheritance has gone unregistered for many years, the true inheritors, what land they own and where it is all need to be identified. We will face similar, historical difficulties here. However, I want to talk about another area. There is a moral responsibility for some of the larger landholders, particularly in Scotland, to register in order to kick-start the process. That would be welcome. Some of the larger landholders, such as the Scottish Government itself and the Ministry of Defence, need to lead by example. I got a few ballpark figures on ownership from the Scottish Parliament information centre today. In Scotland, the MOD owns approximately 23,500 hectares, and has 541 hectares, or thereabouts, of land on lease. It also has training rights over a further 120,000 hectares—land for non-exclusive use in military training. That is a lot of land, and I wonder how much of it is registered. The MOD also owns sites of great value, including grade A, B and C listed buildings, and sites of special scientific interest, protected areas, conservation areas and wetlands of international importance. With the shrinking of the armed forces, what will happen to those sites? Will they be returned to the national parks or to communities? Recently, I watched a programme about how the Victorians left us wonderful parks in our cities, which their descendants enjoy today. Will some of the MOD’s sites be left to future generations of our children and grandchildren to enjoy? The important thing in all of this is registration. If large corporations and other large landholders are encouraged to register, some of our smaller landholders will be encouraged to do so, too, particularly those in our farming community who are challenged at the best of times, and this is a difficult period for them. To support our smaller landholders, I suggest that we ensure that they at least have free registration in the first instance, especially families who have inherited difficulties and have the complicated task of clearing up previously undone business. Online registration is very important. I was recently overseas, and saw that India and Pakistan—countries that have been in business for fewer than 70 years—are going down that route. We have a lot to learn from some of the people overseas who have already done this. Registration is absolutely fundamental if we are to have proper, accurate records, and we should all be able to access information about who owns what. Without that accuracy, neighbours who have had good relations for generations can fall out over small differences. I emphasise that we need to lead by example and ensure that our house is in order before we encourage others. More important, we need to force the issue of registration, so that we have accurate records.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The Scottish climate justice fund is very welcome. Does the member agree—and perhaps the minister could deal with this when he sums up—that we could consider funding wind turbine manufacture in Scotland? That could assist with what we are trying to do—and we could export the ideas as well.

I agree with the member and I do not agree with the member. I agree that all cities should welcome this opportunity, but I urge him not to undersell Aberdeen. Glasgow and Aberdeen are just as fine as Edinburgh, and we should encourage the bank to grow and go to all those cities.

I am pleased to co-operate with the minister on this occasion. Has any thought been given to expanding the institution across Scotland? I appreciate that we are determined to ensure that we succeed in Edinburgh in the first instance, but is there a structure in place to encourage other cities, such as Glasgow and Aberdeen?

I welcome the year of creative Scotland in 2012 and the chance to participate in the debate. Creative industries are an important driver in the economic growth of Scotland, and we should use them to encourage inward investment. In particular, we should do more to support our film industry. I hope that the Scottish Government will resist the temptation to follow the UK Government’s example of cutting funds to the film industry. The motion talks about Scotland being “a world-class cultural tourism destination.” That is true. We have more than 150 diverse communities, and our museums and galleries—including the Riverside museum and the Kelvingrove art gallery and museum in Glasgow—are great assets in attracting visitors. The museums are free, thanks to Glasgow City Council, as are many similar museums and galleries around Scotland. What assurances can the cabinet secretary give in her summing up that she will work with councils to ensure that museums maintain a free admission policy? The recent success of Scottish artists—in particular, Glasgow artists—in the Turner prize competition presents an opportunity. The Turner prize exhibition is now held outside London every odd year and attracts 15,000 visitors. I hope that the Scottish Government will join me in backing Glasgow as a preferred location for the 2015 exhibition, cementing Glasgow’s reputation as a vibrant centre for the arts and boosting our economy. Many people around the world recognise the bagpipes and tartan as symbols of Scotland. However, visitors to our country and our shops—for example, those in the Royal Mile, not far from here—find it easy to buy bagpipes and kilts that are made overseas. We must do more to protect quality and locate manufacturing; more could also be done on labelling the products to ensure that visitors can tell the difference between quality, hand-crafted Scottish products and mass-produced imitations that are made—usually with cheap labour—thousands of miles away. I will stay with the theme of products. I am keen for visitors to the Commonwealth games to be encouraged to see as much of Scotland as possible. Could each city have its own range of official memorabilia that was available only in that city, to promote visits to those destinations? The three-year cultural plan offers a fantastic opportunity to showcase Scotland to the world. Work must be done to secure major events beyond 2014, which I hope will include the 2015 Turner prize exhibition in my own great city of Glasgow. We have an opportunity. We all talk about culture and many events, but a lot of historical facts are attached to our cultural diversity. My colleague Drew Smith jokingly talked about the Olympic rings coming to Glasgow, but he made an important point. Our Glasgow youngsters know only one type of ring, and getting another type of ring to Glasgow would be important. He talked about George Square and the squinty bridge as locations. They are wonderful sites—the squinty bridge is near the television studios, which could use it as a backdrop. The rings could be outside Central station, where a lot of travellers from all over will arrive. Those small details make a difference. Glasgow is the heart of Scotland; it is the steam engine. A lot of good things happen there and come from there. Glasgow represents people throughout Scotland. That is not an Edinburgh or Glasgow issue—it is just reality. I want to concentrate on our young, who still do not have the diverse opportunities that they should have. For example, Glasgow has two bagpipe manufacturers. The bagpipes are a Scottish instrument and they are played mostly in Scotland, yet Pakistan makes more bagpipes than us. Why is that? We need to encourage our industry by supporting it to continue to create high-quality goods. We must ensure that, on the high street, people recognise the difference between quality and what is second best. I am keen to know whether the Government can help our industries. As I said, Glasgow has two companies that manufacture bagpipes and other items that go with them. We must ensure that such companies are geared up to take on the opportunity of the Commonwealth games and that they build on that.

One of the things that I tried to highlight in my speech was that Scottish produce is an important element in all this. Is there any mileage in trying to ensure that all our museums sell only products that are produced and manufactured in Scotland? Could we ensure that shops in high streets in Scotland—for example, the Royal Mile, and Argyle Street in Glasgow—have special labels that tell tourists that every product sold in that particular outlet is manufactured in Scotland?

I thank Stewart Maxwell for bringing the debate to the chamber. Does Liam McArthur agree that although the Holocaust is an example for humankind, and a scar on society from which we must learn lessons, we are still making the same mistakes around the world, for example in Bosnia, Africa and so on? It is crucial that the Parliament and the people of Scotland learn our lessons from what happened in the Holocaust and ensure that it is not repeated anywhere else.

I agree with what the member is saying and am pleased that he is saying it but, when it comes to increasing awareness among communities, does he agree that the minister should look at ways of encouraging people from the minority communities, in particular, to participate in elections? One way of doing that would be to ensure that they are registered to vote. Many members of those communities are not registered to vote, which means that at every election they miss out on the opportunity to exercise their democratic right.

I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in this important debate. I have listened close and hard to the debate and I have to say that a lot of very positive things have been said about many cities, including Glasgow. It would be remiss of me not to add my bit for my city by saying how wonderful Glasgow is, how wonderful its citizens are, how well we are doing in Glasgow, that we are the second-biggest retail outlet in the UK after London and that we reach out to many parts of the world. On a serious note, we are discussing an important issue. One thing that is missing is the link between our cities and our strategy in our overseas commitments and our vision of what we want to achieve in the long term. We want to see how we can add more and what else we can bring to the table. Although we recognise the skills, abilities, knowledge and structure in our cities, we do not have a clear and distinct policy for the development of our infrastructure, which would support our investments overseas and, more important, encourage overseas investors to invest in Scotland. Four of our major cities have twinning agreements and memorandums of understanding across the world. In the 18 different countries with which we engage, Scottish cities are engaged with 27 cities or destinations. My point is: how does that impinge on our structure? How will we make sense of all that now that there is a Scottish Parliament? We need to understand that before the Scottish Parliament, Scottish cities dealt with overseas issues. Now that we have a Scottish Parliament, we need to be more focused in how we continue our engagement overseas. The Scottish badge is recognised around the world and many people appreciate the good things that we do. We have invented a lot of good things. We have a good country and a good tourism business and industry, but what else can we do? How can we promote our cities better? How can we interlink these—

My learned friend will be pleased to know that I agree with him. That is exactly the point that I am making. For example, four cities in Scotland have twinning agreements with four German cities—they are all different cities. We have four cities in Scotland twinned with four cities in France. I want to encourage a joined-up policy and find out how we can benefit from that twinning. What is the point of having twinnings if no benefit comes to the country? We have twinning agreements with cities all over the world—in China, Russia, Cuba and Pakistan. What is coming back? Are they just documents that are signed and put away, or will we actually get some trade from them? We have some limited cultural exchanges, but a lot of expense goes into the issue. A lot of trade delegations go out, but it is important that we as a Parliament assist the cities in coming up with a structure that is more useful, productive and focused on what we are trying to do. Cuba has twinning agreements with more than 50 countries. It does not trade with them; they are bits of paper. We need to avoid that approach and ensure that our twinnings are meaningful and not just cultural exchanges. We have to learn from each other. The cities growth fund and the Government’s economic strategy are just as important as the twinnings. I listened to Drew Smith talk about our infrastructure and transport. One thing that is dear to me is the Glasgow airport rail link. It would be a very important piece of infrastructure for this country. That is true for all our airports: we need good, positive transport infrastructure so that our businesses can be encouraged and we can encourage others to come here to develop. If our infrastructure is poor, people will be reluctant to come. Companies do not have money to burn, and they are looking for safe havens. They cannot find a safer, more developed and hungrier country to develop in than Scotland, but we must have the infrastructure in place to encourage them to come here. That is why it is so important. We have recognised the skills, ability and positive things that there are in cities in Scotland. One city that has not been mentioned so far is Stirling—that is a wonderful city, too. We need to encourage a strategy that will be beneficial to us in terms of our infrastructure and industry.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate, particularly as I am a Glasgow MSP. Glasgow has around 10 per cent of Scotland’s children and young people, but it has more than 20 per cent of Scotland’s looked-after children, which I understand is the highest proportion of any area in the country. Glasgow therefore has a particular interest in the issue, but the debate is important and timely for every member in the chamber, wherever they come from in Scotland. I declare an interest as a member of Glasgow City Council. In Glasgow, the proportion of looked-after children who achieve five or more Scottish credit and qualifications framework awards at level 4 or above is 24 per cent, in comparison with 72 per cent of children who are not looked after. I welcome the progress that the Scottish Government and previous Scottish Governments have made in having care plans produced for nearly all looked-after children and in having such children included in the strategic priorities of most local authorities. However, more needs to be done. The trend during the past few years has been an improvement in attainment and exclusion levels, but looked-after children still lag too far behind on those measures. Further progress is at risk of being stunted if cuts continue to be made to support staff in our schools. Scotland has lost 115 support staff from its schools in the past year, and an astonishing 1,452 support staff from its secondary schools in the same period. Perhaps the minister will tell us in summing up how we will improve outcomes with 1,600 fewer support staff. Recommendation 6 in the recent European and External Relations Committee report from session 3 states that the committee is concerned about the “poor linguistic performance of the Scottish population” and refers to people having two native languages and language skills. A case in point is the facility for Punjabi in our schools. At the moment, there is no provision for Punjabi speakers in our schools. We do not allow them to use Punjabi in examinations because the Scottish Qualifications Authority claims that there are not sufficient Punjabi speakers and that there is insufficient demand for the language. However, after English, Punjabi is the most widely spoken language in Scotland. I do not know how the SQA has come to that conclusion and I ask the minister to comment on that. I am hopeful that the minister will take steps to address the issue for the Punjabi-speaking community. We go on about encouraging languages, yet we fail our community in that way. In spite of an increase in assistance for looked-after children, progress is still too slow and is in danger of grinding to a halt because of budgetary constraints. I welcome the Education and Culture Committee’s inquiry and I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say about addressing the issues. Education is very important and we tend to put pressure on agencies to provide support for our young people, but we are perhaps not supporting the parents. A lot of parents—in particular, single parents—find it very difficult to bring up children and to support them in their education. There must be some provision for them, and we must support our schools in delivering that provision, as there does not seem to be any other window of opportunity. Young parents engage with schools more readily and regularly. Therefore, I ask the minister whether she can try to find some support to enable schools to provide additional support for single parents and parents who are experiencing difficulties, so that we give those children a fair opportunity in life.

I begin my remarks by highlighting the achievement that the securing of the Commonwealth games for Glasgow and Scotland represents. As a Glasgow councillor for 17 years, I particularly want to commend Glasgow City Council for its efforts in successfully bidding to host this international event, which will showcase our great city and our great country. I will let others speak about the sporting aspects of the games and the objective of increasing participation in sport, as I am sure that others are better qualified than me to talk about that. I want instead to touch on four other aspects of the games: the lessons to be learned from history about infrastructure, the ways in which we can promote Scotland to the Commonwealth, how we can use the games to enhance community cohesion, and how we can maximise the opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises. I welcome the update paper, “A Games Legacy for Scotland”, and the work that is being done to ensure a lasting legacy for Glasgow and Scotland. We need only look back to the Commonwealth games in Edinburgh in 1986 to see how a potential legacy can be squandered. Meadowbank stadium is decaying and is destined for demolition. The train station across the road, which was opened specially for the games, lies empty and unused, and the tracks that once linked the stadium directly with Waverley station have been lifted. If there was a legacy of the Edinburgh games, it was civic debt, as they lost the city £3 million on expenditure of £14 million. On the promotion of Scotland to the Commonwealth, I believe that the games present a great opportunity to strengthen the Scottish brand abroad, enhance the image of our country and renew friendships with other nations. I therefore welcome the partnership between VisitScotland and VisitBritain to promote Scotland during the coming Olympic year. Perhaps the minister will explain how that increased visibility can be sustained beyond the London Olympics. On community cohesion, the Parliament will be aware that Glasgow—and Scotland more broadly—is home to many thousands of people with a connection to the Commonwealth countries. However, I have not yet heard mention of how communities can be encouraged to engage in the games and, in particular, provide support to athletes and supporters from countries with which our citizens have a link. That would help to celebrate the fact that we are one Glasgow, woven together by many diverse threads. I feel strongly that the commercial benefits that may be gained from the games should not be solely the preserve of large, multinational corporations. The legacy update document states that Scottish businesses have won 133 of the 171 contracts that have been awarded through the Glasgow business portal. Perhaps the minister could tell us how many of those 133 contracts were won by small and medium-sized enterprises. I fear that small businesses find the tendering process for games contracts complex and somewhat daunting. We need to redouble our efforts in that regard and ensure that as many of our smaller firms as possible can tender for contracts, and that they can compete on a level playing field with larger companies. By ensuring that smaller firms get their fair share of the contracts, we will go a long way towards ensuring that the financial benefits of the games find their way into local communities in Glasgow and other parts of Scotland, which will give a boost to our economy. It might be possible to engage with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to explore the possibility of bringing together councils throughout Scotland to support our potential heroes—when they are selected—by providing free use of sporting and events facilities, and even free transport if that can assist them. The Commonwealth games present a great opportunity to promote Glasgow and Scotland to the Commonwealth, but we seek benefits for the city’s wellbeing beyond the last race in 2014. I welcome this debate as part of the process of securing that legacy. As a Glasgow MSP, I will do my best to make the games a success, and I look forward to the future updates that my colleague Patricia Ferguson’s amendment requests, as 2014 draws closer.

Will the member give way?

The debate has been very interesting and I congratulate Iain Gray on bringing it to the chamber, as it is on a very important element of our society today in Scotland. People’s hopes and aspirations develop early on in life and if they do not get the right breaks at the right time, we suffer as a community. I was one of the very fortunate people who enjoyed education in Scotland, going to primary school for a short time, going on to secondary education, leaving without many qualifications, going overseas for employment, coming back and going to college and on to university. I am grateful for that opportunity and our young deserve those opportunities that we all cherish so much. What is more important for society today is where we—and Scotland—go from here, what we want to aspire to and how we want to take the journey. One of the best ways of taking the journey is through education. There is absolutely no doubt in my mind that education forms a very important element of development. Time and again, I see how education builds strong character and contributes to our economy in more than one way, and that is why I am very keen to see education progress in the future. Our young deserve something very important—education not only at school, but also at colleges and universities. Unfortunately, there are shortcomings in our further education system: we have seen subjects being dropped and choice being reduced. Another important and serious question is why have we allowed that to happen and how can we change it? I keep saying to myself, negative politics is unhelpful; we need to find solutions. We have a responsibility to find solutions and if we do not come up with them, we fail our generations again and again. I want to give a few ideas about how we might contribute, particularly through education. I genuinely believe that the British Council is not doing a fair job for Scotland. I do not think that it is engaging enough with people overseas to encourage people to come to Scotland for further education, which would help our education system. We have embassies all over the world. What are they actually doing for us? Who are they sending to Scotland? It is very important that we get those departments to account for what is happening, because unless we have investment in these industries, we will suffer and our generations will suffer, and that should not be allowed. We need to focus our minds on generating new income, or we will be failing our society today. We need to hunt for that new income and we need to ask the departments that are supposed to be representing our interests what they are actually doing for us.

Good morning. I will be a little different today. I am new to the game of politics in the Scottish Parliament, so I will try not to criticise anybody. It is important to find a solution. We have a tremendous service, of which I am a customer—I have been so since birth. I continue to enjoy the services in our hotels—I call hospitals that because the only time that I get a rest is when I am in hospital. As a patient in hospital, I have noticed the tremendous work that all the people there do. Every one of our staff does tremendous work for us in what we accept are extremely difficult circumstances. I know for a fact that no member would disagree with that. The important issue is how we retain and develop that service. I have reams of figures for all the cuts that departments face. Cuts are a reality. I have been in politics for 17 years and I have not experienced a year in which a cut has not been made. I have seen cuts and cuts. A lot of times, I have wondered when the cuts would stop. I do not see the light at the end of the tunnel—the tunnel is circular and there is no light at the end of it. We need to start thinking outside the box and to ask how we deal with the situation. One way of dealing with it is to develop the service. We are proud that the national health service is one of the best health services in the world. We are also proud that we work with people overseas, but we have done so through token gestures and not seriously. We do not invite patients from overseas to come here, as is done in other countries. Australia, India, China and now Malaysia all sell facilities. We should look at encouraging such trade, if we are looking for new input to inject cash into our hospitals and our service. If we do not have money at home, we must look for it elsewhere. The market is global and we must compete. At home, we have a lot of issues. We have people from 140 communities who travel all over the world and return with all sorts of challenges for us with diseases. Recently, I was in Lahore in Pakistan. It is a twin city of Glasgow, which has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Punjab Government. The Chief Minister there sent a message to the Scottish Parliament in which he asked the Parliament for assistance in dealing with dengue fever, as people out there have been challenged by a new outbreak. At a meeting there, I realised how fortunate we are to be protected by so much. However, we are also vulnerable. Developing our international links and encouraging such trade would be helpful. I plead with the cabinet secretary—although I know that I do not have to, as I am pushing at an open door—to save the service. I am keen for the Government to develop opportunities for fresh input into the service that is not just from Government funding. We need a new injection of resource into the service, for which we need to look outside the box for once.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports work on human rights education in schools, colleges and universities. (S4O-00310)

When will there be national implementation of the strategy and the development of human rights education in Scotland? Moreover, is the minister in a position to advise when the Scottish Human Rights Commission will promote national awareness, respect and understanding of human rights and when it will publish its report?

One of the issues facing minority communities, particularly visible minority communities, is that adoptions are not taking place within those communities—children are being denied that opportunity. They lose not only skills and language but their cultural and religious background. Will the minister instruct local authorities to make the adoption system a little easier and, more important, better understood by minority communities so that they can play a fuller role in the community?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to ensure that local bus services are protected during the economic downturn. (S4O-00242)

We have seen what happened down south in England when transport budgets were cut, with very vulnerable people being affected. I seek an assurance that that will not happen in Scotland.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it promotes Scottish universities to overseas students. (S4O-00160)

Over the past decade, successive Administrations have done a great deal of work to increase the number of students who come to Scottish universities. We punch way above our weight, as 19 per cent of students at Scottish universities are overseas students, in comparison with 16 per cent at United Kingdom universities. However, in my area, the cuts in courses are valued at around £20 million at the University of Glasgow and £12 million at the University of Strathclyde. How will the Executive ensure that such institutions continue to attract overseas students and provide a broad base of education for home students?

I will bring two housing issues to the cabinet secretary’s attention. As she knows from her constituency, the ethnic minority communities in Scotland suffer from a lack of housing. Not only do they seem unable to get appropriate housing, but new developers are building small houses, which means that large families that wish to remain together do not have the opportunity to do so. I hope that she will promise to ensure that that issue is taken into account and that housing associations reflect the communities that they serve.

The minister will not need reminding that we are a nation of inventors. The proposed new community schemes are excellent and very welcome, but I hope that we will have provision to protect any new schemes that come forward, particularly when it comes to international patenting and so on. Community groups will not have the appropriate resource to back up any inventions that they come up with. Secondly, the reporting back to the Parliament needs to be more focused. The challenge for us as a nation is huge, and we should not just say that there will be reports back as and when we need updated; I think we should have a regular arrangement, so that we can focus on where we are going and monitor and benchmark our success.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of Glasgow for electing me to represent their interests in the Scottish Parliament. It is a huge pleasure and privilege for me, as a Glasgow lad who always wanted to come to this chamber. At long last, the people of Glasgow have offered me the opportunity. I hope to do them proud. I wish well the people who did not make it to the Parliament—whether the ex-MSPs or the new hopefuls. I also congratulate the Labour Party, because at long last it has managed to get somebody from an ethnic minority into this chamber. That is a welcome development, and I hope that the party can build on it. I hope to help the party in that aim. I give particular thanks to all the community groups that are working so hard out there on our culture, our needs and our quality of life. Under very difficult circumstances, they do a lot of vital work for communities—the type of work that local authorities and the Parliament could not do. The amount of effort that people put into voluntary work is wonderful. I would like to thank them, and I hope that they will continue with their work. Culture has changed in Scotland. It has moved away from being Americanised and anglicised; it has become Scottish, and more and more so. We are finding our roots. We are not just bagpipes and haggis; we have a lot more to offer from the important elements of our heritage and culture. When we talk about having one police force and one fire service, that is heritage, growth and looking forward. We are moving forward and getting our communities to come with us. We want better achievements and a quality of life that we can be proud of and can share around the world. For example, our fire service and our police force have started to train people from overseas. That is a very welcome new development. It means that we are encouraging those services to look for moneys from outwith the local authorities and the Government; they are now earning money because they have expertise to offer. Sometimes we forget that we are a nation of inventors. Historically, we have done great and wonderful things, and we now need to embed that idea in our youth. We have a huge bank of expertise and young talent in this country—people who are itching to get on and do something. We want to build our economy, and the only way we will do that will be to give people opportunity. That is incumbent on us: we have to find new ways of encouraging young people. We do not wish our young people just to give up, so we must establish something for them. One way of doing that will be to deal with our traditional friends. We Scots have many wonderful relationships around the world, and I will mention a few places with which we have worked historically: Bahrain, China, Indonesia, India, Iraq, Kuwait, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Turkey, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, Europe and the United Arab Emirates. Those are all people with whom we have worked, and we need to welcome them back to Scotland. I think that they have forgotten where we are. We need to tell them where we are and that we are open for business. We need to tell them that we are here as their friends and that we wish to work with them. The work of our universities and colleges has been very encouraging. They have done tremendous work in promoting Scotland as a destination for education and expertise. They have shown dynamism for Scotland, but we sometimes forget that our universities and colleges need support. They do something that the Parliament perhaps cannot do—they can form one-to-one engagements with our friends overseas. They can encourage them to continue to come to this country as a destination for quality education. Also, while they are out there doing that job, they can promote Scotland as a destination for development, for industry and for inventions. We are open for business; this is the gateway to the new world. We want our young people to be proud of us and of themselves, and the only way that we will achieve that is by ensuring that they recognise where their roots are, what their culture is, what their nation is and how they can make this country alive again. We need something that is bubbling, and that is going to happen only if we stimulate our industry and our economy by working with people. It is important that the countries that I have mentioned realise that we are genuinely open for business and want to come and engage with us. We will also go to them if they want us to go there. We need to do that. We are an industrial nation, not an agricultural nation; we need to have industry and to manufacture. We need to do things that will stimulate our economy, and the best way forward is through bringing our people together with us. I am encouraged by a lot of what the cabinet secretary said, but I would like the Government to get our young people, our institutions and our colleges and universities more involved. We need to involve private industry, in particular. We must support our industries to encourage our economy.

Hanzala Malik prayed in Arabic and provided the following translation: I seek the protection of God against evil. I start in the name of Allah, the beneficent, the merciful.