2. To ask the Scottish Government what progress there has been in discussions with the United Kingdom Government regarding the common agricultural policy budget allocation announced by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in November 2013. (S4O-02818)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the convergence decision is not just damaging to Scotland’s farmers but deeply harmful to the economy of many of our most fragile rural communities?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Fraser accept that at least some of those extra expenditures are possible only because of savings on capital projects? Does he welcome those savings, as I do, given that it has been almost unheard of—at least until this Government took office—that capital projects have been delivered under budget?

In any other country in the world, in coming out of recession, as we are, a finance minister would begin to have more latitude as taxation receipts began to increase. That is not so in Scotland, where we face continuing cuts and real-terms cuts, and potentially cuts well into the future, with George Osborne recently announcing plans for austerity plus. There is of course a neat solution to that problem: that is a future that we do not need to share. Mr Swinney, as ever, has put together a carefully balanced budget. The necessity of having a balanced budget is a fact that the Labour Party in particular often seems to forget. Over the past few months, we have heard a very long wish list of increased spending that the Labour Party would like to see, but as usual it will not tell us what it would cut in order to fund that expensive list—except, of course, that there is the vague and lingering threat of Johann Lamont’s cuts commission, where everything is apparently still on the table. If even the Labour Party’s long-held commitment to universal services has been cut, surely nothing is sacrosanct. I am pleased to say that once again the budget is grounded in the bedrock of economic sense, with a careful moderation towards capital expenditure for the very good reason that it delivers a better multiplier. It is important to realise that budgets are not an end in themselves and that it is the effect of the budget on the wider economy that really counts. Again, Labour often misses that point. Since the SNP Government came to power in 2007, Scotland’s economy has begun—thanks to successive and economically competent budgets like this one—to outperform that of the rest of the UK, as today’s employment figures demonstrate. Scotland’s unemployment rate is now down to 6.4 per cent—well below the UK average—which not only demonstrates this Government’s economic competence, but underscores the fact that that has been achieved despite, and certainly not because of, George Osborne’s austerity agenda. I find it absolutely astonishing that anyone can assert that cuts give rise to greater employment. I would be very grateful if Mr Brown or Mr Fraser would explain just how that works.

It is dropping, but not to the extent that it is dropping in Scotland. I note that Mr Brown failed to explain the link between austerity and increases in the number of jobs. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary, within this carefully balanced budget, has found funds to extend free school meals and childcare, and that he has taken measures to protect our most vulnerable people against the worst excesses of the UK Government welfare cuts. However, here I find Labour wanting again. We have heard Johann Lamont say continually in the chamber that the Scottish Government is not doing enough to mitigate UK welfare reforms—we have heard that this afternoon from others. However, in the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee, where journalists fear to tread, Labour members have voted against the council tax reduction scheme, not once or twice but on five separate occasions. Johann Lamont constantly tells us that this Parliament has all the powers that it needs, yet Labour members, in the dark but never dusty recesses of that committee, argue that the council tax reduction scheme is ultra vires, or outwith the competence of this Parliament. That is proof, if any is needed, that Labour says one thing in public in the chamber and another in private when it thinks that nobody is watching. A yes vote in September will avoid the dreadful cost of George Osborne’s continuing austerity and the reduction of the Barnett formula by the proposed £4 billion, but it will also deliver a further bonus. It will restore integrity to this Parliament by enabling the Opposition parties to serve their true masters—the people of Scotland.

It is difficult to imagine who would be against regulation that aims to be transparent, proportionate, consistent and accountable. Who would be against regulation that is appropriately targeted when and where it is required? That is what the bill aims to do and to my mind, it is a useful step towards achieving that purpose. I welcome the Tory support for the bill, as articulated by Murdo Fraser. Perhaps the Tories are not better together with Labour after all. I believe that a more consistent, efficient and effective approach to regulation can enhance economic growth, so I was pleased to hear Professor Russel Griggs, who chairs the regulatory review group, say in committee that the bill will, in his opinion, enhance sustainable economic growth. I assume that all members are in favour of sustainable economic growth—not least because enhancing the economy is one of the mains tools for tackling poverty. I simply do not accept that the twin aims of improving sustainable growth and improving the environment are mutually exclusive. The debate over the semantics of economic growth as against economic development has been to my mind a false one, and despite my repeated requests, no one who gave evidence to the committee was able to demonstrate what they meant by referring to a real-life example. The Federation of Small Businesses gave ample evidence of the increasing burden of compliance and of the confusion, difficulty and costs that arise when different approaches to regulation are taken in different areas—sometimes even within the same area—often for no apparent good reason. It is important to heed those complaints. Not only are small businesses important in terms of the amount of employment that they create in aggregate, but some of the small businesses of today will become the big businesses and big employers of tomorrow. One of the problems in our economy is that that progression of small businesses growing into big businesses happens all too rarely. The economists call it a lack of churn. Today’s fat cats need to be constantly challenged by tomorrow’s fat cats—today’s lean and hungry cats. That is how we will drive innovation and improve productivity and how we will remain competitive. If we want to provide higher quality employment, tackle unemployment, and improve the fortunes of the working poor we need to listen carefully to and support small businesses. A further misconception that has featured in our discussions is the apparent belief that most businesses wilfully break regulations and wish to damage the environment. I believe that the opposite is true and one of the improvements that the bill offers is a greater ability on the part of SEPA to properly tackle real environmental crimes and problems. I believe that the bill is a step in the right direction and I look forward to our having full powers over regulation, when we will be able to do so much more.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to prevent unnecessary or inappropriate closures of rural schools. (S4O-02749)

We now know that the population is increasing across many parts of rural Scotland. For example, in Shetland, we are already seeing significant renewal of activity in the oil and gas sector, and the joint United Kingdom and Scottish Government publication “Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report” suggests that renewable energy will create around 2,900 new jobs on Shetland by 2030.

I am getting there, Presiding Officer. In view of that, does the cabinet secretary believe that education authorities are taking a wide enough view when considering rural school closures?

Perhaps one of the most inspired things that this Scottish Government has done has been to set up the Council of Economic Advisers. No one can doubt the credentials of the council’s members, who include two Nobel prize-winning economists. We can be confident therefore that the Scottish Government has access to high-quality economic wisdom that is both objective and robust. That is why we can be certain that the economic sections of the white paper are carefully crafted; and that is why we can be certain that we have an economic plan in which the Scottish people can be confident. That is also why we can be certain that we have an economic plan that is credible to business and the business community in the eyes of the wider world that is watching Scotland with interest. However, it is instructive to look at Scotland’s economic performance over the longer term. Between 1997 and 2007 we saw average growth of 2.3 per cent compared with 2.8 per cent across the UK. Since 2007, we have outperformed the UK economy across almost every economic measure. That tells us something about the economic competence of this SNP Government in comparison with its predecessors. We must consider, too, the background against which that has been achieved, as we have faced the twin challenges of the worst recession in living memory and the economic illiteracy of the Tory Government in Westminster. Any Government can seem to be successful in the boom phase of the economic cycle, as Gordon Brown demonstrated, but it is an inescapable fact, which George Osborne is finding out, that any Government will struggle to reduce its deficit unless the economy grows. By his own promises of deficit reduction, George Osborne has failed and that is why he is now signalling his intention to move into a further phase of austerity plus.

I am sorry, but I am short of time. Against that backdrop, the underlying strengths of the Scottish economy can be seen clearly: oil and gas with 24 billion barrels of recoverable oil and around £13 billion of investment this year; renewable energy with 25 per cent of Europe’s wind and tidal energy resource and 10 per cent of its wave resource; a very significant opportunity opening up with Europe’s most significant carbon capture and storage opportunity in the North Sea; 300 years of coal supplies just as we are poised on a breakthrough in clean coal technology; record exports in food and drink; and a fast-growing life sciences sector. I could go on, but what that amply demonstrates is that we are building a diverse and therefore resilient economy—yet another lesson that the UK Government could learn from Scotland. Instead, however, the Tory Government is relying on pumped-up property prices to ensure its re-election, with the Nationwide survey suggesting that London property price inflation over the past year has approached 15 per cent. That is a continuation of the uncertain and unsustainable economics that we have seen from the UK Government over many years. With independence, we could do much more. There is for example a cast-iron case for reducing air passenger duty. The increase in VAT alone would pay for that. A similar and robust case can be made for reducing VAT on building repairs, which would pay for itself in increases from other areas of taxation. That is the opportunity that devolution denies us: the opportunity of wisely using fiscal policy to produce both economic benefits and higher returns on taxes; the opportunity to tackle poverty and improve the business climate; and the opportunity to establish that virtuous spiral in which fiscal rewards arise from sound economics and success builds on success. Scotland’s economy is recovering well from recession. With the full powers of independence, we can look forward to a prosperous future.

Will the member take an intervention?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what the benefits will be of the University of Edinburgh’s centre for cultural relations. (S4O-02725)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in a country such as Scotland, which is renowned for its international cultural festivals, the establishment of the centre for cultural relations sends a further message across the world that Scotland is an outward-looking nation that is seeking to better understand how culture and education deepen relations between countries?

I am sure that the member will recall that the Accountant in Bankruptcy gave an undertaking to see whether it would be possible to reduce the fee to below £100.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am delighted to hear that the member is concerned about entrepreneurs. Is she aware that creditors are often entrepreneurs and small businesses who, at the end of a bankruptcy process, might get only a very small return on their money, if anything at all? Their interests are also part of the scope of the bill.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that the member did not have the benefit of sitting through all the evidence sessions in the committee. However, will he take it from me that we heard absolutely no evidence to support the proposal that the extension to 48 months was a bad thing?

I thank the committee clerks and advisers and all those who gave evidence to the committee and assisted us in a useful examination of the bill. I would particularly like to thank those who gave evidence in private and who shared with us their difficult and painful experiences as they wrestled with their debts and with a system for dealing with those situations that is not always as good as it could be. It became apparent when taking that evidence that most of the people who fall into debt do so not because they lack ability in balancing their budgets or controlling their finances, but through misfortune and events beyond their control. Like the committee, I welcome the bill because it is necessary to update and improve the processes for dealing with debt and seek ways to be fairer to creditors and debtors. I fully support the bill’s aim to ensure that appropriate and proportionate debt management and debt relief mechanisms that are fit for the 21st century are available to the people of Scotland. There has been some criticism from Opposition members that the legislative programme for this year is insubstantial, that Scotland is on pause and that bills such as this are unimportant. I was sorry to hear Jenny Marra, for instance, suggest that this afternoon. However, like me, I think that my fellow members on the committee would disagree with that view and would wish to refute it. The bill amends the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985. Imagine if we were restricted to running our computers on the software available in 1985. To the extent that legislation is like a society’s software, most members would agree on the need to update and amend legislation when we become aware of faults and where improvements can be found. The bill might seem to be unimportant, but only to someone who is fortunate enough not to be in difficulty with debt or to someone who is not unlucky enough to be a creditor who has not been paid. During our scrutiny, it became obvious to the committee that this is a complex and technical bill. That means that there is all the more need for advice to be mandatory for those seeking the most appropriate debt solution and not merely the solution that is most convenient for their trustee. Along with that, there is a necessity for that advice to be consistent, and that is why it is important that there should be only one debt tool. Although I am sure that the other tools have merit, no one was able to explain to the committee what their superior merit was and, therefore, the choice of the money advice tool seems as good as any other choice. I was glad to note that the tool offers flexibility, so that it is capable of responding to individual circumstances or difficulties. That seems to be essential if such a tool is to be successful and to be the basis of calculating debt solutions that are fair and manageable for debtors. I think that it is worth noting that, in seeking solutions that are fair and manageable for debtors, the best interests of creditors should also be served, since there is no virtue whatsoever in debt solutions that prove to be unmanageable. I must say a word about creditors, because their interests are sometimes neglected. An important aspect of any debt solution is the need to be fair also to creditors who have provided goods or services in good faith, in the expectation that they will be paid. I do not share Jenny Marra’s view that the status quo is acceptable. The committee heard evidence that returns to creditors are something of the order of 17p in the pound. That does not seem to me to be supportive of entrepreneurship in the way that Jenny Marra described. We heard from people who had entered into bankruptcy but who earnestly wished to pay any money that was due, for the sake of their self-esteem. Extending the repayment period to 48 months for those who are able to make repayment is, therefore, reasonable. Despite some concerns about the possibility of that leading to defaults in payment, we were not presented with any evidence to back up that concern.

Mr Malik is correct in what he says, but he and I perhaps have a different standard of evidence. I do not think that someone merely saying, “I don’t think that the proposal is good,” constitutes evidence. I see that Murdo Fraser is shaking his head, so I will try to clarify the issue. If those who opposed the proposal were able to point to studies of situations in other countries where such a proposal had led to an increase in breakages, I would have accepted that as evidence. However, I do not think that just saying, “I don’t like it,” is good enough. At the heart of this matter is the need to strike a careful balance between the interests of debtors and creditors. Before I finish, I must pay tribute to the Accountant in Bankruptcy. In my dealings with it, on behalf of constituents, it has been efficient and fair-minded. I am pleased, therefore, that it will play an increased role in the provision of debt solutions that are efficient, fair and reasonable.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate John Wilson on securing the debate. Its timing is perfect because, as Charles Dickens famously realised, the festive season is a time when we should consider those who are vulnerable or in difficulty. It is a time when the contrast between the haves and the have-nots in our society is rendered in stark terms, the engine of consumerism is at maximum revs, and already stretched budgets are under severe pressure. It is therefore no surprise that people are driven to borrow at this time of year and it is no surprise that, when the high street banks will not offer facilities to those with slender resources, people turn to other sources of credit, or that payday lenders are ready to pounce on such unsuspecting and vulnerable borrowers. I say particularly to the Labour members whom we have heard that that is what 300 years of the union and the failure of the UK Government to regulate the payday industry have brought us to. Thankfully, there is an alternative. Credit unions offer unsecured lending in a responsible and fair-minded way. Loan applications can be fast and can be done online, but they are always accompanied by prudent advice and there is always a system of checking to ensure that loans are affordable for borrowers. That is the essence of responsible lending, and it is by following responsible lending practices that the cost of borrowing can be kept to a minimum. Credit unions offer far more than unsecured lending. They encourage saving and offer a variety of savings products, because saving even modest but regular amounts is perhaps the best way to help to meet expenses such as those that we are all faced with during the festive season. Saving is the best way to lay in a contingency fund to deal with the emergencies that we all face from time to time, when some ready cash is necessary. It is the way to get out of the debt cycle and ahead of the game. In researching for the debate, I found out that some credit unions even offer mortgages. Members have referred to that. Those credit unions offer a full and comprehensive alternative to high street banks; the difference is that they are not solely motivated by chasing high and unsustainable profits. That ethos is all-important, and it ensures that a careful balance will always be struck in delivering a sympathetic and responsible service for savers and borrowers. In conclusion, I am delighted that the Scottish Government has launched the 12 days of debtmas campaign to foster greater awareness of credit unions, which offer a much better alternative to payday loans and, in many cases, a better service than high street banks do. The more people there are who use credit unions, the more they will grow, and the more they grow, the more people can benefit from their excellent range of financial services.

I wonder whether that would encourage us to take other OBR forecasts, for instance for oil and gas revenues, with a very large pinch of salt.

In addressing payday loans, it is useful to consider how we got into this unacceptable position. I am old enough to remember when employees got a weekly pay packet with real cash inside. In those prudent days, bills were paid weekly and the surplus was carefully nurtured. Most important, incomes at the lower end of the spectrum were much higher in real terms than they are today. Wealth and income inequality have increased markedly over the past 30 years, and the movement towards paying employees monthly in arrears helped to fuel the credit industry, which deregulation aided and abetted. Thatcher’s economic plan depended on a credit boom that created a false sense of wellbeing. The buy now, pay tomorrow approach was heavily promoted as consumerism really kicked off, and banks expanded dramatically as they were progressively deregulated, until the inevitable credit crunch struck. The same economic plan that shut down our industries and terminally impoverished communities relied on making us addicted to credit and creating a huge expansion of financial services to fill the black hole in our economy. All our economic eggs were put into one basket. Sadly, in such an unequal society, the recent recessionary pain is visited most on those who are least able to bear it. The Scottish Government, on a reducing budget, simply cannot mitigate all the pain in Scotland, just as it cannot regulate the banks or legislate to curb the wicked excesses of payday lenders. All that we can do is lobby the UK Government and advise consumers. I know that the minister has been actively engaging with the UK Government in an attempt to persuade it to regulate the industry. Against that background of 30 years of increasing inequality, the Scottish Parliament does not have sufficient levers to create a fairer and more equal society in a meaningful timescale. That is the real cure for these ailments, as there will always be those who seek to prey on the poor and the vulnerable. I am glad, therefore, that the UK Government has at last indicated a commitment to regulate payday loans, although I fear that it will not go far enough. As matters stand, it appears that it will be too little, too late, as we have come to expect from Westminster. I can only contrast that with the Scottish Government’s rapid action, earlier this year, to replace stamp duty with the land and buildings transaction tax, quickly moving to deal with long-standing concerns that Westminster had failed to deal with for many years. In a world that moves at an ever-faster pace, it is necessary for Governments to move quickly to deal with obvious problems such as payday loans. I am also glad that the Scottish Government set up and moved quickly to improve the debt arrangement scheme that Kenneth Gibson described. It has recently taken steps to allow the earlier freezing of interest on payday loans and other debts, which is providing a means for financially distressed people to get back on their feet while avoiding bankruptcy. The evidence for robust regulation of payday loans is overwhelming. I hope that all members of this Parliament unite and send a very clear message to Westminster that that is the case. Beyond that, we need a game changer if we are to tackle inequality properly.

I suggest that the opportunity for such a game changer will come on 18 September next year.

Will Duncan McNeil give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the number of convictions for firearm offences in 2013. (S4O-02673)

Does the cabinet secretary share my view that, because Police Scotland has specialist services available that might not have been available to regional forces, it is in a better position to deal with serious crimes such as firearms offences?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am astonished by the wording of the Labour motion—not least because of its improper and personal attack on the minister. Although I agree that the housing situation is serious, I must point out that it is almost entirely due to the reduction in private sector—not public sector—house building. It seems to be typical of Labour that, in its rush to blame the Scottish Government, it is not prepared to make a proper analysis of the problem or of what has led to it.

I will not. That is perhaps why Labour manifestly failed to deal with the housing problem when it was in power. Its technique then—as always—was to throw large amounts of money in the general direction of the problem in the hope that that would cure it. The housing crisis has been growing across the whole UK since before the UK Government’s Barker report of 2004, which placed considerable emphasis on the need for the planning system to allocate more land for housing. The Scottish Government discussion document of 2007 “Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland” also identified the problem and stated that the lack of a supply of suitable building land has led to unsustainably high land prices. The Institute for Public Policy Research has, in a series of recent reports, identified the planning system as being one of the root causes of the longer-term failure of housing policy. It suggests—correctly, in my view—that uncertainty in the planning system leads to excessive land banking, which ties up valuable resources that could be much better used. In addition, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s report on rural housing identified the planning system as being one of the major causes of failure in housing provision in rural areas. That is why I am glad that Derek Mackay, the planning minister, is taking steps to reform the planning system—although I accept that it will necessarily take time for the reforms to be implemented and for them to feed through into the system. As we have heard from other members, the more immediate problem has been the credit crunch, which was ushered in by Labour in London because, when it was its job to regulate the banks, it failed to do so.

No, thank you. Is it any surprise that, when the housing bubble collapsed, it left in its wake the intensification of a long-standing housing problem? Is it any surprise that the great recession, which had a disproportionate effect on the house-building industry, should exacerbate the housing problem? Only a Labour Party that is hoping to rewrite history could hope to lay the blame for that at the door of the Scottish Government. As if that was not bad enough, Labour’s better together friends then exacerbated the problem with their austerity agenda. It seems that it is more important to Labour to support the Tories at Westminster than it is to engage with economic reality and to place the blame for the problem where it really lies.

No, thank you. I am short of time. In cutting the Scottish Government’s capital budget by 26 per cent and by failing to require or adequately to encourage the banks to undertake responsible lending, the UK coalition has intensified the problem even further—and that is not to mention the damage that will be caused by its current plan to pump up another housing bubble as a bribe to the electorate in the south-east of England, which is the territory on which UK elections are fought and won. It is particularly iniquitous that some banks have taken the opportunity comprehensively to renegotiate punitive terms for housing associations as a condition on lending for new projects. Against that background, the Scottish Government is due great credit for surpassing the halfway mark in delivering on its manifesto commitment to build 30,000 affordable homes. The Scottish Government’s decision to end the right to buy is perhaps the most important step towards achieving a good supply of public housing that has been taken for many years. It is something that Labour apparently lacked the will to do. Shame on it. I look forward to the further powers that independence will bring, which will enable us really to get to grips with Scotland’s long-standing housing problem.

I am slightly puzzled. Is Alex Johnstone suggesting that the pension funds should invest in socially rented homes, which should then be sold to the tenants at a quarter of their value?

I am pleased to speak in the debate because it was partly my involvement as a founding member of the community development trust on my home island of Easdale that led me into politics. We were aided in our early stages by the CADISPA Trust, an umbrella organisation that continues to offer help to communities all over Scotland. I owe a personal debt to CADISPA’s director, Dr Geoff Fagan, who taught me a lot about the concept of capacity building—which Liam McArthur has referred to—and the wisdom of that approach. Rather than giving grants or advising people on how to get them, CADISPA’s approach is unique, in that the focus is on building capacity within our communities to meet whatever challenges they face, now and in future. That is the route to resilience and true sustainability. If community development trusts are to help to build a better future, they need to be well equipped with the skills to do so and, as they do so, to learn from, and in turn teach, others. That is a mechanism that multiplies the effect that any single community trust can have on its own. It is a method for building widespread resilience and sustainability into the fabric of our society. Sadly, in the current climate of economic difficulty, CADISPA is battling for its own survival, even as it continues to help other organisations. It would be easy to praise the remarkable achievements of the many community development trusts across the Highlands and Islands. I would be the first to pay tribute to the many people who tirelessly and often thanklessly do so much for their communities. However, I would like to use this opportunity to deal with some of the problems that such organisations face. In order to set that in context, it is necessary to realise that many community development trusts were first set up in order to tackle long-standing problems that public authorities had failed to tackle, sometimes for many years. It is ironic, then, that a principal complaint of many successful community organisations and development trusts is that they are often given insufficient respect or assistance by the public agencies with which they need to interact. Indeed, community organisations are often faced with barriers that are erected, I suspect, for no reason other than that their success can challenge the very authorities that failed to help them in the first place. If we in Parliament have a genuine wish to empower local communities, we must recognise the iron-bound principle that power is neither created nor destroyed; it is merely passed from hand to hand. Empowerment of communities implies disempowerment somewhere else. We often have debates in Parliament about the balance of power between national and local government but if we truly want to make a difference to our society, we should perhaps focus on taking power from local government and giving it more directly to local communities.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what was discussed at the recent meeting of the island areas ministerial working group. (S4T-00521)

Does the minister agree that the powers that are needed to implement significant changes in island communities—for example, through a bill for an islands act—will be available only with independence?

I understand that the group is scheduled to meet again in January. Will the minister provide an update on what issues will be discussed?

The minister will be aware that the European Marine Energy Centre on Orkney was at least 10 years ahead of the rest of the world in wave and tidal energy research. Is he concerned that that 10-year lead may be lost as those technologies approach commercialisation and need clear subsidy and clear support?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with the comments of the Scottish Crofting Federation’s parliamentary spokesman, Norman Leask, who is a constituent of Alistair Carmichael, that the UK Government’s decision amounts to a “political heist”? What impact will it have on crofters in Scotland?

I am pleased to speak in the debate not just because I am a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, but because of my previous career of running a business for many years, when I often used to ask myself, “Who regulates the regulators?” It was clear to me then that much of our regulation was inconsistent and disproportionate, and that regulatory powers were often placed in the hands of people who used them unwisely and without proper regard for the wider consequences. That said, I fully acknowledge that I have a particular genetic defect that sometimes gave me difficulties when it came to dealing with regulators. Members might not be surprised to learn that I completely lack the forelock-tugging gene; as hard as I try, I cannot force my hand up to grasp it. Regulators did not always appreciate that. The recent FSB survey of its members indicated that a substantial proportion reported an increase in the cost of dealing with regulation over the past year. I wonder how that cost has increased over the past 30 years, although I suspect that we already know what the answer is. I also wonder about the wider cost to our country with regard to growth or, indeed, the lack of growth and prosperity, and about the impact on numbers of jobs, on living standards and on tackling poverty. In this matter, I pay particular regard to the voices of small businesses, because the burden of regulation often falls most heavily on their shoulders—in other words, the shoulders of those who are least able to bear it. That said, I fully understand the need and requirement for regulation. After all, without it, we cannot function as a civilised society, and the quality of our life and environment would plummet. As a result, in considering improvements to regulation, we need to make it more consistent and make it a less blunt instrument. I believe that that is exactly what the bill will do—not as a final solution, but as a step on the road towards better regulation. With regard to environmental regulation, I believe that the bill gives SEPA a valuable toolkit that will enable it to protect our environment more effectively, thereby freeing up resources to tackle serious environmental problems and crimes while offering a lighter regulatory touch to businesses that have every intention of complying. It is often the case that regulation varies from one local authority to another for no good reason.

I am not quite sure exactly how one might measure that, but I certainly listen carefully to Scottish businesses on these matters. As I was saying, regulation often varies from one local authority to another for no good reason. The committee heard evidence to that effect. Some regulators, principally local authorities and COSLA, said in evidence that they are unhappy about that because it conflicts with the concept of local democracy. Unfortunately, they were unable to give a single example of it happening in practice; it seems that their concerns are purely abstract. In any case, I welcome the Government’s assurance that it is prepared to consider exceptions. Witnesses also expressed concern about the economic duty. I am afraid that the apparent opposition of some regulators to sustainable economic growth rather makes the case for that duty to be enshrined in legislation. I cannot understand why anybody should be opposed to that duty, or why the term “sustainable” seems not to be understood. Much of the discussion seemed to be merely semantic, and none of the witnesses was able to give a single practical example to illustrate their concerns.

As I said, none of the witnesses gave us an example and, in some quarters, the jury is still out on that matter. Planning fees prompted some interesting discussion. Some witnesses were firmly of the belief that, because planning delivers a public good, full cost recovery through fees is inappropriate. Our planning system is the midwife to sustainable economic growth, so I am delighted that the minister is focusing on a range of improvements that will help to deliver that growth while protecting and improving the quality of our built and natural environments. The notion that sustainable economic growth is incompatible with that is a dismal notion that could condemn us to slow growth and failure to achieve any of our aspirations. The minister intends to increase planning fees, but it is only proper that developers and the public alike also see an increase in performance. I look forward to the forthcoming code of practice, which will offer reassurance to anyone who has remaining doubts about the bill, and to the enhanced and economic growth that the bill will help to deliver.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Does the member acknowledge that, although Mr Cook made that theoretical point, he was unable to give any practical examples of where that has occurred?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a dream—a dream that, in future, all our buildings will be as well designed as those that are shortlisted for this year’s Doolan prize. I have a dream that, in future, architecture in Scotland will assume a much higher importance than it enjoys today, because architecture is the most public of arts. It touches all of us. We live with it every day of our lives, and for generations. When a fundamental necessity of life is shelter, especially in a climate such as ours, we need more architecture, and we need more great architecture. Since the advent of devolution, Scotland’s architects have responded to a new sense of confidence in Scotland. The Doolan award, which was established in 2002, is perhaps part of that resurgence of confidence. The fact that it is the largest architectural prize in the United Kingdom perhaps reflects that new confidence and, most of all, our ambition and aspiration that we can and will build a better Scotland. The very process of imagining, then designing and then beginning to build a better future will in itself help to usher in that better future. Prizes are important. The Doolan prize, like the First Minister’s saltire prize for marine renewables, helps to set the bar of our ambition higher than it would otherwise be, and as high as it should be. I am therefore glad that the Scottish Government supports the prize. The great thing about good architecture is that it is not just its own reward, to be admired and enjoyed at a purely aesthetic level; it pays off in so many other very real and tangible ways. It would be wrong to talk about any of the projects that have been shortlisted for this year’s prize, but perhaps some of those that have previously won or been shortlisted for the award or other awards might illustrate that point. Reiach and Hall’s Pier Arts Centre building in Stromness springs first to my mind. On my last visit, it was host to an exhibition of no less well-known an artist and painter than Lowry, uplifting the minds and spirits of Orcadians and visitors alike and helping to fill the cash registers of local businesses. As if that was not enough for the small town of Stromness, Malcolm Fraser is currently building the new library there, which is helping to revitalise and regenerate a town with an historic past and a great future. Orcadians are greedy for good architecture. They get it. Orkney Islands Council gets it. Orcadians know that over its lifespan quality architecture will pay for itself many times over. I cannot mention Orkney without mentioning Shetland. At Grodians I came across what is quite simply the best social housing development that I have ever seen—the only one that has ever made me think, “I would love to live there.” Hjaltland Housing Association and Richard Gibson Architects are due great credit for the project, which will pay for itself through better social and health outcomes and less crime, and by enabling people to live more fulfilling and rewarding lives. If time permitted I could talk at length about many other good architectural projects that we have seen over the past decade or so, but there are other points that I want to make. We are beginning to talk a lot more about whole-life costs, because what is important is not a building’s initial cost but the cost of ownership per annum. It can be amply demonstrated that good-quality architecture costs less per annum than buildings that are commissioned and built with low initial costs in mind. We rob ourselves when we follow the cheap route towards apparent value. What is less often talked about is the huge added value that good architecture delivers and which is not included in standard accounting. I am talking about the effects on health and happiness and everything in between, all of which has a huge value and whose absence is something for which we pay highly. I hope that some economist of talent will take up the cause and do an analytical study of the real value of good architecture. I think that many of us know intuitively that the added value that I am talking about is significant and indisputable. My previous career as a builder was intensely practical, but I am also an unashamed and unrepentant dreamer. The final part of my dream is that we build our better Scotland in our unique Scottish way and establish a new vernacular, as a response to the 21st century’s problems, challenges and opportunities, which reflects our climate, our culture and our values and which learns international lessons without being dominated or overwhelmed by them. After all, we Scots know what is best for Scotland.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, not just because a high percentage of Scotland’s forestry estate is in my home county, Argyll, but because in my previous career I had the joy of working with wood as a material for building houses and for making furniture. I am sorry to say that, over my lifespan, I have seen a significant decline in locally added value in our timber industry in Argyll. Nowadays, sawn logs are exported with little or no added value, and an industry that was once labour intensive and which supported whole communities is now one in which most of the work is done by machines. Not so many years ago, there were several small sawmills in Argyll, creating employment and adding the significant value that is available when timber is converted. Now, there is none. Those sawmills went out of business not because there was no demand for their products but because they were unable to make the significant investments that were necessary for them to keep up to date and remain competitive. Timber technology has been driven by advances that have been made in the Scandinavian countries, where significant investments have been made in small-scale sawmills, thus making an important socioeconomic contribution to their rural economies. One result of our failure to do that came to light when the new community hall was being built on the island of Colonsay a few years ago. The community was unable to source the laminated roof timbers in Scotland and had to import them from Norway. Engineered timber is a very useful material with better strength to weight ratios than steel. It is also one of our most sustainable building materials, locking up carbon for its lifespan—and, with good design and reasonable maintenance, that lifespan can be considerable. Our forefathers understood that. I have personally repaired sash and case windows that were over 100 years old and which will, I hope, last for another 100 years. Woodlots are therefore important not only because they offer opportunities for better management of this valuable resource, creating better-quality and higher-amenity woodlands, but because they offer a means of adding significant local value to the resources, giving rise to meaningful and rewarding employment and supporting fragile rural economies. Too often in the past, our forestry has been driven by tax advantages manifesting themselves in fast-growing spruce plantations. Mixed and less dense planting, especially of native hardwoods, offers a much higher albeit longer-term return not just in economic terms but in terms of biodiversity and landscape quality. In well-managed woodlands, timber can be a source not just of firewood or sawn logs for pulp but of a high-quality material for building as well as a source material for crafts such as furniture making. Woodlots offer an opportunity for the kind of good management that has been noticeably absent from much of our forest land in recent years. I therefore wish the Scottish Woodlot Association every success in taking this innovative concept forward.

I add my thanks to those from the minister to the good folk who gave us an excellent and very interesting briefing this morning. It has reinforced my belief that carbon capture and storage is yet another exciting opportunity for Scotland, in which we can once again be at the cutting edge of a new technology: leading the world in solving the climate challenge, decarbonising our energy supply, providing energy security, keeping down energy prices and providing new high-quality and rewarding careers. It is difficult not to like carbon capture and storage; not to be enthusiastic about it; and not to see the immense opportunity that it represents for Scotland. I am reminded once again of that great English economist, David Ricardo, and his theory of competitive advantage. There is no doubt that CCS is yet another area in which Scotland has an obvious competitive advantage. Our depleted oil and gas fields offer the perfect opportunity for sequestrating CO2—the geological conditions are right, and we have the technological skills and capacity to make it happen and the academic knowledge base to ensure that it is done well and safely. The risk of leakage is non-existent, and the pipelines are in place, so it is merely a matter of using existing technology and skills in a new way. That is not to say that there are not some challenges to overcome, but I have no doubt that Scotland’s engineers and academics can rise to those exciting challenges. It is important that we demonstrate carbon capture and storage in commercial operation as soon as we can reasonably do so. The main challenge is for us as politicians to recognise the significant opportunity that CCS offers and to put aside any small differences and work together to make it happen. I am keen to see the results of the UK Government’s competition, and keen for the Peterhead project to be given the green light. I am also keen to see the competition widened if possible to include more than two preferred bidders, and I believe that the captain clean energy project would be the perfect candidate. If that is not possible, I would like to see some form of contracts for difference incentive for carbon capture and storage projects as part of the energy market reform that is going through the UK Parliament. Good government is about good economic stewardship and maximising our economic opportunities and competitive advantages. It is not about letting the grass grow under our feet and seeing other countries take advantage of those opportunities. There is a wider point. It is about pioneering those technologies where it makes sense for us to do so, not just for Scotland’s economic advantage but to play our part as a responsible nation that is helping to solve the global problem of climate change by leading the way and showing other countries how to do it. As Joan McAlpine has just said, China is building a new coal-fired power station every week. Perhaps Mr Harvie should reflect on that. The captain clean energy project offers a unique opportunity to demonstrate to the world how coal gasification works. Noxious chemicals and carbon are removed both before and after combustion. Coal is responsible for the largest proportion of worldwide CO2 emissions, and the technology paves the way for removing 90 per cent of CO2—and perhaps more than that—from our energy production. It is also about doing that responsibly in a way that does not throw thousands of people out of work and which instead creates economic opportunities, keeps the lights on and provides affordably warm and healthy homes in Scotland. Scotland has world-leading climate change legislation, and we have a world-leading wave and tidal research sector. We can have world-leading carbon capture and storage, too.

Does Mr Harvie agree that the whole point of the debate is about the need to get a demonstration project such as the proposed project at Peterhead up and running so that we understand the area much more closely and take any remaining uncertainties—I believe that there are very few—out of the equation?

Mr Fraser, like Mr Harvie, seems to be suggesting that we should have multiple plans and look at various scenarios. Does he agree that if John F Kennedy, instead of saying that we would go to the moon, had said that we might go to the moon, Mars, Jupiter, Pluto or wherever, nothing might have happened at all and Neil Armstrong might not have landed on the moon in 1969?

Fuel poverty is a measure that captures many related problems, including low incomes, poor insulation, high fuel prices and, in the Highlands and Islands, the associated fuel transport costs. Fuel poverty is important because it tells us something about inequality in our society, including the geographical inequality that exists across the UK. Fuel poverty is running at an unacceptable level of more than 20 per cent across the UK but at the much higher level of 30 per cent across Scotland. As Liam McArthur indicated, in Scotland’s islands fuel poverty is at the truly shocking level of 50 per cent. I will leave members to decide for themselves whether that represents a union dividend or a union deficit. As members will know, most powers relating to energy are reserved to Westminster. Therefore, fuel poverty is largely a failure not of the Scottish Government but of Westminster’s policy. That is not to suggest that the Scottish Government can do nothing or is doing nothing about fuel poverty, but it is important to place the matter in its proper context. For that reason, I was glad to hear Ed Miliband suggest that if his party is elected to government, he hopes to do something to tackle fuel poverty. I am glad that he recognises the problem of fuel poverty, even if I am concerned that his proposed method may not work and may have unintended consequences. Price controls are a blunt and unwieldy instrument that may do more harm than good. The proposal seems to carry more than a whiff of populism and political opportunism. I prefer the more careful method that the Scottish Government has followed in setting up an expert commission and listening carefully to what that commission says. I also prefer the Scottish Government’s approach of providing help to insulate homes, because that will provide long-term energy savings and long-term cost savings. There may be other policy solutions. If we had full control over energy policy, we would have the opportunity, for example, to introduce progressive fuel charging, to offer discounted rates for prepayment meters or to offer a lower wind tariff or island tariff, as is currently being discussed for Orkney and Shetland. We could use the renewable energy power that is currently constrained by the lack of grid infrastructure. I look forward to hearing suggestions from the expert commission on energy. The technical challenges, too, must be overcome. For example, the standard assessment procedure that is used throughout the UK to measure home energy efficiency is flawed. As Liam McArthur mentioned, the methodology has given rise to what has become known as “eco-bling”—technologies of dubious benefit that are appended to buildings only to comply with the SAP calculation. Until we have a better understanding of how we can deal with the technological challenges, it might be a mistake to throw money at the problem. We are still learning how to deal with the profound difficulties presented by our older housing stock. Some housing associations are concerned that some of the work done to meet current standards will need to be redone to meet forthcoming standards. At a time when there are severe challenges to our financial resources, we need to ensure that every penny is spent wisely. Much of the low-hanging fruit has already been picked, as we have insulated about 60 per cent of accessible loft spaces and about 60 per cent of cavity walls. In these difficult times, unfortunately, there are no silver bullets when it comes to dealing with fuel poverty. In the long run, a careful approach that closely examines and learns from the effectiveness of policy and technical measures will deliver the solutions.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Mr Fraser agree that the green deal will not really help people in the rural areas that he describes, largely because rural properties will have great difficulty in meeting the golden rule?

I am glad to have the opportunity to speak in the debate, as farming remains a crucial part of the economy of the Highlands and Islands. In many of our most isolated and remote communities, farming is still the only mainstay of the economy. Farming is important not just for economic reasons; in many ways, it has defined and shaped rural life and it is deeply embedded in our culture. Most importantly, our farmers have been the custodians of our landscape for thousands of years. They have shaped and maintained it for all of us to enjoy. We have recently debated wild land in the Parliament. Interestingly, a few months ago, I asked Andrew Thin of Scottish Natural Heritage to tell me where the wild land is. Despite knowing the Highlands and Islands well, I am unaware of any land that has not been worked over in some way by the hand of man in the past 10,000 years or so. His reply suggested that what I suspected was correct: there is no wild land in Scotland. The vast majority of our land is fully tamed and in the care of our farmers. I know a few isolated and desolate spots that are uncared for. They are inhospitable and desperate places of impenetrable undergrowth or impassable bogs that are virtually impossible to traverse. Anyone who knows much about our history will understand that we do not have to go far back to find a time when much more of our countryside was like that. It is thanks only to our farmers that it has been tamed into something that now looks good on postcards and offers opportunities for recreation. Anyone who has doubts about that has only to consider the rampant and unfettered growth of trees and undergrowth along many of our rural roadsides that has sprung up in recent years. Across much of the Highlands, many of our best views and vistas are screened by this untrammelled growth, which is, ironically, much worse when tourists are about in summer and the undergrowth is in leaf. I see Mr McGrigor nodding; he knows exactly what I mean. The one scenic railway journey from Glasgow to Oban predominantly offers views of the rampant growth of willows and birch. As sheep numbers decline, we have seen in some areas an explosion of bracken, which is a noxious weed that cannot be controlled unless there is an economic reason for doing so. That is what happens when land is not cared for, and it is part of what is threatened if our farmers are not supported. The difficulty that our farming industry has faced in recent years is perhaps most accurately expressed by the high levels of suicide among our farmers. Few rural communities have not been touched by the dreadful spectre of suicide and all that it entails. There is no doubt that we need to support our farmers, and there is no doubt that farmers in Scotland face many challenges undreamt of by the UK Government that purports to represent them. Thanks to the remarkable energy of the cabinet secretary, our farmers at least have a partial voice in Europe. Thanks to our cabinet secretary, we now have a very successful food and drink strategy that significantly adds value to our farmers’ produce and to our rural economies. Thanks to our cabinet secretary, we now know that Scotland’s farmers would be much better off if we were independent within Europe, with subsidies between 2015 and 2020 worth more than €1 billion more than if we continue as part of the UK. The supporting arithmetic for that calculation is straightforward and compelling. We in Scotland understand our farming industry and what it requires to make it thrive so that our farmers can continue to play their part as the backbone of our rural economies and the custodians of our landscapes. That accords well with that self-evident principle that decisions are best taken by those who understand them and are closest to them, and that all decisions about Scotland are best taken here in this Parliament with proper representation in Europe and the full powers of independence.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s consultation on providing additional support for renewables on Scotland’s islands. (S4O-02435)

I am concerned that the proposals that were announced in the consultation might not go all the way towards overcoming the range and extent of the barriers that are faced by renewable energy developers on the islands. What assurances can the minister give the sector that that aspect will be considered during the consultation?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits the recently announced development in the Pentland Firth of the largest tidal array in Europe will bring to the marine renewable energy industry. (S4T-00448)

I welcome the benefits of such tidal projects, but does the minister share my concerns that the benefits of wave and tidal technologies may not be fully realised until the matter of disproportionate grid connection charges for island generators is addressed and unless a suitable contracts for difference strike price for wave and tidal generators is set?

I am pleased to speak in this debate because, although there is no significant production of coal in the Highlands and Islands, it is still widely used there as fuel. For that and other reasons, I am sorry to say at the outset that I cannot support Mr Harvie’s amendment. Most of our homes across the Highlands and Islands are off the gas grid, and electric heating, although convenient, can be prohibitively expensive. Many people across the Highlands and Islands are therefore dependent on fossil fuels—a fact that Mr Harvie might find inconvenient. Of course, he is keen on renewable energy generation. I share and possibly even exceed his enthusiasm for renewable technologies, but the fact of the matter is that, as Claire Baker suggested, renewable energy generation is not yet sufficiently developed to provide low-cost heating across the Highlands and Islands. I believe that, ultimately, it will be—and the sooner the better—but even in my most optimistic moods I have to accept that it may not be the case for a few years yet. I am sure that Mr Harvie would agree that the UK Government’s inordinate delays in finalising energy market reform do not help to achieve that aim.

My argument is only one small argument that Patrick Harvie may not have considered that is very relevant to the Highlands and Islands. I intend to make more such arguments and hope that he will listen to and consider them. Members will know that Scotland’s rural areas and, in particular, our islands suffer fuel poverty to a greater degree than do urban areas. On some of our islands, fuel poverty has reached the unacceptable level of 50 per cent due to a combination of factors, among which are fuel transport costs, low wages and hard to insulate homes. For good reasons, coal remains the fuel of choice for many people. On the island where I live, we have an annual coal day when we all work together to bring the year’s supply of coal across. Only a few years ago, we achieved that by dint of hard manual labour. Our community of only 60 souls uses about 60 tonnes of coal a year. Each bag would have to be handled at least six times—down piers, and on and off boats and dumpers—before it reached our homes. Nowadays, we have an easy time. Technology has solved most of that back-breaking problem for us. Now, we use an all-terrain fork lift—a machine that just was not around only a decade or so ago—and we let the hydraulics do the heavy lifting. I therefore cannot agree with Mr Harvie and Mr Rennie that we should just close down Scotland’s coal industry. Just as technology has solved our back-breaking coal delivery problem, so carbon capture and storage and other clean coal technologies will solve the pollution problems of coal and other fossil fuels.

No. I have already taken an intervention. The effect of Scotland’s climate change legislation will be and should be to create that imperative, but to do so in a way that does not destroy jobs or industries. We should and can rise to the technological challenges in that regard. Equally, I cannot believe that it is beyond our wit or ability to provide a regulatory framework that ensures that environmental damage is minimised and that the landscape is properly restored when an opencast mine is exhausted. I did not expect to be upstaged by Mr Fraser on this, but it seems that Mr Harvie would indeed shut down opencast coal with the same relish with which Margaret Thatcher shut down coal mining—without regard for jobs, livelihoods or communities. I welcome the Scottish Government’s approach which, by contrast, challenges our ingenuity to solve problems in ways that will preserve jobs and leave open energy options for the future.

On the afternoon of the publication of the draft budget, it is entirely appropriate for us to debate a motion on the enterprise networks. It is helpful, I think, to place the motion in context. The context is that we are now, at long last, tentatively emerging from what some commentators have described as the deepest recession for more than a century. The performance of our enterprise agencies must be considered against that background, and it is against that background that the results that they have achieved can only be described as staggeringly successful. A payback that achieves more than £5 of benefit for every public pound that is spent is a worthy achievement in any climate and, in the economic climate of recent years, it is remarkable. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has had the opportunity to question senior officials from the enterprise agencies on several occasions over the past two years, and I know from those sessions that the evidence of the effectiveness of our enterprise agencies can stand up to scrutiny. I pay particular tribute to the robust methodology that Scottish Enterprise has developed to analyse its effectiveness. It takes a courageous and confident organisation to subject itself to such robust self-analysis, and I am convinced that that is part of the key to its success in recent years. The clear goals and direction that the Scottish Government has set are another part of the reason for the success of our enterprise agencies. This is about economic understanding and competence. The great economist David Ricardo made the case very well in his theory of comparative advantage, which can perhaps be summarised as, “Do what you are good at and leave others to do what they are good at.” In helping businesses with high-growth potential and in facilitating sectors in which we excel, we are following that wisdom. For many months now, that has been seen to pay off as a range of statistics have steadily shown that we are generally outperforming the economy of the UK as a whole. Employment is higher, unemployment is lower, growth is returning faster than it is to the UK as a whole and, over the long term, Scotland is performing extremely well indeed. Just as the Scottish Government is following a course of economic wisdom, sadly, George Osborne is ignoring the wisdom of perhaps England’s greatest economist, John Maynard Keynes, and we are all paying for the chancellor’s economic ineptitude. Think how much more we could achieve in Scotland if Mr Osborne had not cut our capital budget by 26 per cent. Think how much better our oil industry could be performing if he had not mounted his ill-conceived tax grab.

Think how much better our renewables industry could be performing if George Osborne was not dithering over energy market reform, causing huge uncertainty and an investment hiatus. Think, too, how much better we could do if we could reduce VAT on tourism and if we could reduce air passenger duty. There would be more enterprise. Think how much better we could do if we could work with the oil and gas industry to provide a stable and consistent tax regime. That would bring more enterprise and more success for our enterprise companies. Think what we could do with the prudent use of borrowing powers following Keynes’s counter-cyclical wisdom, boosting the economy in times of recession and leaving a lasting legacy of better infrastructure. There would be more enterprise. Think how much better our enterprise companies could do and how much more they could achieve.

I disagree entirely. I think that they are doing staggeringly well. Any review—if there is one at all—should be conducted on the basis of understanding how on earth they are managing to produce incredible results against such a difficult background.

The Scottish economy appears, at long last, to be on an upward trajectory. A fundamental and necessary ingredient of the growth part of the business cycle is confidence, and the opportunities of next year’s referendum are steadily becoming apparent and are a contributory factor in this growing confidence. That confidence, in turn, will help us to reach an escape velocity in which our enterprise companies will thrive and we will, at long last, throw off the drag factor of the economic incompetence of the UK Government.

Will Tavish Scott give way?

Will Tavish Scott give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the recent Bank of Scotland Purchasing Managers’ Index survey.(S4T-00435)

There are encouraging figures in the survey, which should be welcomed on all sides of the chamber. However, they come in the context of the Chancellor of the Exchequer boasting that he will press on with his austerity measures, which have taken the United Kingdom through the worst recession in living memory. Tomorrow, the Scottish Government will publish its draft budget for the coming year. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, whatever measures it contains to support economic recovery and employment, Scotland remains hampered by the decisions that are being made for it at Westminster?

Alex Johnstone mentioned his “unsophisticated right-wing attitudes”. It seems to me that he shares Murdo Fraser’s view that camping without permission should always be prosecuted. He will be aware that wild camping is a very popular recreational—

If members are selectively reinterpreting the law, I think that they are exceeding the bounds of this Parliament, but it would be interesting—

7. To ask the Scottish Government what opportunities it considers independence would bring for increased consumer protection. (S4O-02328)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that unfair and disproportionate delivery charges are a particular concern in many parts of the Highlands and Islands. Does he agree that we could tackle that issue if we had the appropriate powers?

Will the member give way?

Does the First Minister agree that this morning’s announcement by the United Kingdom Government that there will be a specific islands contract for difference rate is very good news for our islands, for Scotland and for the UK, which will benefit from the significant generation capacity of our islands, and that credit is due to all Highlands and Islands MSPs, to the island councils and to the Scottish Government, who have worked together and campaigned for years on this important issue?

11. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the number of probationary teachers finding employment. (S4O-02302)

What percentage of primary 1 to primary 3 pupils are in classes of 18 or fewer, or are in two-teacher classes with a pupil to teacher ratio of 18 or fewer, and does that represent an improvement in the percentage as it was in 2006, immediately before this Scottish National Party Government took office?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member not accept that almost the opposite argument to the one that he is making could apply? What he is suggesting could result in a situation in which very poor people become trapped in poor and poorly insulated houses.

Hydro power is perhaps the least contentious of our renewables technologies, and the lack of amendments to the motion might be evidence of that. However, that was not always the case, as many early schemes had significant opposition. Now, 100 years or so after the opening of the earliest hydro power schemes, hydro seems to be generally regarded as a benign technology. Perhaps that provides a lesson for us in considering other technologies. Perhaps it is just the fact that wind, wave and tidal power are relatively new and unfamiliar that gives rise to many of the concerns that we have to deal with. I have read that the early railways were also greeted with scepticism and fear and that it was suggested that passengers would suffocate at speeds of more than 30mph. The Locomotive Act 1865 required all road locomotives—which included motor cars—to travel at a maximum speed of 4mph in the country and 2mph in towns and to have a crew of three, one of whom would carry a red flag and would walk 60 yards ahead of each vehicle.

I am grateful to Mr Fraser for introducing a note of humour into the debate. It is hard now to relate to those concerns of more than a century ago, and it is entirely possible that, in the future, people will look back and laugh at many of the concerns that we have today about renewable energy devices. Hydro power seems to enjoy great popularity, but that does not mean that there are no challenges in taking forward projects. Often, significant engineering and construction challenges have to be overcome, which arise out of difficult terrain. Each project presents significantly differing challenges because of differing topographies and geology as well as the problems that are associated with construction access. Hydro projects are therefore necessarily capital intensive and, because each project is a one-off, hydro power presents less opportunity for costs to fall as the technology matures. I am glad that the Scottish Government recognises that in its continuing support regime for larger hydro projects, maintained at 1 ROC per MWh. I understand the concerns that developers of smaller projects have about feed-in tariff degression and especially about the clumsy way in which it is being implemented. I am grateful to Ken Macintosh for addressing that in detail. Technical challenges are the challenges on which our civil engineers thrive. Such challenges can be stimulating; they can foster innovation and the sense of accomplishment that goes along with overcoming technical difficulties. Less uplifting and quite dispiriting are the challenges of grid constraint and grid connection costs. Members will know that solving those problems depends on the United Kingdom Government getting its act together on energy policy. It is time for it to listen to the industry and to implement quickly the necessary grid infrastructure, active grid management solutions such as those in Orkney and a support regime that facilitates the development of renewables. In doing so, the UK Government should consider support for energy storage schemes, especially as pumped-hydro projects offer a well understood method for the large-scale storage that is required to balance the grid. There are further problems with the regulatory regime, which seems to delight at times in delaying projects. There was a time when I had no antipathy towards the supposedly rare bryophyte species Hamatocaulis vernicosus. However, now that I know that that plant is an enemy of hydro power masquerading as an endangered species, when it is no such thing as endangered, I think less well of it and some of its cousins. It is aided and abetted in its subterfuge by Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which should know better and which often simply fail to do their homework. There is a further lesson: we will not safeguard our environment with bad science and bad biology, nor through the lazy application of the scheme in which SEPA applies a much more prohibitive and onerous regime to small-scale hydro projects of less than 100kW, which amounts to an effective presumption against such schemes. The regulatory burden often falls most heavily on the shoulders of small business and on community projects, yet such small-scale schemes offer significant opportunities for local socioeconomic improvements, often in areas that badly need them. Many communities across the Highlands and Islands have been dying slowly for decades. Those communities deserve our due consideration in the hierarchy of concerns, at the top of which has to be the survival and wellbeing of our own species.

Does the member accept that it is the UK Government’s failure to upgrade our grid quickly enough that is limiting our ability to decarbonise the energy supply and help to meet the targets?

As the member for Orkney, surely Mr McArthur is frustrated with the UK Government for not getting on and putting in place the interconnector to Orkney so that it can benefit from the huge opportunities that are available to it.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the final report of the Scottish islands renewables project. (S4O-02252)

Does the cabinet secretary consider that the northern isles and the Western Isles have the best of all opportunities for marine and wind energy and that, if they were not connected to the mainland, they would be prevented from fulfilling their potential? If they were not connected because of a lack of support from the UK Government, would that Government, in a literal sense, be cutting off those islands and their residents from those massive opportunities?

Will the member take an intervention?

Having listened very carefully to Patrick Harvie’s speech, I am completely unclear about what he means.

I am delighted that we have received many briefings for the debate from many interested organisations. After all, one of the problems that the planning system suffers from is public apathy, especially during the earlier consultation phases of planning policy. That is why I am glad that the Scottish Government is leading the way with the main issues report for NPF3 and the SPP consultation, especially as the associated documents are in plain and clear English, are uncluttered and are free from planning jargon. There is a lesson for local planning authorities in that, because early public engagement and meaningful consultation depend on such documents being accessible to the wider public. Too often, reading local planning policy documents is an exercise in forcing our way through a dense lexicon of tortured and ambiguous terms; it is an exercise that is reminiscent of attempting to read some of our more esoteric post-modernist literature, which is meaningless to absolutely everyone—except, perhaps, the author. I am glad, too, that the Scottish Government is forging ahead in a journey of continuous improvement for our planning system, because that system has too often in the past let us all down—applicants and the public—and has not delivered the outcomes that any of us would wish for in efficiency or fairness. Most important, it has not delivered on quality of development. I am particularly glad about the emphasis in the draft SPP on design-led development, with its attendant themes of place making, designing better streets, the architecture and place policy statement and high-quality development. I welcome the new planning performance framework, but I am sorry that the first planning performance annual report suggests that less than a third of local planning authorities have stated that design improvements are negotiated during the application process. That is a disappointment. Too much of the focus has been on answering the question whether to build rather than asking questions about the quality of design. That part of the planning system needs to improve, because nimbyism is often an expression of a lack of public confidence in the planning system as a vehicle for delivering well-designed and high-quality development. I am glad, too, about the renewed focus on sustainable economic growth. Not thinking about that in our hierarchy of considerations is not to live in the real world; it is not to recognise the profound economic difficulties that many people face in communities throughout Scotland and not to recognise that we have one of two possible futures—one in which we face continuing poverty, or a better, well-designed one, in which we can all share the prosperity that sustainable economic growth will deliver.

I am sorry; the Presiding Officer has told us that we are short of time, so I think that I should move on. The planning system should be the midwife of that well-designed, better future. I am surprised, therefore, by Patrick Harvie’s amendment, because I would have thought that the word “sustainable” as the constant prefix to economic growth would answer all his concerns.

I think that you are deliberately misunderstanding that. It is difficult to say in a few words precisely what the meaning is but, nevertheless, I think that we all understand exactly what the term means. I would have thought that Patrick Harvie would welcome NPF3, with its ambitious programme of infrastructure projects that are necessary to secure our renewable energy generation opportunities, which are especially required if we are to take Professor Stiglitz’s advice about the opportunities for moving towards a green economy. I have long been a fan of another Patrick—Patrick Geddes, the father of modern planning. He saw planning as the means of dealing with many of our socioeconomic problems, and I am glad that the Scottish Government is following that philosophy.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how many of the country’s protected sites are in favourable condition. (S4O-02207)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer, which it is encouraging to note. Clearly, overgrazing and invasive species are the main challenges to conditions improving from unfavourable to favourable. Native and non-native invasive species can have a detrimental effect on important habitats and can ultimately change the ecology of the habitat. What action can the Scottish Government take to ensure that the proportion of natural features that are in favourable condition continues to rise?

I acknowledge the valuable input of colleagues into the inquiry and I thank all those who assisted us, especially the committee clerk and her team, as well as the witnesses who gave us valuable information. Underemployment is a phenomenon that has been only recently recognised. In the course of its inquiry, the committee has discovered that underemployment is complex and still not well understood. Nevertheless, it is still possible to make some broad observations. There is no doubt, for example, that a major cause of underemployment is the great recession that Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling led us into.

If the member will let me make some progress, I may take an intervention later. There is no doubt that the recession has also been experienced by many other countries, but it has been particularly acute across the UK for reasons that are linked to underemployment. Underemployment statistics reinforce that view, with the UK experiencing underemployment at a level of about 10 per cent compared with an OECD average of just—

Yes.

If the member had listened carefully to what I said, she would have heard me say that a major cause of underemployment is the great recession. I do not think that Kezia Dugdale would seriously attempt to argue that the recession is in no way related to underemployment. Statistics reinforce that view, with the UK experiencing underemployment at a level of about 10 per cent compared with an OECD average of 2.9 per cent. I urge Kezia Dugdale to reflect on that. A large part of the reason for that difference is the deindustrialisation that has occurred to a unique extent across the UK, largely as the result of Thatcherism—I am sure that Kezia Dugdale would agree with that. While other countries were modernising their industries, we tossed ours on to the scrapheap. The committee heard evidence from Professor David Bell that the shift of our economy from manufacturing to a service economy has had a profound effect on the labour market, giving rise to so-called labour market flexibility—

No, I am sorry, I have already taken an intervention and I have a lot of ground to cover. In this context, that labour market flexibility translates into employment uncertainty. The acolytes of both Thatcher and Blair believe that to be an economic virtue, but such thinking merely underpins the short-termism of the casino economy. When employment is uncertain, people spend less and demand falls. Given that a large part of the reason for our current economic underperformance is the lack of demand, a flexible labour market can be regarded only as another of the UK Government’s economic vices. Chief among those vices is, of course, the austerity agenda. Recent warnings from the International Monetary Fund and the OECD, as well as a very long list of economists, are going seemingly unheeded by the coalition. The effect is compounded by UK employment law, which underpins so-called labour market flexibility, giving rise to the zero-hours contracts that we have heard about as well as sometimes bogus self-employment for people who, in reality, ought to be employees. As if that were not bad enough, on-going welfare reform is giving rise to yet more uncertainty and is lowering demand still further. Economic success cannot be built on the back of the working poor. Against that background, the results that the Scottish Government has achieved are remarkable, with recent figures for growth and employment showing that Scotland is outperforming the UK. The strategy that is being pursued, of capitalising on our areas of competitive advantage and our natural assets, is proving the Scottish Government’s economic wisdom. A disaggregation of growth data shows that oil and gas, renewable energy, life sciences and food and drink, among others, are the sectors that are driving our economic recovery and forging an economy that is balanced and, therefore, resilient. Such dynamic and growing sectors offer the opportunity of high-quality employment. Aligning education, skills and training with genuine employment and career opportunities is an important part of the continuing work to curb both unemployment and underemployment. That is why initiatives such as the Nigg Skills Academy are so important, where Government is working directly with industry in a joint approach to education and training in areas that offer real opportunity. In the face of the economic illiteracy of the UK coalition, the Scottish Government can do only so much to combat the twin scourges of unemployment and underemployment. The committee fairly acknowledges that in its report. What is missing is the third factor in the equation, which is tax-raising powers. The enhanced taxation revenue resulting from economic growth would allow the effect of good government and good economics to be reinforced and rewarded, allowing yet more investment in what would become a virtuous circle of success. I look forward to the Scottish Parliament achieving full powers and to the day when our engine of success will run on all cylinders.

Does the member agree that the simple answer would be for the UK Government to reform employment law?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that it is a question of the UK Government almost wilfully letting all the horses out of the stable and that, without even a rope at the Scottish Government’s disposal, it will be difficult for the Scottish Government to recapture them?

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to minimise the negative economic impact on farmers and crofters of the presence of large numbers of geese in the Outer and Inner Hebrides and the northern isles. (S4O-02185)

I agree with the minister about the wonderful television programme that he mentioned. I am sure that he shares my concern that it was not broadcast to a wider audience across the whole United Kingdom. The minister will be aware that farmers are reporting problems in use of steel shotgun pellets, which often wound rather than kill geese, and otherwise merely scare geese from one farm to another, and that they would, therefore, prefer to use conventional lead pellets. Can the minister suggest any solutions to that problem?

Will the member give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to “The UK Fuel Poverty Monitor 2013”. (S4O-02156)

Does the minister share my disappointment that the previous carbon emissions reduction target and community energy saving programme schemes failed to tackle fuel poverty in many rural parts of Scotland? Does she believe that the combination of Scottish Government support and the energy company obligation will be more effective in tackling the high levels of fuel poverty in Scotland’s rural areas, particularly our islands?

Does the minister agree that, given the repeated warnings from the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets about the lack of electricity generation capacity and the prospect of the lights going off, Scottish coal can continue to play its part in supplying power stations across the UK, alongside other forms of energy generation such as renewables?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, as a means of helping to raise the profile of that wonderful tree, the Scots pine. For some people, it is the “little white rose of Scotland” that breaks the heart; for me it is the Scots pine. I have yet to see a Scots pine that did not look just right in its setting. Scots pines hold my view and captivate me as few other trees do, and they brighten my travels across the Highlands and Islands, appearing now and then, like old friends. They make my heart pause and then beat a little quicker, and they make me smile. They look equally good in rain, mist, sunshine or snow, and they grow where few other things will grow. Their resilience is a symbol of the tough and enduring spirit of Scotland. It is sad that all too few are left and that the old Caledonian forest is reduced to 1 per cent of what it once was. That is sad on a number of levels. We all know the stories of how the Caledonian forest was cut down and cleared, to make way for sheep and for other reasons. In Argyll, the wood was burned for charcoal for 100 years. Our Argyll woodlands supplied the cannonballs for Nelson’s navy. It is interesting that the woodland that was adjacent to the Bonawe ironworks was not just harvested but well managed and conserved, but outwith the immediate vicinity of the works, the forest was felled with no thought for conservation. The woodlands were destroyed over a huge area and are gone. In the place of the old Caledonian forest, we have spruce plantations, from which timber is exported for a few pounds a tonne. There is no local added value and, these days, there are few jobs. Man has been replaced by machine, and our local sawmills, unable to invest in new technology, are gone too. Spruce plantations are deadly for biodiversity. The loss of the old forest is sad for environmental and economic reasons, as well as sentimental reasons. I have more reason than most people to value the fine Scots pine, for I have used its wood for joists and rafters, and for floorboards and furniture. The wood excels in all those uses. It is workable, enduring and attractive. I remember the sweet, aromatic smell as I cut into it. I remember the pink and creamy hues of newly sawn planks, which mellow gracefully with time. I remember the many pleasant hours that I have spent—and hope to spend—in the company of such wonderful wood. I can think of no species more fitting than the Scots pine as our national tree. I can see that I have a few seconds left, so I will conclude on a poetic note: “The woods are lovely, dark, and deep, But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep.”

Do you agree that the UK Government is contributing to uncertainty far more than any concern about the constitution?

Will the member give way?

The timing of the debate is fortuitous because it follows hard on the heels of an Ofgem seminar that was given in Edinburgh earlier this week by the soon-to-retire chief executive, Alistair Buchanan, who gave a remarkably frank presentation. It was a great pity that I did not see any Opposition members there—had they been there, their eyebrows would have risen as high as those of the rest of the audience, which was a veritable “Who’s Who” of the energy sector in Scotland. Mr Buchanan gave a stark warning. Due to the uncertainties of energy market reform, there is a real risk of the lights going out in England, as reserve capacity there has declined to just 4 per cent. I raised the same concern earlier this week in the chamber, which Tory and Lib Dem members, in particular, seemed to find very funny. I find that a strange attitude, as it is not a prospect that I would wish for any of our friends and neighbours in England. Mr Buchanan outlined how many of the assumptions that had been made about importing energy from France, Ireland, Russia and elsewhere were fraught with difficulties, not least because many of our European neighbours are also energy importers on a significant scale. Assumptions about importing energy from those countries may prove not to be at all realistic. In the question session afterwards, which involved a very knowledgeable expert audience, no one questioned the real and credible concerns that had been explained—everyone there agreed that the delay and uncertainty caused by prevarication over EMR are damaging and are making a bad situation worse. Part of the problem, no doubt, is the remarkable turnover of UK energy ministers and the disillusionment that is setting in at DECC, with several high-ranking and very experienced personnel having left recently. That is why I am glad that the Scottish Government is taking such a helpful and reasonable attitude. Good evidence for that constructive co-operation is given in the newly published document “Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report”, which was prepared on behalf of both Scottish and UK Governments. I commend that excellent report to members. It makes the case quite decisively for the enormous renewable energy potential of Scotland’s islands. The minister correctly said that the report suggests that Scotland’s islands could produce 5 per cent of the electricity that the UK needs by 2030. The report also says that, ultimately, Scotland’s islands could produce as much as 20 per cent of the electricity that the UK demands and that Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles would benefit from a significant number of jobs. The report suggests that 10,000 jobs could be created on those islands by 2030, with a further 29,000 full-time equivalent jobs being created throughout the rest of the UK. The report outlines how energy generation on the islands can be competitive, with the higher costs of generation on islands mitigated by significantly higher capacity. However, it stresses that generation projects will be viable only if a fair and reasonable connection and transmission charging regime is provided, and it outlines a number of sensible ways in which that can be done. The whole point of energy market reform is to keep the lights on at an affordable cost while decarbonising our energy supply. The point that seems to be lost on Rhoda Grant is that that requires an integrated UK energy market.

Rhoda Grant obviously does not understand the concept of contracts for difference in the energy market. What she says would be perfectly valid—she would be quite correct—if renewable energy was subsidised from taxation. However, it is not subsidised from taxation; it is subsidised by the consumers who are the end users of energy, wherever they happen to be. Another point that is missed is that fundamental to keeping the lights on is a single harmonised European energy market, and facilitating that is also part of the purpose of EMR. Scotland’s renewable energy generation capability, especially that of our islands, will play a very significant role in that—

Doing that will be a source of real prosperity for Scotland.

Does the member agree that it is the fearmongering of the no campaign that causes uncertainty?

Will Ken Macintosh give way?

Does the minister agree that, with the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets warning that the lights could go out unless the United Kingdom Government resolves the uncertainty of our energy policy and with many of our European neighbours being net energy importers, Scotland’s oil and gas will become increasingly valuable as we move further into the century?

Ken Macintosh seems to be arguing that the Scottish Government is due no credit when the statistics look quite good and due blame when the statistics are bad. Surely he cannot have it both ways.

It is necessary, when considering youth employment, to place the issue in the context of the deepest recession that any of us has ever known. In fact, the economist Stephen Boyle recently told a group of MSPs that it was the worst recession since 1870. Although we are now technically just scraping out of recession again, the economy has at best been flatlining for several years. Against that background, the ONS statistics, which show a decrease in youth unemployment in Scotland of 29,000 over the year and an increase in youth employment, are a cause for optimism. They represent a heroic effort on the part of the minister and the Scottish Government. Of course those figures do not give any cause for complacency, but they reveal an achievement that even the most grudging members on the Opposition side of the chamber should recognise. Even those most grudging members should recognise the effort that it represents on the part of all those young folk who are struggling to get a start in their careers in these most difficult times. Not to recognise their achievements is an affront not just to the young people, but to everyone in Scotland who strives to give the next generation the best start to their working lives.

I think that Mr Macintosh will agree that we do not take those interventions and then see an immediate result. Interventions of any type take time to begin to work, and we are now seeing the results of those interventions in the current statistics. There are those who will argue—quite correctly—that unacceptably high youth unemployment predates the current recession, and that it is a UK problem and not purely a Scottish problem. It is a long-term structural problem that has a lot to do with the long-term mismanagement of the UK economy; with de-industrialisation, deregulation and overdependence on banking; and with steadily growing inequality over the past 30 years. Inequality is important because it has a disproportionate effect on younger people. It reduces the incentives of work and fosters the belief that normal aspirations are outwith the reach of many people, thereby reinforcing the cultural belief that celebrity and perhaps the lottery offer the only realistic routes out of poverty and undermining the belief that the steady application of effort in a career is worth it. A culture that seems to suggest that some careers are glamorous and exciting and others are drab and unrewarding is not helpful. Unhappily, our education system has sometimes reinforced that view by offering educational courses that are not as well aligned to job and career opportunities as they could be. In its recent inquiry into underemployment, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard from UK Oil and Gas that it currently faces significant skills shortages and that it anticipates a demand for around 100,000 young people over the coming years. The renewables industry suggests that it has similar shortages and a significant growing demand for young people. That indicates the importance of the Scottish Government’s collaboration with industry in initiatives such as the Nigg Skills Academy, which aims to train at least 3,000 younger folk in energy industry skills by 2015. Not only is it immoral that young people are consigned to unemployment when some industries are crying out for new recruits, it is economically inefficient and will stifle those same industries, which offer the greatest prospects for growth. That indicates also the importance of modern apprenticeships, which re-establish the link between training and employment in areas where real career opportunities lie. It is a cause for satisfaction but not complacency that 25,000 modern apprenticeships have been created for the second year running. Opposition members should have a care when they talk down Scotland’s oil industry and our renewable energy potential and when they daily talk down Scotland’s future economic prospects, for in doing so they most discourage our younger folk, who deserve much better than that from Scotland’s politicians across the political spectrum.

Will the member take an intervention?

If we are to place Scotland’s energy future in context, we must look at the world energy situation overall. World energy consumption is set to rise sharply over the coming years. The World Energy Council has said that “Even with improvements in energy efficiency, we expect global energy demand to double by 2050”, and the International Energy Agency suggests that demand might have doubled by as soon as 2035. It is against that background that we can say that Scotland’s oil reserves of 24 billion barrels can comfortably be valued at £1.5 trillion, at least, and that the assumption of a price of $113 a barrel might be very conservative. It is against that background that we can say that Scotland’s renewables opportunity, which could ultimately see us generating as much as 10 times our own energy needs, is a hugely valuable resource, and that Scotland’s economic and energy future will be clean, green and very bright. The most significant risk that we face to achieving that potential is presented by the London Government. We have seen that with the oil and gas industry and George Osborne’s tax grab in the 2011 budget. That industry’s prospects only recovered after Mr Osborne saw the error of his ways. We are seeing the same thing with the prevarication over the UK Energy Bill, which is causing huge uncertainty. As a result of that, we are witnessing a hiatus in renewable energy investment in a situation that parallels that experienced by the oil and gas sector two years ago. It seems that Mr Osborne has a compulsion to squeeze the life out of Scotland’s golden geese—the sooner that we can prise his greedy fingers from around their necks, the better. I am deeply concerned—as, I am sure, Mr McArthur is—that Mr Osborne will also kill off the fledgling wave and tidal industry in a failure to provide interconnectors to our islands soon enough, and in failing to end the punitive island transmission charging regime. I travel the length and breadth of the Highlands and Islands over a large proportion of Scotland’s land mass, and I have seen little evidence of poorly sited wind farms. Indeed, across much of the Highlands and Islands, we barely see them at all. That is a great pity because they could bring much-needed jobs and income to communities that would otherwise die.

I will conclude on a positive point by noting that we have recently achieved 40 per cent of our community energy targets of 500MW.

Does the member accept that, given the progressive nature of the tax, the proposed measure would help those who are further up the ladder more? Those are the people who least need help in making their homes more energy efficient. It is the people who are lower down the scale who need the help.

Will the member give way?

Although I am not a member of the Finance Committee, I relish the opportunity of speaking in this important debate. Some of our colleagues—none of those who are in the chamber—have suggested that it is a somewhat technical and dry subject. On the contrary, it is interesting and profound. I congratulate the Finance Committee on producing an excellent report. It is concise and readable but covers all the important points. Most importantly, it is accessible to someone who, like me, did not sit through all the committee’s deliberations. Although I welcome further powers coming to the Parliament, I am not a huge fan of the Scotland Act 2012, largely because it was a missed opportunity to do much more. However, the important point is that the Scottish Government and the Parliament have seized the opportunity to address the long-standing neglect of the problems presented by stamp duty—something that the Westminster Parliament failed to do. That indicates to me the profound difference between the two Parliaments. One is old and slow moving; ours is agile and able and can quickly respond to new opportunities. That is one of its many understated assets. However, speed is not everything. That brings me back to the bill and the committee’s report, in which it is obvious that quality has not been sacrificed in the process of scrutiny. A further point that strikes me is how positively the prospect of change has been embraced by those involved in the property sector. All the responses to the committee seem to be positive. Even almost, but not quite, all the responses in the chamber seem to be positive. There is a tangible sense of relish, excitement and positive possibility in the responses that augurs well for the future of Scotland and suggests a widespread appetite for many more powers to come to the Parliament. I suggest that members should contemplate the power of that effect writ large throughout Scotland as we collectively address the opportunities of independence. I suggest that that effect will bring a boost to the commonweal and our economy. It will bring what we might call an independence bounce. The approach to the bill signifies a further profound difference between this Parliament and Westminster as we take the opportunity to make the tax fairer and simpler while, at the same time, taking care to avoid distorting the market or having a perverse and detrimental economic effect. That is the essence of good policy, as is amply demonstrated in the approach to the bill, which has the principles of social justice and progressive taxation at its heart. That is a fairly profound point, I think, which was missed by some of the people who made representations to the committee. Progressive taxation arrangements that are fair and simple limit the desire and opportunity for tax avoidance. If we overburden the bill with complexity, we will increase the likelihood of unintended consequences and we might generate opportunities for creative and unprincipled avoidance schemes. Some points about the bill were well made. For example, I sympathise with people who are concerned about sub-sale relief, in some instances, particularly at a time when banks are reluctant to finance property development. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to consider relief in respect of forward-funding schemes. I also sympathise with people who seek to improve the energy efficiency of the housing stock. They are perfectly correct to do so. However, the bill is not the vehicle through which to achieve that aim. My main concern is the OBR’s unbridled optimism in its forecasts on stamp duty receipts over the next six years, which I contrast with its supreme and widely discredited pessimism about oil receipts over a similar period. Either the OBR is on another planet or it is merely the political puppet of the Westminster coalition, which is no doubt taking a hollow negotiating position as it seeks to reduce the block grant beyond what is reasonable. I have every faith that common sense will prevail and that such posturing will soon be punctured. I am glad to welcome the opportunities that the bill presents and I commend the approach of the Scottish Government and of the Finance Committee.

I want to reiterate that point. Given that Ken Macintosh seemed to indicate—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. Ken Macintosh seemed to indicate that there was some merit in what I said and that it had given him pause for consideration. Rhoda Grant has had some time to consider what I said. Does she accept that, because the tax is progressive, the kind of measure that she proposes would help the people further up the scale, who need it least, and not help the people who need it most: those down at the bottom of the scale?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact will be of Daktari Diagnostics locating its manufacturing site in Inverness. (S4O-02015)

Given that the deal was sealed with the First Minister during the Scotland week celebrations in New York and that it arose from a meeting with the First Minister at the Scottish open in Inverness last year, does the minister agree that attendance at, and participation in, such events is a very good use of the First Minister’s time?

I commend the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee on securing the debate. I am glad to have the opportunity to share some of my thoughts, which spring from more than 30 years’ experience of running a small business in the construction sector. I remember receiving about 25 years ago the renewal documents for a contract for services that my company then provided to Argyll and Bute District Council. The original contract was three pages long; the renewal documentation five years later was the size of a thick telephone directory, and three copies had to be signed and witnessed. The contract was worth less than £5,000 per annum. I was reluctant—my lawyer friends would approve of this—to sign the document without first reading and fully understanding it. Three pages into the document, I realised that I would need to engage the services of a whole team of lawyers for at least a month before I could safely sign it. In the end, I solved the problem by the simple expedient of not signing the contract. That seemed like a good solution. We continued to provide the service and get paid for the next 15 years, despite three further tendering exercises and three sets of unsigned contract documents over that period. Nobody ever noticed that we did not sign the contract. That example epitomises much of what is still wrong with Scotland’s public sector procurement, which is often overly bureaucratic in a way that is disproportionate to the contract size. I am happy to acknowledge that we have made much progress in Scotland and that our record compares well with the rest of the UK and with many countries in Europe. However, it is absolutely right that we should strive for continual improvement, and there is no question but that improvement is required. Much of the problem seems to stem from risk aversion. I know of two fairly recent significant projects in the Highlands and Islands where the main contractor went into liquidation shortly after beginning the work. In each case, the subcontractors and the supply chain of smaller local firms were significantly out of pocket. In each case, the contracts cost much more to complete. We need the procurement process to be much less risk averse and much more risk aware. We also need a process that properly manages risk—all the risks. One good way of managing risk is the unbundling or disaggregation of larger contracts. That not only spreads the risk but gives smaller local companies a better chance of winning contracts. Smaller contracts are often less attractive to predatory firms, which may be very good at dealing with the bureaucracy but much less good at actually carrying out the work. By helping smaller businesses, smaller contracts help Scotland to achieve what the economists refer to as churn—the process by which the big, fat, lazy cats are replaced by lean, mean, hungry cats. That is also the process that drives innovation. Both of those are necessary ingredients in any successful economy. Rural areas such as the Highlands and Islands present particular challenges for project delivery, particularly in the islands. Almost always, the smaller local firms are best at negotiating and dealing with those challenges. For aftercare and warranty work, I have often found that firms from far afield are—understandably—reluctant to send operatives out to far-flung places. We need to focus much more on outcomes and the quality of outcomes and far less on process. That is especially the case in tendering architectural work, because even our most successful architects tend to work in small companies. If we cannot capture quality at the design stage of a project, we will not achieve it further on in the delivery process. The great thing about a small country such as Scotland is that we can drive forward the process of reform and continual improvement faster than larger countries can. The Parliament has already delivered procurement processes better than many other countries—think what we could do with all the levers of innovation and reform at our disposal.

Does the member appreciate that, as employment law is a reserved matter, it would be the UK Government’s place to do that, and not ours?

I am sure that the minister is aware that concerns have been raised by NFU Scotland that some crofters who have entered into renewable energy agreements might not be able to progress their projects due to the decrofting issue. Can the minister assure Parliament that owner-occupier crofters will not be put at a disadvantage when they are progressing renewable energy projects?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on giving yet another statesmanlike speech in his role as convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. I am pleased that the committee’s report on RPP2 was a good one, but it could have been better. It might have been better had the Labour members of the committee concentrated more on climate change mitigation and a bit less on political point scoring. I am sure that most of the committee’s members would agree that the great thing about the Scottish Government’s ambitious climate change targets is that they not only tackle the threat of climate change, but give impetus to our renewable energy targets, to much-needed investment in our grid and to tackling the scourge of fuel poverty. I am therefore proud that the Scottish Government has set such ambitious targets and that it is more than halfway to meeting them. In our scrutiny of RPP2, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard calls from some quarters for more clarity and detail. Such calls represent a failure to recognise that RPP2 is a high-level, strategic document, or that it relates to a fast-moving field, in which innovation, the application of technologies and business practice are all moving forward at a startling pace.

I think that the member will agree that technologies are moving so quickly that it is impossible to predict where they will go, other than to say that they will be helpful during the next few years, given that a lot of our technology is directed at solving the problem that we are talking about. There is a failure to recognise that plans that are too inflexible will be an obstacle to achieving targets, far from increasing the possibility that we will achieve them. There were calls from some quarters to introduce more punitive regulations to enable us to achieve our targets. For example, it was suggested that the introduction of tougher building standards would lead to greater energy efficiency in new homes. Such suggestions fail to recognise that the house building industry is on its knees. We are building less than 0.5 per cent of our building stock per annum.

I reject that suggestion absolutely, Ms Grant. If you want a tutorial on the cost implications of higher building standards and energy efficiency, I will make myself available to give you such a tutorial. New houses have to meet high energy efficiency standards and tougher standards are being introduced—they might not be as tough as some people would wish them to be, but that is for very good reasons. Our energy efficiency problem lies not with new houses but with the existing housing stock. The vast majority of the housing stock—more than 90 per cent—is more than 10 years old and such homes are not nearly as energy efficient as new houses are. To raise energy efficiency standards for new homes beyond what is planned would be to run the risk of building far fewer new homes, which would be counterproductive, even in the context of our climate change targets. It was suggested that tough regulations should be introduced for the private rented sector. The suggestion fails to recognise that even with today’s high energy prices, many interventions have a payback period of more than 60 years. That is made clear in the Sullivan report, which I commend to members who have not read it. The green deal also fails to recognise that issue. If it is any sort of deal, it is the wrong deal for the wrong people; it will certainly not help the people who are most in need, who are increasingly suffering fuel poverty. If we are to make progress in the area, it is better to use the carrot than to use the stick and to work in partnership with Scotland’s businesses and people. That leads me to one of the most significant problems that we face in meeting our climate change targets. Whereas the Scottish Government is focused on renewable energy and its climate change targets and recognises that the approach offers many opportunities as well as challenges, the UK Government is unfocused and perhaps confused. It is procrastinating on energy market reform and the necessary grid enhancements, it is procrastinating on transmission charges, especially for Scotland’s islands, and it is procrastinating on the domestic renewable heat incentive, all of which could help Scotland to achieve its climate change targets sooner rather than later. I would think better of some Opposition members of this Parliament if they thought less about applying unwise and punitive regulation to Scotland’s people and businesses and more about the inadequacies of the UK Parliament, and if they gave a little thought to the issue and recognised how well the Scottish Government is doing in achieving its very ambitious climate change targets.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate is timely, as it comes shortly after the latest GERS figures have been announced. Those figures, which are up from last year’s figures, clearly show that Scotland is on a successful trajectory. Scotland has been in a better fiscal position than the rest of the UK for five years. We are now producing 9.9 per cent of the UK’s revenue, which is up from 9.6 per cent in the previous year. That indicates significant fiscal strength, especially as we have only 8.4 per cent of the UK’s population. It is unfortunate that we receive only 9.3 per cent of the expenditure. In other words, we pay more to Westminster than we get back, and we have done so for some time. The figures also reveal that Scotland is in a better position than the UK to the tune of £4.4 billion, or £834 per person. I am sure that the Opposition parties will be glad to hear that the good news story for Scotland does not stop there. Scotland’s oil and gas industry is entering a new phase of increased production, with investment this year expected to reach £13 billion and plans for longer-term investment exceeding £100 billion. I think that the Opposition parties think that those oil companies and their investors are completely stupid, but it is no surprise that they expect the fields to be more, not less, productive over the coming years and that revenue is expected to be between £41 billion and £57 billion over the next six years. That will give a newly independent Scotland a great start. It is a financial springboard that will propel us on to even greater success. That is not all the good news. As the First Minister has said, Scotland has won the energy lottery not once, but twice: it has 25 per cent of Europe’s wind and tidal resources and 10 per cent of its wave energy potential. This will play an ever more significant part in Scotland’s economy. Scotland has an oil resource that will last for another 40 or so years, with 24 billion barrels still to be extracted, which will be worth more than £1.5 trillion at today's prices. No serious commentator is suggesting that oil prices are going to fall in the long term. However, the important point is that our offshore marine energy industry will be maturing as oil begins to run out. The Offshore Valuation Group suggested in its 2010 report that by 2050 marine energy may contribute as much as £4 billion per annum to Scottish revenue in corporation tax alone. That excludes onshore renewables, the myriad of opportunities afforded by micro energy and the onshore supply chain, and the considerable economic potential of exporting our expertise in that most valuable sector, the knowledge economy. The unionist parties are pessimists and doubters. Anyone who doubts that Scotland will succeed in harnessing nature or that it can solve the technical problems associated with marine energy should go to the European Marine Energy Centre on Orkney. They should experience for themselves the creative energy being brought to bear all over Orkney, not just in the offices and test stations but in conversations in pubs, fish and chip shops and cafes. They should go to Orkney and experience the renaissance effect that is under way as those creative people apply their talents to solving the problems and exploiting the exciting opportunities. That is exactly what the economist David Ricardo meant by countries exploiting their comparative advantages. It is what Joe Stiglitz means when he prescribes moving to a green economy as the medicine for ailing economies. Unlike the UK Government, which is prevaricating over energy policy, an independent Scotland will nurture this opportunity. We will continue to lead the way in the renewable energy revolution and we will reap the economic and fiscal rewards. There is a point when the Unionists, the doubters and the doomsayers turn to dishonesty in their efforts to diminish Scotland. They crossed this line before when they buried the McCrone report and for 30-odd years told us the lie that Scotland’s oil was of little value. I have heard nothing this afternoon that re-establishes their credibility or their integrity. The Scottish public may have been fooled once, but they will not be fooled twice. I am just about to finish—

Will the member give way?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made since 2007 on delivering healthcare to rural and remote areas. (S4O-01940)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given the progress that has been made in delivering better health services across rural Scotland, this Parliament is best placed to meet the needs of rural and remote Scotland across all policy areas?

Does the minister agree that the findings of the latest global connections survey, which showed that Scottish exports increased by £1.6 billion to £23.9 billion in 2010-11, is evidence that the efforts of the Scottish Government, SDI, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to promote Scottish goods and services are paying off?

I am particularly pleased to speak in the debate because I have spent all of my adult life and much of my childhood living and working close to some of Scotland’s wildest places. Although I use the word “wild” in the ordinary sense of the word, on reading some of briefings that have been sent to me I find that the word is inadequate. A stronger word is needed, at least for me. What I mean by wild is the wildness that we experience going through the Corryvreckan whirlpool in a small fishing boat in a gale or walking over the mountains of Mull in a snowstorm in winter, not for fun but out of necessity, and sometimes out of grim necessity. I am led to believe that the definition of wild land is “an area where an individual finds the experience of wildness is particularly strong.” I find that that sometimes applies to Edinburgh. According to that definition, there is not much of Scotland that I, and the people who work on the land in our remote rural areas, would describe as wild. I have a love of our natural environment and all its inhabitants. I am fortunate to be able to enjoy that right on my doorstep. Dolphins often play around the ferryboat that serves my island home. I can climb into my kayak and, in less than an hour, watch sea eagles on Mull or golden eagles on the Garvellachs. I have scratched the backs of basking sharks on lazy summer seas and rowed madly away from killer whales when their distinctive dorsal fins have appeared too close for comfort. I have come face to face with wild Mull goats, looked into their eyes and understood why the devil was sometimes personified as a big billy goat with horns and a beard. I am really not being funny here. I have watched otters play and nursed young seals back to health. However, my chief concern is that it is our own species, Homo sapiens, that is the threatened species throughout much of the Highlands and Islands. Mankind has inhabited Scotland for around 10,000 years, perhaps more. In that time, we have disposed of the Caledonian forest that once covered our country. In Argyll, we did it to make cannonballs for Nelson’s navy. Almost all our land has been grazed or burned, and the landscape has no resemblance to what it was even a few hundred years ago. A handful of people make a meagre living from it. It supports fewer people every year. Traditional rural economies are declining. Many people cling to their livelihoods like limpets on wave-washed rocks. Rural economies are changing, as they must do, to survive. New opportunities are opening up, which almost always involves some new development. Many of our most economically and socially fragile areas are already suffering death by designation. Living and life itself are sometimes banned in those areas, yet those people who live on our land, as opposed to those who go there only to play, have been the custodians of that land for generations. They have a deep-rooted understanding of the land and how to nurture it. That landscape quality takes work and active management. Under the care of people who understand that, our landscapes have been maintained in an almost pristine condition—a pristine condition that leads others to conclude that it is wild. Successful conservation is a bottom-up and not a top-down process, and cannot and should not be imposed by designation.

I compliment the Finance Committee on its inquiry and report on this important subject. Demographic change is one of the big themes and challenges of our time. In so far as it is a challenge, there is an element of irony, in that as a society we have in part become a victim of our own success. As members have said, the very welcome fact is that, generally speaking, we live much longer than we used to. However, that does not detract from the fact that that is not the case in areas of our country that suffer from deprivation, where lifespans have not increased and deprivation on its own presents significant challenges. There is no doubt, though, that our ageing population presents profound challenges for service delivery and how we finance it. The challenges will intensify as the baby boom generation progressively retires and costs are borne by a relatively smaller workforce. There is a particular challenge for the Highlands and Islands, where demographic changes are intensified because, in many areas, we export younger people and import old people. Rurality presents particular service delivery challenges, not least for healthcare. I welcome some of the information technology innovations that might help to deal with that by reducing costs and by maintaining or improving the quality of services. Perhaps the most significant response to the challenge, which is not really touched on or fully articulated in the Finance Committee report, is to ensure a successful and growing economy. The Scottish Government is pursuing that with vigour and is concentrating on areas of our economy where we have a comparative advantage, including oil and gas, renewable energy, life sciences and food, to name just a few sectors. However, in seeking a successful economy, the concern is by no means just the pursuit of growth for its own sake. Instead, as is made plain from the implementation of the national performance framework, the aim is sustainable growth and a fully functioning and balanced economy that measures success across a broad socioeconomic spectrum. I was therefore delighted to hear the Nobel prize-winning economist Professor Stiglitz pay tribute to that approach in giving evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee only last week, when he said: “Let me commend Scotland for the several efforts that are being made to develop better measures of performance.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 27 February 2013; c 2594.] That tribute is all the more apt considering Professor Stiglitz’s latest book, “The Price of Inequality”, since inequality is in itself a contributory factor to the challenge that is presented by demographic change. Fuel poverty is one example of the difficulties that are disproportionately borne by older people. Economic success is insufficient to tackle the problem. I believe that credit is due to the Government for maintaining a range of universal services and for implementing a range of preventative spend measures. Free personal care is one such provision and I am delighted that spending has increased from £133 million in 2003-04 to £342 million in 2010-11. That is not only wise, but financially prudent, as indicated by Age UK, which estimates that it costs £5,000 a year to provide personal care for someone, compared with £25,000 per annum for a person to be looked after in a care home.

Absolutely. I completely agree with the member. Better integration of healthcare is another necessity. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has introduced the older people’s change fund, which was £70 million last year and £80 million this year. The measure will, we hope, end the practice of cost shunting from one public agency to another and reduce bed blocking. Free bus travel is another welcome measure that the Scottish Government is maintaining. It helps older people to remain active and maintain social networks, which has health benefits as well as social benefits. Just because those benefits are difficult to measure and quantify in economic terms does not mean that they are not of significant value. Scottish National Party members are often accused of pursuing independence for its own sake, but it is precisely because of the challenges that I have outlined that we seek independence. We seek it to allow the Government to have the full range of levers necessary to realise our economic potential and bring about a more equal society—one where we support our older folk. The longer-term trend of the UK, whatever Government is in power there, is economic failure and greater inequality. Against the backdrop of the demographic changes and challenges that we face, it is increasingly important that both countries be free to travel their own separate ways.

Does the member agree that means testing of what are currently universal benefits would increase the likelihood of people falling through the gap, for a variety of reasons?

Does the member not agree that, despite the fact that some witnesses expressed that view, all the evidence is that companies continue to invest in renewable energy in Scotland and that those who are sceptical and talk about uncertainty as a result of constitutional change are really just scaremongering with a political agenda?

Will the member take an intervention?

First, I commend my colleagues on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for their extensive work on this important inquiry. I also commend our team of clerks and advisers for their patience and professionalism and I thank the many witnesses who gave evidence. The result is a comprehensive and valuable report on a subject that is of the utmost importance to Scotland. The issue is big and complex, and our inquiry was necessarily long. In such a fast-moving field, much has happened since we finished taking evidence. I am pleased that most of that has been positive. I particularly welcome the First Minister’s announcement of an even more challenging, but achievable, interim target of generating 50 per cent of our electricity from renewables by 2015. Political will is the vital ingredient in assuring our success in achieving such targets and—fortunately—we have that in abundance. Renewable energy is important not only because we enjoy significant opportunities and economic advantages from such technologies but because, of all the commodities in the modern world, energy is the king. With sufficient low-cost energy, we can solve all our other problems. That, along with our oil and gas reserves, gives Scotland a huge comparative advantage that makes it difficult to see how we are not set for a future of long-term and sustainable economic success. Of course, there are challenges in achieving the targets—if there were not, that would mean that we had not set the targets high enough. However, the committee painstakingly explored those challenges, and the overwhelming conclusion was that they are surmountable and that we are on course to achieve the targets. Just as there are challenges, so are there many opportunities for jobs and growth, as well as for local social benefits, including the means in many areas to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty. It is an absolute disgrace that energy-rich Scotland should suffer fuel poverty to the extent that it does. I am glad to note that, since the report was published, the difficulties that we indicated with the planning system have been at least partially dealt with. The planning minister recently announced a 20 per cent increase in fees and provided a fund, to which colleagues have referred, of £673,000 to help to deal with wind turbine applications. I am glad that the committee successfully exploded some of the myths that surround renewable energy. The myth that onshore wind destroys tourism was thoroughly explored and no evidence to support it was found. The myth that wind power does not reduce carbon intensity was blown away in the breeze by no less an authority than National Grid itself. The myth that wind intermittency presents a problem and negates carbon savings was revealed to be nonsense by National Grid and others. Another myth was that consumers are paying very high premiums to subsidise renewables, but the figure is now known to be of the order of £21 per annum, which is a tiny fraction of annual fuel bills. The committee made its view clear in paragraph 196 of the report, which says: “It is the Committee’s view therefore that renewable energy represents a safe bet both for energy security and for protection from price shock.” I particularly welcome the target of 500MW for community renewables, which offers the possibility of transformational change across the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere. When I look at what the Shetlanders have done—I thought that Tavish Scott was here, but he is not—with their oil fund, whereby a small levy on the oil that passes through their community has provided community facilities that are second to none, I see a model for what can be done in the rest of Scotland. When I think of the difficulties faced by Scotland’s islanders, who have struggled for generations in the teeth of a hostile climate, and the opportunities now offered by these exciting technologies, I am filled with great hope. That hope is increased when I see the world-leading research that is being done at the European Marine Energy Centre, with young Orcadians returning to Orkney to take up the exciting and cutting-edge career opportunities that are now available. In considering the challenges in achieving our targets and the full potential of our renewables opportunity, one group of problems looms larger than others—those that are entirely within the province of the UK Government. Those include: damaging and disproportionate transmission charges for Scotland’s islands; a failure to invest enough or early enough in upgrading the grid; delay and uncertainty on energy policy, manifested now in setting strike prices for contracts for differences; inordinate delay in introducing the domestic renewable heat incentive; and a green deal that is not the right deal for the right people. The list is long and, once again, the UK Government has made the case quite eloquently for such decisions being best taken here in Scotland, in this Parliament.

Will the member give way?

The member mentioned that there is a single UK market. The committee heard in evidence that, in future, we will move into a European market with a North Sea interconnector. When electrons are pushed down the wires, consumers do not care what the country of origin was. When they pay for them at the eventual point of use—

—the subsidy will be contained in the final price.

Once again, the local government finance settlement is, considering all the circumstances, a generous one. It maintains local government’s share of the Scottish Government’s budget, which is higher now than it was in 2007-08. Once again, council tax will be frozen, ensuring that hard-pressed households are protected, supported by £70 million allocated on a needs basis. That is economically important because our ailing economy lacks demand, and cutting household budgets would only further depress demand. It is the right thing to do both economically and morally. Teacher numbers will be maintained, supported by £39 million, and a range of measures are being introduced to ameliorate the worst effects of the UK Government’s welfare reform, including £40 million to plug the gap that is left by reductions in council tax benefit. That is another measure to protect hard-pressed households. It is morally wrong that the cuts should fall hardest on those who are least able to bear them but it is a mistake to think that the Scottish Government, with limited resources, can fully protect Scotland from those Westminster-imposed cuts. Councils, too, are receiving their share of extra capital—a further £46 million to fund shovel-ready projects. All that will provide much-needed local economic stimulus, supporting jobs and demand. Of course, we have—incredibly—heard the Tories continuing to deny their austerity policies and arguing that the UK Government is not making cuts. They do that at the same time as they lobby on behalf of big business. I do not think that the Scottish public are likely to be fooled by that. Labour—just as absurdly—continues to call for more spending on virtually everything. It seems to be equally in denial of the Tory austerity policies. Today, Labour members will fail, as they have failed since the draft budget was first introduced several months ago, to provide any meaningful alternatives in terms of showing where they would get the extra money from to fund their long and expensive wish list. The only thing that we have heard from them in that regard this afternoon is that they want to increase council tax, adding hundreds of pounds to the bills of hard-pressed households. The position of Labour members is wonderfully complacent. They seem to calmly accept the Tory cuts and somehow seem to believe that the Scottish Government can fully protect the Scottish people against the ravages of their better-together friends in the UK Government. With the limited powers at its disposal, the Scottish Government can never fully protect the Scottish people in these circumstances. It cannot do so without the full range of powers that will come with independence. Given all the circumstances, and most notably the Westminster cuts, the local government settlement is both fair and prudent.

I regret that I was unable to take part in last week’s debate on payday loans, but I listened to it with interest and found myself agreeing almost completely with Kezia Dugdale. My only point of disagreement is that Ms Dugdale and her colleagues on the Labour benches seem content to allow the UK coalition to keep hammering the Scottish people at every turn while apparently suggesting that the only solution lies with the Scottish Government. The proposition that the Scottish Government, with its limited resources, can ameliorate all the harm that is being done by the Tories and the Liberal Democrats is simply not credible; it is a bit like asking the Scottish Government to chase escaped horses while the UK Government stubbornly refuses to lock up the stable. The obvious solution is for the UK Government to continue to pay attention to Mr Ewing’s call for it to cap interest rates on payday and similar loans. Given the background of what most commentators are now calling the great recession and in the face of the exorbitant loans that the UK Government refuses to regulate, it is hardly surprising that over the past few years and until just recently the number of personal bankruptcies has been increasing. The latest figures apparently show that we might have turned a corner in that respect, with, as I understand it, the number of bankruptcies last year falling by about 30 per cent, but we need to treat such figures with caution, especially as financial difficulties are bound to increase as the UK Government’s welfare reforms come down the track. Against such a difficult background, the Scottish Government has to be congratulated on its efforts to continue to refine the debt arrangement scheme, which offers a very constructive alternative to personal bankruptcy by making it possible for a debtor to repay the money owed over a reasonable timescale. Indeed, the increase in debt payment plan approvals under the scheme might be part of the reason for the reduction in personal bankruptcies. It is an infinitely preferable solution for both debtors and creditors, who will at least have their original debts repaid. I am delighted that successive reviews of the DAS have shown that it can be improved in ways that strike a balance between the needs of debtors and those of creditors. Given the time that it can take to approve debt payment plans, it is only right for interest and other charges to be frozen at the start of the application process rather than at the end. However, I have to say that the person who really needs counselling from a money adviser is George Osborne. The problem with very rich people such as Mr Osborne is that they never have to think about money and, because they never have to think about it, they never come to understand it. A debt payment plan for the UK is urgently required and any money adviser would advise Mr Osborne that the debt should be paid over a suitable period. Attempting to repay debts too quickly will not work—and every day we are presented with new evidence that Mr Osborne’s plan is not working.

Will the member give way?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration has been given to the impact that potential court closures may have on island communities in relation to travel. (S4O-01751)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that there is also scope for greater consideration of travelling times and difficulties when scheduling court cases, especially cases that involve travel to and from islands? Does he agree that such consideration of scheduling could also lead to efficiencies in the court system?

It is important when considering any budget to first consider the context. Few people would disagree that we are in the worst and most prolonged economic crisis that any of us has experienced. Most commentators also agree that the Westminster coalition’s austerity policies are not working—even some of those who were initially enthusiastic. The best economic wisdom on how to deal with recessions came from that great English economist John Maynard Keynes, perhaps along with his Canadian counterpart, John Kenneth Galbraith. What they prescribed was really quite simple. In times of recession, Governments should spend on capital projects and infrastructure, and they should recoup that from taxation in times of growth. No one can end boom and bust in the way that Gordon Brown boasted, but by that method we can take the worst excesses out of the business cycle. That is basic economics.

I am sorry, but I have a lot to get through. The real mystery is why the London Government seems not to understand that. Far from improving matters, it is making them worse. The economy is flatlining and, as we heard just today, Government debt is increasing. I am forced to conclude that the London Government is driven not by economic sense but by ideology, and that fiscal difficulties are merely providing cover or an excuse for it doing what it would want to do in any circumstances. It is also surprising that the Labour Party seems not to have any answers either in London or in Scotland, except perhaps for Johann Lamont’s cuts commission, which threatens to undo much of the good work that this Parliament has done since its inception.

No, I am sorry. I must make progress. The Labour Party has gone from wildly exuberant expenditure in government to trying to outflank the Tory party on the right, at least in terms of economic stupidity. Each of them fails to understand that economics is not a zero-sum game and that the answer to our current problems is to stimulate demand and not to weaken it. The Labour Party also seems not to recognise that the Scottish Government does not currently have borrowing powers. Therefore, the budget is fully funded and, by definition, all the measures within it are affordable.

No, I am sorry. I must make progress. I cannot see how the Labour Party can reconcile its proposition that, in the future, universal services will be unaffordable with its claim, along with the Tories, that we are better together. According to that vision, surely what they mean is that we will be poorer together. I completely reject the proposition. Provided that we have control over our own resources, Scotland can look forward to a prosperous future. Therefore, we are fortunate that in Scotland we have a cabinet secretary who is solely driven by what is best for Scotland and who understands exactly what is required for the Scottish economy. The downside, of course, is that he does not yet have fiscal or borrowing powers, and the pity is that those are the very tools that are most needed to deal with our current situation. Under those circumstances, the Scottish Government has taken a very rational approach. Regionalisation of the further education system will offer greater efficiency while maintaining college places equality, and amalgamation of the police and fire services will offer similar efficiencies while protecting front-line services.

No, thank you. I have a lot to get through. Health and council budgets have been protected, with councils maintaining their share of Scottish Government funding. Families have been protected by maintaining the council tax freeze and small businesses have been protected by the small business bonus, which is especially important because some commentators suggest that recovery will come from the small business sector. Managing all those things—which, incidentally, are all manifesto commitments—with a steeply declining Scottish Government allowance is impressive; finding additional capital for a range of capital projects to provide further stimulus is even more so. Delivering those projects—the new Forth road bridge, for example—under budget and delivering many others efficiently, while ensuring value for the public pound through the Scottish Futures Trust and the NPD mechanism, requires the special discipline that Mr Swinney brings to his work.

Therefore, it is all the more remarkable that the cabinet secretary has also found money for a range of preventative spend measures, recognising that it is important to have an eye on the future. I was surprised that the Opposition parties called for evidence of the effectiveness of and savings created by those preventative spend measures, as if, in this area, we can spend one day and see a result the next day. That underpins the belief that there is a lack of economic understanding among the Opposition parties in the chamber.

I am pleased to support this budget. Weighing all the circumstances, I think that it is a good budget. It is good economically, in that it will provide capital stimulus; it is good financially, because inevitably the books will be balanced—

And it is a good budget politically, as it will maintain manifesto commitments and therefore the trust of the Scottish people.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept the OBR figures that suggest that, as Mr Swinney outlined in his speech, capital expenditure gives a multiplier of 1 while revenue expenditure has a multiplier of 0.6?

Will Margaret McDougall give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on expediting the proposed new subsea power cables to the Western Isles and Orkney. (S4O-01705)

Does the cabinet secretary consider that by delaying the provision of these cables, which will lead to significant cost increases and significant delays for generation projects both large and small, Ofgem and the United Kingdom Government have acted in consumers’ best interests?

Does the member agree that enlightened planning practice suggests that, in enforcement cases, the enforcement officers should do their best to resolve the issues in an amicable and constructive fashion rather than take formal action? Therefore, the statistics that she has quoted are actually the hallmark of a practice that is to be welcomed.

Will the member give way?

How does the member feel about the proposal for a wind farm on her colleague Jamie McGrigor’s estate? I know that I certainly welcome some of the community benefits that may flow from that.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate, not just because I have been wrestling with, reading about and thinking about our planning system since I lodged my first application, nearly 35 years ago, but because few subjects merit more attention. The planning system is immensely important to delivering sustainable growth and safeguarding our built and natural environments. In short, the planning system delivers our future. Incidentally, my first application was for the renovation of a cottage and it was refused consent. The cottage is still a ruin and, for me, that points the way to how we must judge our planning system: on the outcomes that it produces. That the cottage I referred to is still a ruin is not, I suggest, anybody’s idea of a good outcome. I suggest, too, that there has not been much construction since the inception of the modern planning system in the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1947 that we can be all that proud about. When I look back at the past 65 years or so of building, I do not see all that much that would win design awards. I ask myself: where are the listed buildings of tomorrow? Where are the conservation areas in the making? I therefore have some sympathy with those who feel that our planning system fails to deliver quality of development, which is perhaps why so many people are against any and all development. That is why I am glad that the minister recognises the need for improvements in place making and design quality. Our planning system has often shrunk from the subjective nature of determining design quality, but in reality there is a much wider recognition of good and bad design quality than we sometimes acknowledge. When a planning system fails to address that, it fails entirely. My focus as a Highlands and Islands member is inevitably on rural planning issues. Although those are similar to many of the issues that are found across the country, there are of course particular rural concerns. Perhaps the most important of those concerns is the rural housing problem. I note that the then Rural Affairs and the Environment Committee’s 2009 housing report included recommendations on improving the planning system. It is therefore a disappointment to me that at a recent meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on rural policy, on the theme of housing, the discussion again focused on planning as a significant problem in delivering rural housing. When it is considered that Scotland’s population density is among the lowest in Europe—the Office for National Statistics quotes it currently at 67 people per square kilometre—and with only 3 per cent of the population living in 50 per cent of our most rural land area, the constraint on housing land that is imposed by our planning systems in many rural areas is unfortunate to say the least. However, the flipside of the statistics is that 81 per cent of our population lives in open areas covering less than 6 per cent of the land area. That puts many of our planning issues into perspective. Even before the credit crunch, Scotland was not a country groaning under development pressure. I welcome the current planning reforms, as the need is for continuous and incremental improvement. I also welcome the minister’s recognition that our planning system must become more efficient and simpler. Even after 35 years, I often struggle to understand the complexity of local planning policies and of letters that I receive from heads of planning. More worrying is the fact that when I talk to council members who are taking planning decisions, they seem to understand them much less than I do. I have some sympathy for planning departments that struggle with a lack of resources, but I have to temper that sympathy with the observation that my mailbox is stuffed with complaints from constituents about overzealous efforts being applied to often petty and trivial enforcement issues. I am therefore glad that the minister has struck a careful balance between increasing planning fees, which will add a further burden to development costs in difficult times, and increasing resources to planning departments, and that he sees the clear need to link increased resources to improving efficiency. I welcome, too, the focus on plan-led planning practice and efforts to engage more people at that earlier stage rather than have engagement that is merely reactive to applications. Most of all, I welcome the minister’s focus on improving the culture in which we deal with planning, because improving the culture and paving the way towards a more enlightened planning system trumps all other possible improvements.

John Finnie may recall that, in 2011, a big election issue in Argyll and Bute was the council’s proposal at that time to close 30 per cent of its primary schools in the type of area that he has described. Does he agree that that was really a failure of planning policy rather than of education policy?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that the on-going extension of permitted development rights takes an awful lot of applications out of the planning system and, in effect, increases the resources that are available to planning departments?

Will the member give way?

I am struck by the thought that Opposition members in the chamber this afternoon seem to have come down with a very dismal dose of January blues. First, Rhoda Grant was wringing her hands about health and safety issues, when in reality the health and safety record of the oil and gas industry is better than that of construction, farming and fishing, and—as we have heard in the chamber—better than that of retail. When we consider the hazardous nature of what the industry does, that is a terrific record, so Rhoda Grant ought to congratulate the industry rather than complain about health and safety.

I have ground to cover.

Okay.

Yes—and as good as the safety record is, we should of course all strive to improve it. We also heard from Mary Scanlon about when she was a slip of a lass and oil was $3 a barrel; it is now $100—or well over $100—a barrel. I am afraid that I just cannot follow the logic of the assumption that, somehow or other, oil prices will drop away and be as unreliable as she seems to suggest.

Certainly.

I did not say that Mary Scanlon was suggesting that. The point that she made very well and eloquently was that oil prices are rising steeply and have been doing so, and that that is the long-term trend. I am old enough to remember—just like Mary Scanlon—the discovery of oil and gas in the North Sea. We were told that there really was not very much oil there at all, and I am old enough to remember that we were told that it was somehow the wrong sort of oil. If it is the wrong sort, it is wrong in the sense that it seems to be a special type of oil that is always running out almost before it has been discovered. Every year seems to bring another scare story that talks down Scotland’s oil. The reality has been, and is, quite different. More than £300 billion in oil revenues has been sent to the Treasury, and Scotland’s oil has been one big fat golden goose that has somehow survived the abuse of considerable fiscal uncertainty as successive Westminster Administrations have seen how much it can be squeezed with a sometimes careless abandon with regard to the wellbeing of industry or its future. I was therefore shocked, but not at all surprised, at the eventual publication of Gavin McCrone’s report in 2005. It was immediately evident on reading that report why it had been buried in secrecy for so long. So much for the past, but what about the future? I am sure that the Presiding Officer and all the members in the chamber are as happy as I am to have heard in today’s debate that the future of Scotland’s oil and gas sector looks very bright indeed, with the prospect of 24 billion barrels of oil still to come and a wholesale value of £1.5 trillion. So much for Scotland’s oil running out. That equates to about 40 per cent of oil by volume still to come, and at least 50 per cent of oil by value. By any measure, that is still a considerable resource indeed. It is a good-news story that all Scotland’s politicians should be talking up, and for more than one reason. Recessions are mainly about the loss of confidence and, although the current one was precipitated by the banking crisis, nevertheless it continues only because of a loss of confidence. At some point in the economic cycle, confidence always returns, so there is a sense in which we can literally talk ourselves out of recession. For ideological reasons it may suit the Tory agenda to talk up our economic difficulties, but that is the opposite of what we should be doing. Scotland’s oil and gas industry deserves to be talked up for yet another reason.

In these days of unemployment—and, especially, youth unemployment—we hear of significant skills shortages in oil and gas, yet we also hear that young people are reluctant to embark on careers in the industry, despite the prospect of rewarding employment. One good reason for that is that we continually see scaremongering in the press and media about uncertainty in the industry. No wonder young people are reluctant to contemplate careers in oil and gas. It is not oil resources that are unpredictable so much as it is UK Government policy. As far as Scotland is concerned, let us hope that the UK management of those resources comes to an end soon. Scotland’s oil and gas reserves certainly deserve to be talked up as being a valuable economic resource—all the more so with the exciting development of carbon capture and storage just around the corner.

I will finish immediately.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

James Kelly said “finally”, which leads me to believe that that was the end of his list. Does he accept that not one item in his long list represents a criticism of the budget?

I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate, although I am not a member of the Finance Committee. I commend the committee for its work in producing such a comprehensive report, which I have had the benefit of reading. The report correctly identifies the context for the draft budget as one that is as challenging as any that a Scottish finance secretary has ever had to deal with. It is challenging for two reasons: first, because of the generally grim economic circumstances; and, secondly, because of the cuts that are being imposed by the Westminster Government, which amount to a real-terms cut of 11 per cent over four years and, within that, a capital cut of almost 26 per cent. Gavin Brown might like to pretend that there is no such thing as inflation but, in reality, that is just fantasy economics. Far from the chancellor’s promises of a much better outlook by now, the overall state of the economy is now much worse than when he took office. The prospect of a triple-dip recession, which is unheard of and unprecedented, looms large. The UK faces the loss of its coveted AAA rating, and the fiscal position has worsened rather than improved. In its central aim of reducing the UK deficit, the austerity policy has failed, but, worse than that, it now appears that it has locked us into a downward spiral of economic misery, and the chancellor has no answer.

I do not have those figures to hand, but I think that the member is missing the point. The UK will possibly lose the AAA rating because of poor fiscal and economic policy. The chancellor has no answer except the promise of more austerity. What is perhaps more disappointing is that neither in London nor in Scotland does the Labour Party have any answer either, except perhaps from Johann Lamont, with her own special brand of austerity to be unveiled at some point in the future by her cuts commission. Her claim that many of this Parliament’s greatest achievements are unaffordable misses the fundamental point about any Scottish Government budget: that, by definition, it must be balanced, which therefore means that current policies are affordable. If there is one aspect of the budget that might genuinely be held to be unaffordable, it is the £1 billion of private finance initiative payments that must be found annually. Buying infrastructure on a credit card was never affordable. That is perhaps the most unfortunate legacy in Scotland of the long years of the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administrations, and one that it will take a long time to forget.

I think that the clue is in the term “non-profit-distributing”. It is tempting to assume that the thread of economic illiteracy runs through all the Opposition parties in the chamber but, from reading the committee report, I know that that is not the case. Opposition members have the same good grasp of economics as we have, which is perhaps why I see so little genuine criticism of the draft budget in the report. They do not criticise it because, in fact, they accept that it is a good budget that strikes a careful balance between social policy and economic policy; and between maintaining demand and confidence on the one hand, and providing the stimulus of capital investment on the other. It is a budget for both jobs and growth, maintaining jobs through a no compulsory redundancy policy and creating them and stimulating the economy through careful transfers from resource to capital. When thinking about the budget, I always consult two advisers who have spoken to Scotland down through the centuries: Adam Smith, who defined our values of economic wisdom and prudence; and Robert Burns, who articulated our social conscience. Together, they represent our shared cultural values of good economics and an egalitarian social conscience—two sets of values that are not mutually exclusive but mutually reinforcing. I suggest that each of those advisers would be happy with the finance secretary’s budget and its careful compromise. It is a good budget for jobs and growth, but we will in the future see even better budgets when Mr Swinney has the full range of fiscal levers and full prudent borrowing powers when Scotland is independent.

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing this debate on an issue that is important not just for the Pentland Firth and Scotland’s islands but for all Scotland and indeed for the UK. It is estimated that the Pentland Firth accounts for about 50 per cent of the UK’s tidal resource, and tidal energy is the most reliable of renewable energy resources. Perhaps the most useful Christmas present that my wife buys me every year is a set of tide tables. I am an islander, who begins his journey to the Parliament in a rowing boat, so knowing the state of the tide is important to me. It is fortunate that tides are predictable. Predictions can be made more than a year in advance, with accuracy to within a few minutes for any given location. It is the predictable and unceasing nature of our tides that makes tidal energy so vital, and Scotland is leading the world in tidal and wave energy research at the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney. However, the biggest impediment to bringing devices into commercial production is the disincentive to invest that is presented by the imposition of unfair transmission charges. Paragraph 62 of European Union directive 2009/28/EC, on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, says: “The costs of connecting new producers of electricity and gas from renewable energy sources to the electricity and gas grids should be objective, transparent and non-discriminatory and due account should be taken of the benefit that embedded producers of electricity from renewable energy sources and local producers of gas from renewable sources bring to the electricity and gas grids.” The directive continues, in paragraph 63: “Electricity producers who want to exploit the potential of energy from renewable sources in the peripheral regions of the Community, in particular in island regions and regions of low population density, should, whenever feasible, benefit from reasonable connection costs in order to ensure that they are not unfairly disadvantaged in comparison with producers situated in more central, more industrialised and more densely populated areas.” Paragraph 7 of article 16—I thank you for your indulgence, Presiding Officer, but this is important—says: “Member States shall ensure that the charging of transmission and distribution tariffs does not discriminate against electricity from renewable energy sources, including in particular electricity from renewable energy sources produced in peripheral regions, such as island regions, and in regions of low population density. Member States shall ensure that the charging of transmission and distribution tariffs does not discriminate against gas from renewable energy sources.” That all seems perfectly clear to me, and the EU position seems to be unequivocal. I wrote to Ed Davey about the issue on 9 April last year. He eventually replied to me on 3 August. That was despite the reassurance that was given to me when he appeared before the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee in June that he would deal with the matter forthwith. Perhaps I am slightly cynical, but he eventually replied a week after I wrote to his boss, David Cameron, to complain about his failure to reply. Mr Davey said that Ofgem is comfortable that there is compliance with that directive, but it seems to me that the insistence on punitive transmission charges for Scotland’s islands is in complete contravention of both the letter and the spirit of the directive. Just last week, we heard Ofgem warning Mr Davey that the lights might go out in England as early as 2015. Neither Ofgem nor Mr Davey has much to be comfortable about. In reviewing the daft transmission charges, perhaps they will take into account the fact that, currently, they are denying not only Scotland’s islands but the whole of the UK the benefit of Scotland’s renewable energy.

Does the member agree that the reason for the inflationary increases in cable costs has a lot to do with the prevarication in getting those cables in place and that, if that had been done two or three years ago, a lot of those costs could have been avoided?

Does the minister agree that, if followed properly, the policy of no compulsory redundancies and the aim to meet seasonal demand from local and temporary labour could benefit the communities of Orkney and Shetland by providing more locally generated employment?

I think that everyone in Scotland was proud when the Climate Change (Scotland) 2009 was passed—here was another area in which Scotland could be a world leader. The targets are ambitious and achievable and, most important, they are set at a level at which unintended consequences can be minimised. Although some members might like us to make even faster progress, we must always exercise caution rather than force change too quickly, as change can bring hardships on people who least deserve hardship. We must practise climate justice at home as well as abroad. Nevertheless, it is no small achievement that we are already ahead of most of Europe in reducing our greenhouse gas emissions, despite a small setback last year. The trend in carbon reduction is downwards and showing every indication that we will achieve and perhaps even exceed our targets. Although achieving the targets presents challenges, we are demonstrating in Scotland that those same challenges offer opportunities, not least of which are the significant economic opportunities in our renewable energy sector. Once again, Scotland is leading the world, for instance in the field of marine renewables, with requests to the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney from the US, Japan and Korea to show them how to do it. What an amazing contribution to the rest of the world a small country such as Scotland can make in pioneering those exciting developments. The great thing about Scotland’s significant renewable energy opportunity—with 25 per cent of Europe’s wind and tidal resource and 10 per cent of its wave energy capability—is that it will solve both our energy problem and our climate change problem. When we solve both of those problems, we do so not for a decade or even for a century—we solve them for ever. In looking at the obstacles to achieving those targets, once again I have to confess to further frustration with the Westminster Government: with UK energy ministers squabbling among themselves about their energy policy and sowing doubt and uncertainty throughout the industry; with Ed Davey peddling patent nonsense about energy costs rising with Scottish independence; with the rapid decrease of the feed-in tariff for solar photovoltaics, ensuring that Scotland will not benefit nearly as well as it should from that technology; with the prevarication over the domestic renewable heat incentive; and with hugely excessive transmission charges for Scotland’s islands, where much of the renewable resource is. I suggest to the Opposition parties in the chamber that the UK Government is so terrified of—and so preoccupied with—the prospect of Scottish independence that it is taking its eye off the ball with regard to energy policy and other areas. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that the single biggest impediment to Scotland achieving its climate change targets is the UK Government.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what information it has on how the number of applications to Scottish universities compares with the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4O-01539)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that higher education should be based on the ability to learn, and not on the ability to pay?

In his speech just a few moments ago, Liam McArthur accused the cabinet secretary of lodging with the ombudsman a complaint against his own Government about the Dunoon ferry service. I and a number of members from the Highlands and Islands region were copied into the same email from the Dunoon ferry campaigners that Mr Russell received, and Mr Russell copied me into his reply. I can therefore confirm to the chamber that what Mr McArthur said was entirely inaccurate and, indeed, untrue. I ask the member to accept my word for this if he will not accept the cabinet secretary’s but, if he is not prepared to do that, I am sure that Mr Russell and I will be happy to co-operate in carrying out the minimum amount of research that would be required to get to the truth. I ask Mr McArthur to take a bit of time and, when he discovers the truth, to come back to the chamber at the earliest opportunity and make due apology to Mr Russell and the chamber.

No, I am not prepared to take an intervention. This debate should not be about the cabinet secretary or who said what when—[Interruption.]

I invite the member to speak to me after the debate, which is—or should be—about further education. [Interruption.]

Last week I paid tribute to the cabinet secretary because he was on the verge of pulling off that difficult task of making a virtue out of necessity. This week, I renew that tribute. The further education system has been in need of reform for many years. Hugh Henry admitted as much in last week’s debate and he agreed that reform was necessary—reform that Labour failed to carry out when it was in office, when its budget was rising year on year, and which Hugh Henry failed to carry out when he was education minister, albeit briefly.

No, I took a number of interventions last week and did not even get halfway through my speech. The need for reform was evident in that daft system in which colleges sometimes operated in competition with each other like pseudo-businesses—some colleges did well and others did not, and two colleges that were close together would sometimes struggle in competition with each other, running identical courses, each with half-full classes. We heard a lot about that last week and we heard about needless and wasteful duplication. We should remember, too, that further education is not really about colleges. It is not even about the further education sector. It is about young people and it is about training and educating and equipping them for life. The system was failing many of those young people because it was not always—

No, I have to make progress. The system was not always about supplying education that was relevant to the needs of those young people for today and tomorrow. How do we know that? We know that because in an era of rising unemployment, particularly youth unemployment, we hear from industry sectors of skill shortages. We hear that they are desperate for young people but that they cannot get sufficient numbers who are adequately trained or educated. We hear that from the oil and gas sector.

No, thank you. With estimates of 22 billion barrels of oil still to come out of the North Sea, with a value of more than £1.5 trillion, the sector offers not just short-term employment but rewarding long-term careers.

No, I will not, thank you. We hear about skill shortages from the renewable energy sector. With some estimates suggesting that there will be investment of more than £100 billion in the sector in Scotland in the next decade, the sector offers great career opportunities for young people.

No, thank you. No, thank you. There is a need to reform and to refocus our further education sector and to address those pressing problems, because it is fundamentally wrong to deny our young people—

No, thank you. It is fundamentally wrong to deny our young people the opportunity of meaningful careers. It is also wrong because it deprives us of the ability to fully realise our economic opportunities.

The buildings in our further education estate are not all capable of accommodating the necessary reforms, so large amounts of capital investment are required to facilitate the reforms. The Scottish Government has provided that investment partially through the non-profit-distributing mechanism. That is why, in this period of reform, it is misleading and entirely false to consider only revenue spending. There is one further matter that I must touch on before concluding. Colleges have reserves of around £206 million—or they did at the end of 2011. That is equivalent to about 40 per cent of this year’s revenue budget.

Under those circumstances, it is only proper that colleges contribute to the costs of the reforms, which, by and large, they support. The cabinet secretary has been carrying out the reforms—

He has been carrying them out under difficult circumstances.

In beginning a speech in a debate about tourism, it is only proper that I first pay tribute to the man who is credited with single-handedly starting the Scottish tourism industry: Walter Scott. I am sure that he would be more than surprised to know that he founded an industry that now supports about 10 per cent of employment in Scotland and which, even in these dark days of recession, grew last year at a rate of 9 per cent. When much of the rest of the economy is flatlining, that is a very healthy rate of growth. Tourism is yet another industry in which Scotland bucks the economic trends and outperforms the rest of the UK, and it takes more than 20 per cent of the overall UK tourism spend. In one way or another, every person in Scotland benefits from this dynamic industry. That is why all members of this Parliament should support it and consider themselves as tourism ambassadors for Scotland and talk up Scotland’s many virtues. If there is a segment of the tourism industry that deserves special consideration, it is business tourism. Business tourism leads to many other benefits, such as business contacts and business contracts, repeat visits, and export and investment opportunities for Scotland. It is worth contemplating why Scotland is so successful in that sector. It seems to me that something about Scotland inspires creativity. It was not an accident that the industrial revolution started here with James Watt’s steam engine. It was not an accident that the enlightenment started in Edinburgh and that Adam Smith founded modern economics here in Scotland, which was a precursor to the modern business landscape that stretches across the globe. Those things were not accidents. There is something about Scotland, something about our landscapes and something about our people and our manner of discourse and dialogue—although not always in this chamber. There is something about Scotland that inspires thought, and which inspires creativity. Business, if it is to be successful, must be all about creativity, because creativity leads to innovation and innovation is the key to success in business, as it is the key to our economic success as a nation. What better place to refresh tired minds and to rediscover a passion for success than Scotland? That is why business tourism is growing in Scotland. So let us start talking Scotland up, and let us tell the world that we want to do more business. Scotland’s business is no longer centred exclusively in our cities. I am thinking of the biomara project at Dunstaffnage in Oban, where we lead the world in marine research with a project that aims to capture the vast productive powers of our oceans in producing biofuel. Think of the business spin-off that will be engendered by that project. I am thinking of the European Marine Energy Centre on Orkney, where we lead the world in marine renewables research and development. That has led to inquiries from Korea, Japan and the US to teach them about marine renewables. As people from other countries learn from us, we will learn from them. Learning from each other and doing business with each other go hand in hand, for business is about mutual benefit and the best of business is often centred on friendships. As Mary Scanlon said, we must always strive to improve our competitiveness and we must address the impediments to this successful sector. Dr Mike Cantlay, chairman of VisitScotland, appeared before the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee only a couple of weeks ago. He said that inbound air passenger duty “is not about austerity; it is lunacy.” He also said that the UK is “one of only 14 countries that apply the full rate of VAT on restaurant meals; the average for the rest of the EU is 8.8 per cent, not 20 per cent.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1897, 1896.] We have the second-highest rate of VAT on accommodation in Europe; the average for the rest of Europe is 10.3 per cent, as opposed to 20 per cent. I agree with Mary Scanlon that we need to increase our competitiveness; reducing VAT would be a good way of doing so. I am forced to wonder why, in the face of all economic wisdom, the UK Government persists in overtaxing this area of industry and, indeed, any area of industry in which Scotland does well or enjoys an advantage. The answer to that question is self-evident. Fortunately a solution is almost at hand.

When I read Liz Smith’s motion, I found it hard to believe that it came from the same Tory party that is in the process of savaging the UK’s further education budget by 32.3 per cent in real terms, as Marco Biagi told us. It is difficult to reconcile the two things.

Not at the moment, thanks. Perhaps the Tories have woken up from their long slumber and imagine that we are now in an independent Scotland where it might be credible for the Scottish Tories to say one thing and for the Tories south of the border to do another. Or perhaps, undaunted by Mr Obama’s recent election victory, they are merely following Mitt Romney’s maxim that, “You can fool some of the people all of the time and these are the ones we need to concentrate on.” Whatever the reason, the people of Scotland will not be fooled, as they have not been fooled by the Tories for many years. In fact, they have not been fooled since the last time there was major reform of the further education sector nearly 20 years ago. It is worth reflecting on the shortcomings of the previous system, in which each college competed against its neighbours as if they were businesses in a free market, and the concerns of education were often overshadowed by those of business. The reason why that system can never work is that it laboured under the restrictions of a zero-sum game, whereas genuine business relies on growth and open economies.

If Mary Scanlon is prepared to wait and listen to my speech, I will deal with that very point. In the previous system, success was often measured by the success of the institution but not always by that of the students. A few colleges may have done well under that system, but others most certainly did not. In answer to Mary Scanlon’s point, I say that I have personal experience from my previous life in business, when we had to send apprentices to a college in Glasgow. That particular college—it would be unfair to name it—was not doing well in business terms. I should say that I had no choice. I see that the cabinet secretary is wondering what I am getting at here [Interruption.] I ask members to be patient. I should add that that was before the flourishing Argyll College was established under the stewardship of Michael Breslin, the recently retired chief executive. Members will be pleased to hear that Mr Breslin is now putting his considerable talents to good use as an SNP councillor. I return to the answer for Mary. Our apprentices received almost nothing in the way of education or training at that struggling college in the central belt. I had first-year apprentices quite proudly tell me—they used to do this often—that they had to show the lecturers how to do things.

Not at the moment; I am still answering Mary’s question.

On one occasion, I refused to sign off training modules as the apprentices had agreed with me that they had not achieved competence in those areas. The following week, the head of the department telephoned me, and he explained to me that I was missing the point. The point was, from his business perspective, that he would not receive the funding unless I signed off the modules that week. He had no real concern about the training and every concern for his budget. I can only assume that that became a more general problem because the following year the practice of employers signing off training objectives was discontinued.

I did not say that—I said that some colleges did well and that others did not. I could go on at length and provide more examples— [Interruption.] Members will be glad to hear that I am not going to do that. I must pay tribute to the cabinet secretary, because he is in the process of pulling off that most difficult of tasks—making a virtue out of necessity. We cannot pretend that the Scottish budget has not been cut. The only way to continue to deliver high-quality educational outcomes, while protecting student numbers, is by doing away with the unnecessary duplication that resulted in much wasted effort, with neighbouring colleges sometimes struggling with half-full classrooms as they competed with each other for students.

In winding up, I must pause to reflect on the fact that Hugh Henry’s amendment seeks to add only one very small sentence to the Tory motion—

Perhaps the Labour and Tory parties really are better together, because it is becoming increasingly difficult to tell them apart.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is entirely appropriate and fitting that the Parliament should note the 10th anniversary of the Gigha buyout and congratulate and commend the community of Gigha for its successes since then. I therefore thank David Stewart for bringing the debate to the chamber. In passing, I should also pay tribute to the elderly statesmen of Gigha, Willie McSporran and John Martin. It is only right that their part in this should be acknowledged. It is fitting that the debate comes at a time when the community empowerment consultation has recently closed, and soon after the land reform review group has been set up, for there are many lessons to be learned from Gigha and from the islanders’ experience over the past 10 years. It is good to look with some satisfaction at how far communities such as Gigha have travelled along the road towards addressing their many challenges and how the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Scottish land fund helped to start them on their journeys, but it should also be recognised that the path of Gigha and other such communities is not always easy. Managing the challenges of running an organisation such as the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust would tax the abilities of many a chief executive of a multinational corporation. The political challenges of doing that within the intensely local democratic framework of a community such as Gigha might well challenge the abilities of many professional politicians. Of course, I am not thinking so much of members of this Parliament as I am of our colleagues down in Westminster, who seem to understand little about Scotland and nothing at all about our islands. There is a need, therefore, to recognise and pay respect to the knowledge, know-how and experience that have been acquired on Gigha—all the more so because that experience has been hard won mainly by volunteers who wrestle with issues that have a profound effect on their futures, those of their families and those of their friends and neighbours. We should recognise, too, that that voluntary work takes place in communities that are acknowledged to be economically fragile, where people have to struggle daily to make a living, as well as attending to the collective needs of their community.

Yes, of course. That is why I am delighted that communities such as Gigha have been able to take advantage of the many opportunities in renewable energy for example with the dancing ladies of Gigha. I am also delighted that the Scottish Government has established the community and renewable energy scheme, through Community Energy Scotland, which will enable many more communities to take advantage of the revenue funding that is afforded by renewable energy. Gigha faces continuing and imminent challenges, some of which David Stewart mentioned. There is some way to go before all of its housing is brought up to a decent standard—it is still somewhat below the average standard in Scotland. Gigha also needs its sustainability to be ensured with the realisation of the planned new wind turbine. Further investment in Gigha will be required before the overall investment begins to pay off, as it assuredly will over the generations to come. With £6 million having recently been put into the re-established Scottish land fund, I hope to see many more communities achieve ownership and control of their own assets and benefit from that local control. Gigha is a microcosm of Scotland. The islanders there suffer from many of the same problems that are writ large across Scotland. Ownership and the ability to harness and control their own resources are significant factors that have allowed the community to take huge steps towards addressing those problems. What is good for Gigha should be good for the rest of Scotland, too.

Does Rob Gibson agree that, when we consider the cost of assisting communities such as Gigha, we should also consider what the monumental cost of not assisting them could be in the future? We would have to continue to provide health and social care services even if the population of Gigha dwindled to a handful of people.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve the historic built environment in the Highlands and Islands, given the increase in funding to Historic Scotland as set out in the draft budget 2013-14. (S4O-01354)

How much of the cost of repairs to Scotland’s built heritage will be clawed back by the United Kingdom Treasury in VAT imposed on repairs to historic buildings? What impact will the imposition of VAT on approved alterations to listed buildings have on our struggle to maintain the viability of our historic buildings?

I welcome the statement and I am sure that it will provide support and reassurance to the renewables industry. The minister mentioned at the start of the statement the importance of wave and tidal generation. Can he remind members what support the Scottish Government is giving to those technologies and what their potential impact would be across the Highlands and Islands region?

The member will be aware that many people lament the lack of mobile phone coverage across Scotland. If we cannot put masts in the right places to get coverage, how on earth will we achieve it? Which would the member prefer—mobile phone coverage or no masts—because we cannot have both?

I pay tribute to all the many community volunteers across the Highlands and Islands—indeed, across Scotland—who work selflessly for the benefit of their communities. I can personally attest that the work at the coalface of community development is often done in very difficult conditions, in the face of economic fragility and deprivation, and in a culture in which power is not always surrendered easily to communities that wish to grasp the opportunities available to them. Nevertheless, since the right to buy was introduced in 2003, and especially when that was combined with the income generation opportunities that renewable energy projects offer to communities, community development has begun to transform the face of the Highlands and Islands. I could pay tribute to a very long list of communities but it is only right that I should pay particular tribute to my fellow islanders in the communities of Eigg and Gigha, who paved the way for many other communities. I know that the people of those two communities would agree that, having taken responsibility for community ownership, their path has not always been easy, but they would also agree that it has been worth while. I am delighted that the Scottish Government has committed a further £6 million to the Scottish land fund, because there is an appetite on the part of many more communities to benefit from bringing local land and local assets into much more productive use. That is why I am also delighted that the right-to-buy legislation will be revisited and reviewed so that we can apply the lessons that we have learned over the past nine years or so and improve the legislation. However, it is right that we should take our time with that and with the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, because these are complex matters that are sometimes fraught with difficulties, which can be hard to appreciate except by those who are actively engaged in community development at the grass roots. The community empowerment consultation covers a number of areas and proposes a number of interesting ideas—all of which have merit and which I am sure will, at least in theory, receive support across the chamber. However, it is crucial that the practical implementation of those ideas is considered carefully, all the more so because we owe it to volunteers and community activists—the people who give up their valuable time without recompense—across Scotland to get it right and not to present them with more difficulties than they already face. I am particularly glad that consideration is being given to extending the right to buy to urban areas. Too often, there is an urban-rural divide. Opportunities that are open to rural communities should also be open to urban communities and to communities of interest. The underlying theme seems to be one of bringing assets into more productive use. Should it really matter whether those are in rural or urban areas or how a particular community is defined? That applies equally to underused public properties. Who owns public properties should be neither here nor there, because they are public assets—they belong to us all. Empowerment of communities means disempowerment somewhere else, for power is neither created nor destroyed. Too often in Scotland’s past, power has been expressed as the ability to say no to the legitimate aspirations of individuals and communities. Real power is the power to say yes and to facilitate the aspirations of Scotland’s communities. I am therefore delighted that this Scottish Government is taking forward the consultation with a will to share power and to do so wisely to empower communities and to engage them in their own success by giving them the tools to secure better futures for themselves and, ultimately, for us all.

Does the member agree that community activists and volunteers have been working for their communities—and that, indeed, the Olympic games have been held very successfully all over the world—since long before David Cameron came up with the idea of the big society?

Will the member give way?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve dialysis facilities for patients in rural areas. (S4O-01171)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware of the campaign to provide a dialysis facility in the Lorn and Islands district general hospital in Oban. Can she offer any hope for those who have campaigned for that facility for many years?

I compliment my fellow members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for their considered and intelligent scrutiny of the bill, and the clerks, who provided their usual high standard of support. Most of all, I want to record a personal thanks to Professor Kenneth Reid, who provided us with specialist legal advice. It is a great tribute to him that he did so in a way that facilitated our understanding, as lay people, of some fairly technical issues with both humour and patience. I also thank the many witnesses who gave evidence, and the people who wrote to me and took an interest in the committee’s work. We all agree that the bill’s general thrust and focus is to be welcomed. Completion of the land register is itself a worthy goal. Smoothing and rendering more efficient the processes that pertain to property transactions are equally worthy objectives. However, my concern throughout has been that, in our bid to complete the land register, we do not sacrifice quality for speed and that we recognise some of the problems of the system and attempt to deal with them, so far as we reasonably can. I am therefore glad that Mr Ewing, the minister, engaged constructively with the committee and with the various stakeholders. He listened carefully and responded to suggestions for improvements to the bill when it was wise to do so. For example, in section 42, on prescriptive acquisitions, he reduced the period of abandonment of land from the originally proposed seven years. That is only one example of a practical and wise judgment being made when it had to be made. A certain amount of idealism was displayed in the amendments that were lodged by some of my colleagues on the committee. Idealism, of course, is a fine thing and I am glad that the spirit of idealism is alive and well in the Parliament. However, we must never enforce our idealism when it will cause harm and difficulty, when ordinary people going about their business will be victims of that idealism, or when the practical difficulties far outweigh any benefits that the idealism might bring. I therefore hope that Mr Harvie and Ms Grant will understand why I felt unable to support their amendments. However, even the best of systems can never be perfect. Despite the keeper’s reassurances that all was well, I felt that it was important that a more efficient and perhaps more cost-effective mechanism than the courts ought to be available for resolving mistakes or disputes. I was therefore glad to be able to lodge an amendment at stage 2 that will have the effect of allowing the Lands Tribunal to provide such a mechanism. The unanimous support that the amendment achieved in committee was due much more to the common sense of my colleagues and the compelling evidence that we had heard than to any persuasive ability on my part. The bill has been much improved in its course through the Parliament. I have been pleased to play my own small part in the process and I hope that members throughout the chamber will support the bill.

If a target such as the member describes was set, what mechanism could the Government use to ensure that it was achieved?

Will the member give way?

13. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the integration of health and social care. (S4O-01021)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer, which partially answered my supplementary. I am sure that she was aware of the concerns that were raised last year by the Royal College of Nursing and Audit Scotland about the proposed model for the integration of health and social care that was being pursued by NHS Highland and Highland Council. Is she able, at this point, to say whether those concerns have been addressed as the integration of those services has proceeded?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, because few of the subjects that are debated in the chamber are as important, in these difficult times, as the Scottish Government’s growth strategy. Within the limited powers that are available to it, the Scottish Government is doing its utmost to shelter Scotland from the worst effects of the Westminster Government’s disastrous austerity policies—although perhaps they are not disastrous but are doing what they are designed to do, which is to deliver austerity—and are doing so with some success. That success is remarkable, given that it comes in the face of most savage cuts to our budget, particularly our capital budget, which has been cut by 32 per cent. It is also remarkable because we lack the powers of any normal country, which means that we are constrained in what we can do. We lack the borrowing powers and the full fiscal levers that would allow us to do much more. Evidence for that success lies in our unemployment rate, which is currently below the UK level, and our employment levels, which are higher than those for the UK.

Not at the moment, but I will do presently. It also lies in the fact that, when we become independent, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development would place Scotland in sixth place in its prosperity ranking, whereas the UK would be in 17th place. Our GDP per capita would be 15 per cent higher than that for the rest of the UK. More evidence for the remarkable nature of the Government’s success is the fact that Scotland has been in fiscal surplus for four out of the five years to 2010, whereas the UK was in deficit for each of those years.

Mr Brown is employing a bit of sophistry. The comparison is unequal, given that the Scottish Government lacks the powers that the UK Government has. Let us make the comparison once we are independent. I was glad to hear what was almost some humility from Mr Brown, because it should be a matter of shame for the Tories, and the Lib Dems, that the UK economy has gone back into recession. They have been warned of that risk repeatedly, but they have ignored all the advice that they were cutting too quickly and too deeply and that if they did not produce growth, the fiscal situation would worsen in the face of a shrinking economy. It is far from the case that UK borrowings are diminishing—they are increasing—and it is far from the case that the Tories and the Lib Dems are safeguarding the UK’s AAA rating; they have been warned that that, too, is under threat. In contrast, the Scottish Government is following a path of long-understood economic wisdom: in times of recession, Governments should accelerate and increase capital spending, which they will recoup from increased taxation revenues when growth returns. Like all great truths, Keynesian economics is, at its core, very simple—in fact, it is so simple that it seems strange, to say the very least, that neither Mr Osborne nor Mr Cameron seems to understand it. Despite the highly punitive cuts that have been made to our budget, the Scottish Government has continued, and will continue, to invest in infrastructure projects, such as the new Forth road bridge, that are creating jobs and improving infrastructure as part of the infrastructure investment plan. That plan commits £60 billion to a long-term programme of infrastructure investment up until 2030, and it is the provision of that long-term certainty that will help to secure jobs and build a platform for a more prosperous future. We will continue to invest in housing and we will build 30,000 affordable homes during this session of Parliament. We are supporting that with £710 million of expenditure over the next three years. Before I hear the old broken record about whether that is affordable housing or social housing and what the exact definition is, I say that a house is a house is a house. We will continue to pursue our economic opportunities in areas such as renewables, which will create at least 40,000 jobs by 2020 and many more beyond that, and we will continue to support that new and exciting industry with investment such as the £70 million national renewables infrastructure fund. If we had borrowing powers, we could do much more, investing in more infrastructure to support jobs now and improve our future prospects. If we had taxation powers, we could do still more to increase the competitiveness of Scottish businesses.

I apologise to Mr Macintosh. I would have been happy to take the intervention, but the Presiding Officer must preside. If we had taxation powers, we could cut VAT on tourism, for example, to increase the competitiveness of our tourism industry. We could cut VAT on housing and building repairs, maintenance and improvements to create jobs and improve the quality of our built environment and our housing stock. I would dearly like to hear from those in the dependence parties exactly what their economic plan is, beyond visiting more cuts on this disunited kingdom.

Will Gavin Brown give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Is it often not the case that the people who complain most about mobile phone masts are those who are also asking for 3G and forthcoming 4G broadband in rural areas? Does the member agree that that is unlikely to be delivered without an adequate provision of mobile phone masts?

Was it Margaret Thatcher who said that any person over the age of 30 who used a bus could consider themselves a failure?

I am pleased to contribute to the debate, although I am puzzled that the Conservatives have come so late to the subject. This Government has been advancing a policy of localism since 2007, and the SNP has been preaching localism for much longer than that—since long before 2007, when we were able to form the Scottish Government and put the principles of localism into practice. Perhaps the Conservatives recognise a need to have at least the shreds of an underlying political ideology. The back-of-an-envelope thinking that lay behind the Conservatives’ big idea of a big society has not really progressed beyond the back of that original envelope. Perhaps the Conservatives feel a need to try and graft some political meat on to the skeletal remains—apart, of course, from its giving tax breaks to the rich—of what the Conservative Party stood for. As for the Labour Party, I was concerned to hear Ms Boyack criticise the SNP on the matter of council house building. The sad fact is that while it was in government in Scotland, the Labour Party lacked the political courage to do away with the Tory right-to-buy policy. We did away with it, and council house building has begun to flourish again in Scotland over the past few years.

Through the innovation and investment fund a number of housing associations have come up with some really good, innovative housing projects that have delivered far better value for money than we ever dreamed of under the previous Administration. It is perhaps worth going through some of the localism policies that this Government has implemented. We have heard about the concordat with local authorities, the single outcome agreements and the abolition of ring fencing. Those policies are all about a new mature relationship between national and local government, whereby local authorities are empowered and are free to spend their resources on local priorities. However, I agree that it is a big pity that not all councils have embraced that opportunity as well as they might have done. If members are unhappy with the unwillingness of their local councils to embrace those principles, as I am unhappy with my council in Argyll and Bute—perhaps Mr McGrigor is too—they will have the same opportunity as I will have next week to vote for a better local administration. I suspect, however, that Conservative votes will largely be wasted votes, simply because the Conservatives lack the number of candidates for the votes to have any real effect. Turning to planning, I can only contrast what I am hearing here today with Mr Cameron’s policies in England, where he seems to be riding roughshod over local councils. I am curious about the difference between what is happening in England and what is happening in Scotland in planning terms, because this Government implemented and improved the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, which has empowered local authorities to deal with smaller—

Of course, Jamie McGrigor will know that a number of independent candidates are secret Tories who are frightened to admit it. Jamie McGrigor rose— I return to planning—

I point out that I did not accept a second intervention from Mr McGrigor. To accept one was quite generous. Local planning authorities now have full powers to deal as they see fit with smaller local applications, which are generally no longer subject to appeal to the Scottish Government. Instead, we have local review bodies. Even on larger planning applications that the Government deals with, such as those for wind farms that would generate in excess of 50MW, local authority decisions or recommendations are often upheld—the Government upholds them in about two thirds of cases.

No. I have taken enough interventions from the Conservatives. The current consultation on planning proposals suggests taking the existing approach further by freeing local authorities to develop local development plans without fear that reporters will subsequently alter them. What the Tories in Scotland talk about in planning terms is not really localism, but nimbyism. I will talk about other localism policies of the SNP Government. The community and renewable energy scheme has already delivered £16 million for community energy projects. We have an ambitious target to have 500MW of community energy generation by 2020. Jamie McGrigor will know of such projects on several islands. He will know about Gigha, but he might not know about the island of Yell—we cannot get much more local than that. I see the Presiding Officer indicating that I should wind up, which I am just about to do. I welcome the Conservatives’ conversion to localism.

I only hope that, now that they have succeeded in driving our economy back into recession down in Westminster, members will use their power in Westminster to ensure that the Westminster Government invests in our local shovel-ready projects in order to kick-start our local and national economies.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what advice it provides to towns and villages whose historic built environment has fallen into disrepair. (S4O-00896)

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern at the long-term neglect of the historically important burgh of Inveraray? Will she join me in encouraging Argyll and Bute Council to apply for the generous funding that the Scottish Government has made available through the conservation area regeneration scheme in order to tackle that long-term neglect?

I recently visited the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney, which enabled me to gain a first-hand insight into the remarkable progress that it is making in testing wave and tidal energy generating devices. The centre is at the exciting cutting edge of world-leading technology, and I was delighted to see the impressive rate of development there. I was also pleased to speak to a number of young Orcadians who were enthusiastic about being able to return home after higher or further education to pursue careers in that exciting technology. The opportunities that such technologies offer are highly significant not just for our islands, but for Scotland and the rest of the UK, as they will allow climate change targets to be met and energy security and price stability to be provided. Now that plans for grid connections are being firmed up, the focus is on the remaining significant barrier to the deployment of devices that are approaching commercial viability—the present onerous transmission charges, which will greatly inhibit the necessary investment. Although I welcome Ofgem’s initial proposals, which are aimed at levelling the playing field to some degree for remoter parts of the mainland, I cannot accept proposals that are prejudicial to the interests of our islands and which do not correctly interpret the wider public interest. It is said that the reason for the current transmission charging regime is that our islands are too far away from London, but the reality is that London is too far away from our islands and their significant energy-generation capabilities. That wider public interest is surely best met by meeting our climate change targets and achieving energy security and price stability sooner rather than later.

Sure, and I remain optimistic. I point out, however, that it is truly lamentable that it has taken this length of time to get anywhere near approaching the right solution. It will also be greatly in the interest of the public if we realise sooner rather than later the huge economic opportunity that the technology brings to Scotland. I am disappointed at the suggestion in Mary Scanlon’s amendment that reducing transmission charges for our islands would somehow increase fuel poverty. The logic and arithmetic of that quite escape me. It is a fact that Scotland suffers much greater fuel poverty than England—it affects 30 per cent of households in Scotland compared with about 24 per cent for the UK—and that Scotland’s islands experience fuel poverty at a rate of around 50 per cent. That is, no doubt, part of what we call the union dividend. Perhaps Mary Scanlon can explain to me how discouraging local energy generation could possibly lead to an outcome that decreases rather than increases fuel poverty.

No, I am sorry, but I am running out of time. Ken Macintosh’s suggestion that the Scottish Government should dig into its budget to pay the onerous transmission charges is similarly misguided. Scotland already pays more than its share of UK taxes. Despite Liam McArthur’s suggestion, it is difficult to see how the transmission charges, in their current form, can be seen as anything other than anti-Scottish. Ofgem’s proposals, though a step in the right direction, are still not acceptable for anyone who cares about Scotland’s islands.

A few years ago, I was lucky enough to be invited to a community conference on the island of Gigha, just after the people there had switched on their three wind turbines—the dancing ladies of Gigha—which are Scotland’s first community-owned wind turbines. We were taken out to see the turbines on a warm sunny day, with a few puffy white clouds lazily floating across a blue sky. Cattle grazed peacefully beneath the turbines and the turbines turned gracefully in the warm breeze. I felt as if I was in a Dali painting. Everybody was smiling. Another kind of energy and another kind of power was being kindled on Gigha that day: community power, because a community had been empowered at last to tackle its long-standing problems and was generous enough to want to share its new-found knowledge and empowerment with other communities. I have some sympathy with Patrick Harvie’s motion, but I am afraid that I cannot support it as it stands. Nothing stands in the way of any local authority that wishes to take up his suggestion, but I fear that local authorities are not always well equipped to follow that route. I am concerned, too, about Patrick Harvie’s antipathy towards business, and big business in particular. As with all things, there are some bad businesses—large and small—but also some very good ones. The Government has set some very ambitious targets for climate change and renewable energy generation, but it cannot achieve those targets on its own—no Government can. We must enlist businesses, large and small, and communities at all levels to help us to meet those targets. That is a great and a common endeavour. With infinitely renewable energy, which in time will become inexpensive, we can solve many of our other problems. We can create not only jobs but fulfilling careers, we can create prosperity and we can end fuel poverty.

No, I have only four minutes. Little Scotland can, by becoming the world’s laboratory, make an unparalleled contribution to mankind in solving the problem of our renewable energy supply and exporting the technology and the knowledge across the planet. However, we will not achieve that through the narrow-minded exclusion of big business, because business excels at innovation—

No, I am sorry—I have only two minutes. Business excels at investing in new technology, and if we are to fulfil those targets and achieve all the benefits that come with that, we will need the massive investments that only big business can provide. We can do that while ensuring that our communities also benefit by undertaking their own renewable projects or by collaborating with business in joint projects. In fact, we are increasingly doing that, and I commend our Government for setting another ambitious target of 500MW of community energy by 2020. For those reasons and more, I am pleased to support the amendment in the name of the minister, Fergus Ewing.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Patrick, do you agree that it would be very helpful if the big society extended to Scotland’s islands with regard to fair transmission charges?

How will the changes ensure that we have the right balance between speeding up planning applications and ensuring that the views and requirements of communities are taken on board?

Will Willie Rennie give way?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in this debate because, as an islander, I know how important ferry services are and how emotive the issue can be. I welcome the Labour Party motion, but I think that the Labour Party has already forgotten that it was Labour’s own Gordon Brown who was first mate and then captain at the helm of the United Kingdom ship of state when it crashed on the rocks and threw us into economic turmoil. It is cold comfort indeed that that economic shipwreck catapulted Gordon out of the cockpit only to make space for messrs Cameron and Clegg.

No. I have only four minutes, at most. In the face of this economic storm and the most savage of cuts to our budget, the Scottish Government is due great credit for sticking to its promised plans for the most wholesale improvements to our ferry network in living memory. It is entirely right that the ferries review should start with proper consultation, so it is interesting that it appears that there have been many more responses in the last round of consultation, as people realised that we really are consulting and that we really are listening. It is not a sham consultation of the kind that we were used to prior to 2007. What a pity, in that case, that both Labour and the Liberal Democrats can think of no more constructive response than to stir up one community against another: Barra against South Uist; Lochboisdale against Lochmaddy; and Oban against Lochboisdale. Lib Dem MEP George Lyon’s recent attempt to instigate a European Union inquiry and to halt the whole process of rolling out the RET was truly lamentable, and was potentially damaging for our economically fragile island communities. Tavish Scott’s recent proposals for the separation of Shetland are reminiscent of that Ealing comedy “Passport to Pimlico”.

Those actions are all much more about petty political posturing than about a genuine attempt to help our islands. I am delighted that cooler heads prevail in Scotland these days, that the ferries review represents a fair, methodical and consistent approach to improving ferry services for all our islanders, that the Scottish Government has given a commitment to listen to all our communities and all the consultation responses, and that it recognises and will carefully consider the wishes of the people in South Uist on a ferry service between Lochboisdale and Mallaig. However, if for any reason that is not immediately possible, and blame must be cast, the wise and pragmatic folk whom I know on our islands will know to look to the south—to the dead hand of Westminster and successive economic mismanagement by the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories. For many years, they have failed to invest in our ferries, piers and harbours and have left us with a legacy of underinvestment, which will, in these difficult times, take some time to correct. I am pleased to support the cabinet secretary’s amendment to the motion.

Is it the Labour Party’s position that only companies or individuals who are resident and domiciled in Scotland should be able to buy land in Scotland?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. Although I am what Murdo Fraser has described as “a non-lawyer”—I wonder whether that is a Latin legal term—in my previous career I had various practical experiences of the difficulties that are sometimes presented by our system of conveyancing and land registration. I compliment my colleagues on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on a good example of working together in a largely consensual but effective manner in our scrutiny of the bill. An effective land registration system is of fundamental importance in a property-owning democracy. Although I support the general aims of the bill, it is unfortunate that we do not seem to pay sufficient tribute to our original register of sasines. Cumbersome as it now is, it has operated fairly well over a considerable period and we must be careful that our efforts to modernise the system do not have unintended consequences. It is easy to criticise the old system. While it is true to say that there are many old titles that are vague or inaccurate, it is also true to say that some titles approach the level of works of art in their efforts to describe and define properties accurately. As a body of documentation, they describe much of the history of our country and are a tribute to our legal profession. They remain a valuable resource and, where possible, should be used to clarify current title certificates. Modernisation presents considerable challenges. The Ordnance Survey map is not always as accurate as it ideally should be, especially in rural areas, which has given rise to historical errors and continues to give rise to errors. With modern global positioning systems and other surveying systems becoming increasingly capable of affordable accuracy, many of those errors are coming to light for the first time. Human error, whether from historical bad drafting of titles or from errors in first registrations, must also be acknowledged. Any modernisation system must provide an efficient and cost-effective mechanism for the resolution of those mistakes. I am glad that the bill also contains proposals to improve the situation regarding a non domino acquisition, as such acquisitions often present opportunities to correct historical errors or unfairnesses. We received a lot of evidence from Andy Wightman. I have a great deal of respect for him and the idealism that he advocates, but his suggestion that we should advertise or hold auctions of land of unknown ownership could give rise to profound practical difficulties. Nevertheless, I congratulate him on his recent book, which is a readable and lucid account of what can, in less capable hands, be a dry subject. Finally, I must support my friends in the legal profession who are rightly concerned about the proposal in section 108 to introduce a criminal offence for what might be innocent errors on their part. That might create onerous obligations on them and on buyers or sellers, who would be required to protect their innocence. I was glad to hear from the minister that he will think carefully about that aspect of the bill.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to be able to speak in this debate, because I have lived on an island for more than 30 years, so I have an appreciation of ferries that is sometimes lost on mainlanders. The ferry that serves the small island on which I live is an overgrown rowing boat, which has an engine that works most of the time. In the old days, the ferryman used to row the boat, but nowadays he is a wee bit smarter; if the boat has to be rowed he makes the passengers row it. I come from a long line of ferrymen and mariners, so I have a special interest in ferries and in islands. Thinking about the debate brought back memories of when I first heard the term RET, from a relative who worked for CalMac long ago. He was an islander too, and I remember him being quite excited about RET. I was in my early teens at the time—I am talking about quite a long time ago—and as the years and decades passed, hope of RET being introduced faded and many of us thought that that wonderful concept, which would level the playing field between the islands and the mainland, would never be realised. I am therefore proud that in the previous session of Parliament the SNP Government introduced the RET pilot for the Western Isles and the Argyll islands of Tiree and Coll, with a promise that if the pilot was successful the Government hoped to roll out RET to other islands. Predictably, the Opposition parties—in particular the Labour Party and the Lib Dems—offered nothing but criticism. I can almost forgive them for that, as it is perhaps what they feel they ought to do, but what I find really hard to forgive is that they busied themselves with blowing on small embers of discontent in the hope of fanning them into a bonfire, and followed an agenda of the most naked political opportunism. Fortunately, many islanders of good sense were prepared to wait and to place their trust in the SNP in the hope and expectation that we would deliver RET for other islands, given time. I am therefore delighted that there is now a commitment to roll out the scheme to many of the other islands, and that we have repaid that trust. Unfortunately, we are yet again hindered in our efforts to improve ferry services by the Westminster Government, which is imposing quite draconian cuts to the Scottish budget. RET requires more capacity on some routes and it requires new boats. That is a tall order indeed, when capital budgets are being cut by 32 per cent. It is a tall order when revenue budgets are being cut and it is an especially tall order when much of the existing CalMac fleet is getting to be past its sell-by date. Neither RET nor the ferries review offers the perfect solution to our islands’ needs but, in terms of improving ferries, the SNP Government has already, in a few short years, achieved an awful lot—much more than any of the previous Governments in this Parliament, or those in Westminster for a generation and more. Predictably—again—the Opposition parties will carp and criticise, but the suggestion that we can do much more in these difficult times is the kind of fantasy politics that will fool not many people, far less Scotland’s islanders, who are known for their pragmatism and common sense.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sure that the member welcomes, as I do, the extension of the length limit, to include transit vans, for example, so that the absurd practice of local carriers having to have the length of vans chopped down will finally come to an end after years.

To ask the Scottish Executive what advice it can give to local authorities in the Highlands and Islands—

3. To ask the Scottish Government what advice it can give to local authorities in the Highlands and Islands region to assist them in achieving sustainable economic growth. (S4O-00699)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Argyll and Bute has the highest unemployment rate and the lowest rate of growth in the Highlands and Islands region? What advice can he give Argyll and Bute Council to help it to tackle the problem?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it can assist private owners to meet the costs of common repairs where councils or housing associations propose significant improvements or repairs to the external fabric of blocks of flats with a proportion of private ownership. (S4O-00629)

Is the minister aware of the situation of private owners at Relief Land in Inverary, who are faced with a proportion of the significant cost of external repairs to the long-neglected 200-year-old tenement? What advice can he give to a pensioner with little savings who is suddenly faced with such a situation? Will he encourage Argyll Community Housing Association and Argyll and Bute Council to adopt a sympathetic attitude to such owners and make efforts to seek a constructive solution that minimises the immediate financial burden on owners?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, because I have first-hand experience of the importance of broadband for people who live in rural and remote rural areas, as I have lived in a remote area for most of my life. The thing that has changed my life and that of my neighbours more than anything in the past 30 years has been the arrival of broadband. Initially, dial-up connections offered limited usefulness, although I remember printing out a copy of the first e-mail to arrive in the tiny island where I live and handing it to a local museum. Somehow or other, I understood that something significant was happening, although at that point the usefulness was pretty limited because so few people had e-mail addresses. I could not have guessed then the significance that the new technology would have so quickly. Now, rather than me living out in the sticks and on the periphery, disqualified from participating in modern life, my 4 megabits per second connection allows full and proper participation in modern life. I must add, though, that I am lucky. For reasons that are unknown to me, not all my neighbours enjoy that staggeringly high speed. Yes, I am lucky with my 4 megabits per second because I can shop for bargains on the internet and at least partially offset the higher cost of rural living; I can be as well informed and as socially connected as anyone else in the country; and, as a citizen, I can participate in the democratic process, even to the extent of fulfilling my duties and obligations as a member of the Parliament. Not all my constituents in the Highlands and Islands region are so fortunate. Unbelievably, this far into the 21st century, many of them remain without broadband or with speeds that are so slow as to be almost useless. There are days when my broadband luck fails me and my connection seems to crawl and dither like—well, let us just say that it is very slow at times. Broadband availability is a matter of economic, social and democratic exclusion. We have two classes of people: those who are without broadband and who are therefore excluded, and those who have it and are not. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s “Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan” and its ambitious targets. I particularly welcome its focus on addressing rural areas.

I certainly welcome that. I do not know whether it is technically possible or feasible for everyone to access that but, if it were, of course I would support that. The renewables revolution is already under way in rural areas, which are set to become the economic powerhouses of Scotland. A vital ingredient of that will be the availability of next-generation broadband in those areas. I therefore welcome the funds that have been committed to help achieve that by the Scottish Government, the European Union and the UK Government, although I wish that the UK Government would dig deeper into its pockets. Members might ask why I pick on the poor old UK Government. It is because it has another tool in its box that can help to achieve superfast broadband for all. Regulation is the means by which the free market must be controlled. In that, the UK Government has once again failed us in relation to broadband and 3G coverage. It has certainly failed us here in Scotland. Indeed, the current aspiration of the UK Government and Ofcom to roll out 4G to 98 per cent of the UK population seems a worthy goal, but it could in theory leave more than 20 per cent of the Scottish population without 4G. I suspect that if that were allowed to happen, a high proportion of such people would be in the Highlands and Islands region. Nevertheless, I welcome the UK Government’s co-operating with us to help us to achieve an ambitious future for Scotland. However, if that Government lacks the will to regulate, I would call on George Osborne to open his wallet a bit further and help us pay for first-class broadband services for all Scotland’s people.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

What percentage of people would be denied broadband coverage under the Conservatives’ proposals, and whereabouts would they live?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Presiding Officer, I have a confession to make: I cannot pretend to understand properly the common agricultural policy, some of which is mind-boggling in its complexity. That, of course, is part of the problem. I therefore welcome some of the proposed reforms, especially the proposed simplification, although I remain sceptical about elements of the proposals that may increase complexity. As I said, I do not fully understand the CAP. Fortunately, I know a man who does. He is sitting in front of me: he is the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead. It was no surprise to me that he was the first cabinet secretary to be re-appointed last May, because every farmer I talk to all over the Highlands and Islands sings his praises as being the first Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs who properly understands farming and who fully represents their interests. I repeat that I do not fully understand the CAP, but having carried out building work for a number of farmers over the years, I do know something about farmers. I know them to be the most versatile and capable of people who can mix a batch of concrete as easily and as well as they tend their livestock and their land. I know, too, from my own previous occupation how difficult it is to work outside all day, often battling against the elements and dealing with the practicalities of running a business, then to come home at night to face a mountain of paperwork. I know, too, of farmers whose fathers and grandfathers were farmers and who wish, in their hearts, that their sons and daughters, too, could be farmers, but whose heads now dictate that they advise their children to take up other occupations. I share their sadness at that. However, our farms are still in many ways the mainstays of our rural economy, and they represent a culture, tradition and way of life that has been passed down through the generations. They have been the custodians of our environment and they are the reason why we still enjoy a high quality environment. Thanks, again, to the energy, the effort and the enthusiasm of Richard Lochhead and to the hard work of our farmers and others in the supply chain, in the face of global competition, our farm produce—our wholesome Scottish food—is increasingly being marketed and brought to the tables of Scots and of others around the world, with exports significantly increasing as the quality of our produce is internationally recognised. That, in turn, feeds into our tourism industry, and I am pleased to see that across the Highlands and Islands, people can now in many of our restaurants and hotels eat the top-quality produce of our land and our seas, which adds immense quality and value to the visitor experience. I welcome the proposed greening of our agriculture, but only as far as it can be implemented with the willing consent of our farmers. They are the local experts and I have concerns that the particular challenges that our Scottish farmers face will not be understood properly in Westminster. Whatever the final outcome of the negotiations with Brussels, Scotland's farmers must be listened to and be heard. I know that the cabinet secretary is listening, but I have concerns about the challenges that he has in being heard properly in Brussels. After all, he has too often had first to fight the UK Government for the opportunity of taking the case of our Scottish farmers directly to Brussels.

I am delighted to take Alex Fergusson’s assurance that the door is now open, although I am sure that he would agree that there have been occasions in the past when it has not been as open as he suggests it is now. I am concerned, too, that we have only six MEPs in Brussels. It is a matter of common sense that Scotland's farming interests will be better represented when we have 20 or more MEPs.

I understand that the number of MEPs would be in the region of 20. Of course, that will be a matter to be decided when the great day comes. I look forward to the day—the not too distant day—when, as an independent country, we have full and proper representation in Europe, and to Scotland getting the proper proportion of CAP funding that we are entitled to and should receive.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member not agree that, at a time when the UK Government’s economic policy is manifestly failing, that policy represents a kind of cruel and unusual punishment, as it attempts to force people into jobs that simply do not exist?

Does Mr Findlay agree that, if the UK Tory Government had not cut our capital budget by 32 per cent, it might be possible to do some of the projects that he rightly says are not being done?

It is difficult to overstate the importance of the recently published “Infrastructure Investment Plan 2011”, for which I commend the cabinet secretary. It is a plan that contains a vision of Scotland’s future at a time when we have much need of vision; it is a plan that is ambitious when we have much need of ambition; and it is a plan that is aspirational when we have a need to be aspirational. Most of all, it is a plan for long-term economic recovery based on the sound principles of infrastructure investment. It will leave a lasting legacy for future generations as well as creating jobs and prosperity in the shorter term as we work through each and every project on this extended list. It is a plan for economic success where the UK Government has no plan. It is pitiful to witness the UK Government’s return to the dangerously naive grocer-shop economics of the Thatcherite era. The great English economist John Maynard Keynes first recognised the pivotal role of Governments in returning an economy to growth and at no time since the 1930s should those lessons have been heeded more closely than now. The UK Government’s response to our economic difficulties seems to be inspired by the fiction of Charles Dickens. It is an amalgamation of Mr Micawber’s belief that something will turn up and an austerity programme that is worthy of Scrooge. I can only hope that Messrs Cameron and Clegg are visited by ghosts this Christmas, because they seem not to be open to persuasion by anyone who is alive. In contrast, the Scottish Government offers a plan and a message of hope. There is hope for our beleaguered Scottish construction industry, which stands ready to help us to build our way towards economic recovery. There is hope for communities and businesses, which wrestle daily with inadequate infrastructure. There is hope for people without jobs and for people without homes. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, I am pleased that the plan contains a commitment on improvements to the A82, not least by dealing with the long-standing bottleneck at the infamous Pulpit Rock. The A82 has been one of the principal routes to the north and the west for more than a generation, and the bottleneck has served to illustrate the poverty of our infrastructure and a poverty of aspiration on the part of every previous Government of the country. It has illustrated the poverty of ambition on the part of the previous Labour-led coalition, whose interest rarely extended beyond the central belt. Now, at last, we have a Government for all parts of Scotland.

Jean Urquhart was referring to an era when the Highlands and Islands qualified for objective 1 status. I am sorry that, as a result of a serious miscalculation in the arithmetic by the Government of the day, the region no longer qualifies. I welcome the Government’s commitment to provide next-generation broadband for all parts of Scotland, especially rural areas. In the 21st century, the information highway is as important as tarmacadam roads. Indeed, more traffic on the internet might result in less traffic on the roads, which I hope is at least one area on which Mr Harvie—if he were here—and I would agree. Scotland—and particularly the Highlands and Islands—is on the cusp of a revolution in renewable power, which will deliver prosperity after generations of decline. It is therefore correct that the Government prepare the way with investments that are designed to facilitate the revolution by strengthening and extending the grid. We cannot deliver prosperity unless we plan for prosperity. Our planet is bathed in energy. Anyone who thinks that Scottish ingenuity cannot develop better and more successful ways of harnessing that energy is so laughably pessimistic that even Dickens would have trouble painting their caricature. Scottish innovation and ingenuity, not least in pioneering new mechanisms of investment, will ensure that we deliver on our commitment to build 30,000 new affordable homes during the parliamentary session. I was speaking to some constituents the other day, who have just taken occupation of a new home under the shared equity scheme. They are delighted to have the opportunity to buy their first new home with the help of the Scottish Government. We will deliver all the projects in the infrastructure investment programme for Scotland. That will sustain jobs and help to see us through the difficult times. We could deliver more if we had the full and proper powers that every member of the Parliament ought to aspire to have. We will deliver very much more and real prosperity when we free ourselves of our chains and shackles—like those of Marley’s ghost—and the drag factor of successive economically illiterate United Kingdom Governments and embrace our future as an independent Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member acknowledge that the Highlands and Islands lost objective 1 status, when it should not have done, because of arithmetical errors in calculating GDP per capita and that that was the responsibility of the Labour Government at the time?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is taking to ensure that the quality of further education is being maintained in rural areas. (S4O-00468)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reassurance. If Argyll College is merged with other colleges, what further reassurance can he give that local education services and local links with the community and businesses will be maintained and improved?

Given that alcohol abuse plays a significant part in domestic violence, does Jackie Baillie agree with and support the Government’s policy on minimum alcohol pricing?

Does the member agree that extending RET to Shetland and some of the Orkney routes would have the effect of higher costs, not lower costs, for passengers?

I spoke in the chamber in June in a members’ business debate on this issue. I spoke then about my experience of being rescued by the coastguard following the loss of our boat in storm conditions one dark night in September 1977. I owe my life to the coastguard service, which co-ordinated the search and rescue that ended successfully when I was airlifted off a wave-swept, tiny rock at 8 o’clock the following morning. In particular, I owe my life to the local knowledge of the officers of the Oban coastguard station, which is now closed. Through that local knowledge, they were able to focus the search on the small area of sea where they knew I was most likely to be. They were able to do so because of their intimate understanding of the particular wind and tidal conditions that prevailed that night, because they had a close relationship with the other boats and individuals who participated in the search and because they were able to collaborate with and trust the knowledge of the crew of the fishing boat that found me. I come from a family with the sea in their blood. My grandfather was a ferryman and fisherman. My great-uncle was a ferryman and my uncle was a puffer skipper. With members’ indulgence, I will just pay a quick, affectionate tribute to that fine man, John MacFadyen of Lismore, who was the personification of Para Handy and who taught me all I know about the sea and an awful lot about life. I also have cousins who are currently fishermen and ferrymen. I worked as a fisherman as a schoolboy and a student and I have spent much of my recreational time kayaking and sailing on the beautiful but sometimes treacherous waters of the west coast. Like all who spend much time on the sea, I have a profound respect for it. It has at different times filled me with awe and with fear. I have lost good friends to the sea and witnessed and lived through the mourning of our community when our young men have been lost to the sea. The sea has no hard shoulder where you can pull over when things go wrong. There is no handbrake on a boat. When things go wrong, it is often the only hope of the mariner that we have a first-class search and rescue service. Some of the most dangerous waters in the world are found between the Mull of Kintyre and the Point of Ardnamurchan. The Sound of Islay is littered with wrecks. The proliferation of lighthouses built by the Stevenson family—at Skerryvore, Dubh Artach and elsewhere—indicates the profound dangers of those waters. The Corryvreckan whirlpool is said to be the third largest in the world—believe me, it deserves its fearsome reputation. Strong and sometimes perverse tides dominate large stretches of the coastline, which is littered with rocks and hazards. It is only with skill, experience and local knowledge that those waters can be navigated safely. Imagine the difficulties of co-ordinating and carrying out a rescue in those waters, almost always in bad conditions, often at night. There are radio blackspots; there are huge gaps in mobile signal coverage; and there are magnetic anomalies. Our technology, clever though it is, sometimes just does not work—as we know, even in this chamber. Thankfully, our lives do not depend on it. The late Baroness Michie, many years ago when she was the Lib Dem MP for Argyll and Bute, fought and lost a campaign to save the Oban coastguard station. She did so knowing, as I do, the importance of local knowledge. She fought the fight with integrity and a passion for what was right. She was rewarded by re-election, and perhaps more important, by the respect and warm support of her constituents, which crossed the party divides. The coalition in Westminster knows nothing of the hazards of the sea. It cares nothing, it seems, for the value of human lives. At a time when recreational usage of our coastal areas is increasing, and when we are at the start of the offshore renewables industry—with tidal generators planned for the Sound of Islay, and offshore wind turbines planned off the coast of Tiree—it is truly perverse that we should be cutting our coastguard service. I urge Lib Dem and Tory members to reflect on all of this, to follow the example of Ray Michie and to support the Government motion without reservation.

Does the member agree that he might have taken an entirely different view of the matter if the Shetland station had not been saved?

How will the member know that the proposed new system is robust? If lives are lost at sea in future, how will he reconcile that with his conscience?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what reassurances it can provide that the quality of rural health services will be maintained, especially in the more remote rural areas of the Highlands and Islands region. (S4O-00401)

I know that the cabinet secretary is aware of the problems in providing out of hours and emergency cover in west Ardnamurchan. Is she in a position to suggest a solution to the problem?

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests. It is difficult to overstate the importance of the subject matter of this debate. Architecture is the most public of our arts. It cannot be ignored. It affects the way in which we live, how we feel and our sense of identity. We can escape from Picasso if we want. We can escape from Da Vinci—perhaps even from his code. We can even escape from the Glasgow boys. However, we cannot escape from our architecture and our built environment. We cannot ignore it. We also cannot easily escape from some of the mistakes of the past—the dismal architectural and planning mistakes. I judge policies by their outcomes and I am forced to reflect that in the latter half of the 20th century, after the Town and Country Planning Act 1947, we did not build all that much that we can be proud of or that future generations will admire as the listed buildings of tomorrow, and our planning system did not prevent the intensification of many of our social problems or the loss of community. Those failures are symptomatic of a state in decline—the UK state—and the withering of the union and its associated creative energy. Architecture mirrors our triumphs and our failures. It can lift us up or it can drag us down. Like any art, it also expresses our deepest feelings, our confidence and our sense of wellbeing. As an optimist, however, I see signs of hope in Scotland in this early part of the 21st century. This building, this Parliament, is a metaphor for that hope and for a rediscovery of our Scottish identity. As a newcomer, I find that this building is growing on me. It seems to reunite the old Scotland with the new. Queensberry house exemplifies respect for the past; the new part of the building exemplifies our newly awakened confidence and our internationalism. It is an interesting and complex building, and each part of it is interesting and complex just as each part of Scotland should be. Each part of it is different but linked by a common theme, just as Scotland has its regional variations and vernaculars that are linked by our national identity. However, Scotland needs more than just one fine house. I have been encouraged, therefore, to see good examples of architecture springing up in the past few years. I am encouraged to see movements towards place making and masterplanning, which offer a means of reconnecting people with place—because if buildings are important, people are even more important. Architecture and planning must be about people and must be centred on people. We should talk about building not houses, but homes, and we should talk about building not just homes, but communities. Our design talents should not be confined to the blank pages of new communities and new homes but be used to alter and improve our existing communities and homes. Each of them is special or capable of being so; each of them deserves a quality of approach and treatment; and each of them deserves care and craftsmanship. Every stage of the process needs to be enshrined in quality, from initial design right through to final commissioning. Each participant in the process needs to be enthused with the vision that we are together building a new Scotland. Of course, it will cost in labour, effort and the care that we bring to bear, and it will cost money to build a new Scotland that is truly fit for the 21st century. However, in that great labour we will rediscover our confidence, our capability and our creativity. Perhaps that is why the Westminster Government is so reluctant to assist us and why it refuses to contemplate reducing VAT on repairs and improvements to help Scotland’s hard-pressed construction industry. Perhaps that is also why it refuses to contemplate adequate borrowing powers for Scotland so that we can properly fund that work, and perhaps that is why it refuses to devolve corporation tax so that Scotland’s construction sector can become more competitive. Perhaps the Westminster Government is too feart because it knows that, in that great endeavour of building this new Scotland, our growing national pride will necessarily propel us towards independence. In closing, I pay tribute to my fellow Highlands and Islands regional member, Jamie McGrigor, who seems to be the only member from the Tories and the Lib Dems who is not too feart at least to come to the chamber and stand up for Scotland’s built environment. However, I have some sympathy for him in trying to defend the indefensible.

Given that the costs that are implicit in preserving and repairing our listed and historic buildings still attract VAT, will Jamie McGrigor give an undertaking that he will put his kilt on, go down and twist the arm of David Cameron and ask him to zero-rate—or at least reduce—VAT on repairs?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to raise the educational attainment level of young people in rural areas. (S4O-00313)

Will the cabinet secretary comment on the progress made by the commission on the delivery of rural education, particularly as regards recognising the importance of rural schools in the preservation, support and development of the communities they serve? Does he recognise that in order to safeguard the future of threatened rural schools, a range of interventions might have to be made, such as the provision of affordable housing in the catchment areas of vulnerable schools? I recognise that such interventions are outwith the remit of the department for education and lifelong learning, so does the scope of the commission permit it to make such recommendations to other Government departments?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate, as fuel poverty is one of the most significant problems of this era. Unfortunately, we are losing the battle against fuel poverty at the moment, in the face of exorbitant increases in energy costs and decreases in real incomes, especially for the most vulnerable people in our society. However, I am disappointed in Jenny Marra and her colleagues because, in their long years of power in Westminster and Scotland, when the sun was shining and budgets were rising year on year, they failed to fix the roof, but they expect us to fix it now that it is raining.

No, I am just beginning. I am disappointed that they do not show some humility in that respect and in respect of the fact that, across that period, the indices of inequality, in every measure, increased rather than decreased. That is a badge of shame for the Labour Party. I thought that I heard a Tory member speak earlier in the debate, but he seems to have gone, and there are no Liberal Democrats in the chamber either. What a disappointment. Is that a reflection of the seriousness with which they view this problem? There are three main factors in fuel poverty. The most important is income inequality, which I have mentioned. Our northern European neighbours have far more equal societies than we do. The second most important factor is the steeply rising fuel prices, which look set to continue well into the future. The third factor, in order of priority, is our relatively uninsulated housing stock. Again, the Scandinavians put us to shame in that regard. The Scottish Government has taken all reasonable steps to tackle that problem, introducing a range of insulation and energy efficiency measures.

No, thank you. The Scottish Government has increased the funds for those measures in this coming year by 32 per cent, in the face of Westminster capital cuts of almost 40 per cent. By contrast, the Westminster Government is failing to properly regulate the energy suppliers. Recently, a Lib Dem MP, Alan Reid—members might not have heard of him—proudly told me that his Government was taking two major steps to combat fuel poverty. First, it was making it easier for people to switch suppliers. Consumers will therefore be able to switch easily from one supplier who has just implemented a 20 per cent price increase to another supplier who has also just implemented a 20 per cent price increase. Members will understand my reluctance to compliment the honourable gentleman on that measure. The second measure is that the Government has apparently extracted a promise from the energy suppliers that they will not increase prices this winter. Given that they have just increased their prices by 20 per cent, that hardly seems to be much of a concession. That is what we in Scotland expect from Westminster—cold comfort.

I am also appalled at the lack of understanding about the true scale of the problem and the expenditure that it would take to solve it. I put it to Jenny Marra that it is far more than another £50 million or so a year. I would be happy to speak to her about that in detail later, but I must continue. It is also a fact that fuel poverty is significantly worse in Scotland than it is in England. Perhaps our unionist friends in the chamber will explain whether that is part of the much lauded union dividend.

Will the member take an intervention?

I declare an interest and ask the Parliament to note my entry in the register of members’ interests. It is a great privilege to speak in the debate, because I have helped to build houses since I was a boy. I have seen huge changes in the house building industry over that period, almost all of them for the better. I am sure that members will be relieved to know that the era of the builder’s bum has almost gone. It has been banished and is no longer the acceptable face of Scotland’s house building industry. Instead, we now have smart, sophisticated people working in a highly complex and technical industry. Having worked all over the UK, I can confirm that Scotland is at the cutting edge of good practice and new techniques in house building. I hope that that sophistication will be matched by the speeches that we hear this morning, but I fear that we may be disappointed. In fact, I have already been disappointed. I fear that we will hear nothing more than plaintive cries for mair money. In the current climate, that is as naive as Oliver Twist asking for more porridge.

That question has already been answered. I will not dwell on the semantics of the difference between two terms. The occupants of a house do not care whether it is part of a shared-equity ownership scheme or social rented; they are just pleased to have a house.

No. I have already taken one intervention and I have to move on.

I might take one shortly. Before we hear calls for more money, I hope that our Tory and Labour friends will tell us where they would find it. Which other budgets would they cut to provide it? What services and capital projects would they cut? Anybody can ask for more money. I am disinclined to take lessons from the Tories on housing. That party sold off our public sector housing stock for far less than the cost of replacement and brought council house building to a standstill.

Not at the moment. I will explain why a little further on. I am equally disinclined to take lessons on housing from the Labour Party, which knowingly helped to pump up property prices, believing Gordon Brown’s proud boast to have ended boom and bust. It even considered allowing self-invested pensions—SIPs—to include domestic property to further inflate the property bubble. That bubble, which Labour helped to inflate, resulted in decreasing affordability and meant that the fall was even steeper when the bubble inevitably burst. As if that was not bad enough, the Labour Party lacked the political courage to end the Tory right to buy. It has always been the Labour way to throw money at problems, as if that was always the only answer. However, the SNP Government will be judged not on the amount of money that it spends, but by the number of houses that it builds. The SNP alone has shown the political courage necessary to end the right to buy so that councils can begin building houses again. The SNP alone has shown the political courage required to end the council tax discount for second home owners. Now, we are removing council tax relief for long-term empty properties to encourage the reoccupation of Scotland’s 25,000 empty homes. The national housing trust is working with developers and councils to enable the completion of stalled housing projects, and the innovation fund is playing to Scotland’s great strength in innovation—to great effect already. The reality is that, to solve our complex housing problem, there are three golden rules: innovation, innovation and innovation. Beyond that, we need a multi-faceted approach that is open to new ideas because, as Einstein famously said, the definition of stupidity—which I am hearing from all the Opposition parties this morning—is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result.

That is one of many innovative schemes that have come forward recently, and yes, of course, all innovation is welcome. I will take no lessons from the likes of Alex Johnstone, criticising our ministers for wearing hard hats. I will not take lessons from Alex Johnstone or any member of the Opposition who has never laid a block, cut a rafter or nailed a slate on to a roof. I will take no lessons from anyone on the Opposition benches who has not read and understood the Barker report, the “Firm Foundations” report, the Mackay report and, most recently, the “Homes Fit for the 21st Century” report. On fuel poverty, I am proud of the Government’s commitment to the energy assistance package, to the universal home insulation scheme and to the boiler scrappage scheme, and I will not take lessons on energy efficiency from Opposition members if they have not read the Sullivan report and the hard-to-heat homes report and if they do not understand part 6 of the 2010 building standards or the 2010 standard assessment procedure calculations. That is partially why I have not been prepared to take some of the interventions.

No, I will not. [Laughter.]

Over the last three years, we have built 25,000 affordable houses—the largest number of houses built since the 1980s. Over the next five years, we will build 30,000 affordable houses and 5,000 council houses. That is what the SNP Government will achieve by working in partnership with councils, housing associations and builders in new and innovative ways, playing to Scotland’s great strength in innovation.

Will the member take an intervention?

The last major reform of further education was undertaken by the previous UK Tory Government in 1992-93. Our Tory friends in Scotland would like us to forget that era, but the iron lady and her successor have left rusty stains on Scotland’s soul that will not be forgotten until we remove their various legacies. Our Tory friends in Scotland will never be able to rebrand themselves successfully until we remove those legacies, so they should support, and thank us for, the further education reforms. Mary Scanlon rose—

No, I have only four minutes. The Tories turned our colleges into businesses competing with each other to replicate courses not in any genuine market, but in one in which the competition was and is for public subsidy. That is not business and it is certainly not the free market that our Tory friends profess to worship. Education is not and should not be about business. It is one of our higher callings: to discover and nurture the talents of our younger generation. The aims of education are incompatible with the business-centred approach. Scotland is now under the hammer of another couple of young Tory Turks, overdosing on testosterone and imposing cuts that are too fast and too deep and that run the risk of tipping us back into recession. Under those circumstances, we are forced to seek better value in education as in other areas. With careful pruning, the tree can become stronger. In order to safeguard the precious asset of our young people’s education, we must eliminate replication and competition where it is destructive and replace it with co-operation and collaboration, which is constructive. I trained a number of apprentices over the years and experienced at first hand the destructive effects of competition in further education when some of our colleges did well and others did not. Our apprentices went to a college in the central belt that did not do well under that system. I remember first-year joinery apprentices occasionally teaching lecturers how to do things. I remember being pressurised by the college to sign off apprentices as competent at tasks when they had not yet achieved competence. I remember the college explaining that if I did not do so, it would not receive its funding. Its concern was about money and not much about education and training. I therefore welcome the cabinet secretary’s proposals. They are long overdue. I welcome his firm commitment that not one college will close and his commitment to flexibility, so that colleges will be free to collaborate in ways that minimise difficulty. I especially welcome the cabinet secretary’s and First Minister’s commitment that higher education will remain free in Scotland until “the rocks melt wi’ the sun”. I have an affectionate message for Liz Smith. I will support that commitment, as will my colleagues on the SNP back benches, to free higher education in Scotland, “Till a’ the seas gang dry, my Dear.”

3. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to speed up the application process for the Scotland rural development programme. (S4O-00216)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm the financial allocation that is to be awarded by the Argyll regional project assessment committee for the remainder of the seven-year programme?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member may not be aware that the most recent building standards—the 2010 standards—include 30 per cent more energy efficiency measures. They are already challenging the construction industry, especially in the creation of affordable housing. That is happening in the member’s region in particular because of the extra rural costs. Therefore, I am surprised that she is asking for even higher building standards.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

One dark night around 10 o’clock in late September 1977, I went with two companions to the assistance of a yacht in Easdale Sound. We had been alerted by the screams of women on board the yacht. We commandeered the only boat that was available, the Easdale ferry, which was an overgrown rowing boat with an outboard engine. There was a brisk wind, but we were experienced boatmen and conditions at that point were not serious. As we approached the yacht, however, our engine failed, the wind and the waves suddenly began to rise and we were swept northwards towards open water. Before we could rig our oars, we were driven on to a rock. A huge wave arose out of the darkness and broke over the boat. My two companions were washed overboard and I was driven to my knees. The boat was swamped. Fortunately, as the boat was wooden, it did not sink, but successive waves washed over it, and I could breathe only between waves. The boat slowly drifted northwards through the darkness and huge seas. Eventually, it turned over in the heavy surf that was breaking on the island of Insh. I half swam and was half washed ashore, on to a small rock. The boat was smashed to pieces in minutes. I found a depression at the top of the rock and I lost consciousness. When I came to, parachute flares were in the sky. Somehow, my companions had made it ashore and raised the alarm. The coastguard was alerted. Oban lifeboat launched but—wisely—turned back in the horrific conditions just south of the island of Kerrera. Luckily, the coastguard was able to contact the skipper of the one local fishing boat that was capable of searching in such conditions, and it put to sea. Local knowledge again came into play, as those on the fishing boat were able to narrow the search area to where they knew I was most likely to be. I was spotted at 3 am, but conditions were still too bad to launch a helicopter. A Sea King from RAF Leuchars picked me up at 8 am. Without the specific local knowledge of the coastguard, acting in co-operation with the fishing boat, I would not have survived. That local knowledge encompassed intimate understanding of tides and local weather conditions, which can often be contrary and counterintuitive. It also included knowledge and understanding of the capabilities of local vessels and their crews, who are often asked to help in such circumstances. The story has a sad sequel. The fishing boat skipper who braved horrific conditions to search for me, and his crewman, were lost at sea a few years later when their boat sank. Afterwards, a pall hung over our community for many weeks. We who live in coastal communities will pay for the coastguard cuts and will count the cost in lost lives and needless tragedy. As we are developing our offshore renewables, our seas and coastal areas will increasingly contribute significantly to our prosperity. That prosperity will be delivered by men and women who will at times work in hazardous conditions. It is therefore truly perverse that the London Government should contemplate the proposed cuts at this time. I urge all members of the Parliament to oppose the coastguard cuts.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will be as brief as I can. There is no need for me to reiterate some of the points that have been made. I would like to pick out only a few important points. I am disappointed to see so few members here today, particularly on the Opposition benches, because rural areas are going to become increasingly important as we move through this century. They will change from backwaters into our economic powerhouses. I represent a region that enjoys an almost pristine environmental quality, thanks mainly to the indigenous population, who have been the custodians of this environment for generations. In our efforts to protect that environment, we must take care not to run roughshod over that home-grown environmental wisdom, because it springs from lifetimes of understanding. If we are properly to realise our marine opportunities of wave, wind and tide, there is an urgent necessity to transfer the responsibility over and the revenues from our seabed to the Scottish Government. Scotland’s people should be the beneficiary of our marine environment and estate, and it should be managed by our Government on our behalf. The future offers exciting opportunities for rural areas, but we also need to remember the difficulties of the present. Our scenery often masks rural deprivation and poverty. Fuel poverty, in particular, is common in rural areas and is often exacerbated because the full range of fuels is not available. Fuel poverty of another kind is becoming more apparent. Rural Scotland suffers from some of the highest fuel-pump prices in Europe, which is a disgrace in such an oil-rich country. People who have no public transport alternative often have to drive long distances and are crippled by high fuel costs. Despite assurances of intent from the Liberal Democrats in Westminster, the UK Government has so far refused to act on the issue. I call on all members of the Scottish Parliament to support our policy of establishing a fuel duty regulator and to demand that the UK Government take action. In the previous session, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee considered the important problem of rural housing. Much remains to be done. We should take the opportunity of increasing housing allocations in the planning system because that costs nothing, which is important in these difficult times. I invite any member who wishes to understand more about rural affairs to visit us in the Highlands and Islands region and enjoy some hospitality while doing so.

6. First, I should declare the interest noted in my register of interests. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that provision is made for extra costs associated with social housing in fragile rural communities. (S4O-00027)

The minister has partly answered my supplementary, but is he aware that the reduction in the affordable housing grant has made it very difficult for housing associations and other organisations to consider building houses in the most fragile rural areas in the Highlands and Islands region? These are often the most remote communities where, although building costs are the highest, sustainability can be assured by the construction of a very small number of houses.

6. To ask the Scottish Government, given the pressure on public sector budgets, what steps have been taken to ensure that quality of support for disabled people is safeguarded. (S4O-00016)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that reassurance.

Has the cabinet secretary heard from Argyll and Bute Council whether it intends to go ahead with its proposed school closures?

It is a great privilege to have been elected to serve the people of the Highlands and Islands region. It is where I was born and where I first made my home as a young adult, although, Presiding Officer, you will no doubt discern from my accent that I spent most of my formative years growing up in Glasgow. In my time here in this Parliament, I hope in some small way to help bridge the gulf of understanding that sometimes exists between urban and rural Scotland. Becoming a member of this Parliament has caused me to reflect on my political awakening, which happened not suddenly but in stages. I recall the final stage of that awakening in late August 2001, as I was driving home from a six-month spell of working in London. I recall crossing the border and coming back into Scotland. I recall the air becoming immediately fresher, the sky bluer and the grass greener. No doubt we are all subject to such romantic feelings when we return to our homeland. However, I was immediately confronted by a hard reality. The moment that I re-entered Scotland, the road quality deteriorated significantly. As I continued my journey home towards Argyll, the quality deteriorated still further. In places, the roads in the Highlands and Islands region are reminiscent of those in third-world countries. I think in particular of the roads on the island of Mull. Just as that is true of our roads, it is true of much of the rest of our infrastructure. I very much welcome the recent addition of the new ferry, Finlaggan, to the CalMac fleet, but I also know that most of that fleet is well over 20 years old. During the first three sessions of this Parliament, the improvements have been insufficient and I have wondered why that might be. I do not think that it is because this Parliament and successive Scottish Governments have lacked the will to effect improvement. Having been a builder for more than 30 years, I am forced to disagree with our bard, Robert Burns, when he said, “... makin roads Is no this people’s study”. It is neither lack of skill nor lack of study, but only lack of money that is at the root of that problem. My former colleagues and workmates in Scotland’s sophisticated and capable construction industry stand only too ready to build better infrastructure for Scotland. Each of us is a product of our experience. I can only reflect on mine and ponder that if I had lacked borrowing powers, I could not have provided a home for my family. I cannot imagine that many members have not availed themselves of a mortgage to buy or build a home for their families. I can also only reflect that of all the houses that I have helped to build over the past 30 years, I cannot recall one that was built without the help of borrowed money. It is often said that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts and nowhere should that be more true than in this Parliament. Our collective wisdom is and should be greater than the sum of our individual portions of wisdom. If members believe that it is wise to avail themselves of borrowing powers, how can any member believe that this Parliament and the Government that derives from it should lack those powers? That seems simple and self-evident. It also seems simple and self-evident that we will never afford the quality of roads, public transport, hospitals and schools that we deserve if we have to meet their cost from each year’s budget. Such improvements provide long-term economic and social benefits and must be funded over the long term. Rhoda Grant and Gavin Brown provided some helpful advice in this chamber only a few minutes ago. They reminded us that borrowed money must be repaid. I thank them both for those pearls of wisdom and remind them that capital assets should never be financed on the credit card schemes of PFI and PPP. In fact, if either of them would like to build Scotland’s first PFI home, I can recommend a number of builders who would queue in a long line for the opportunity. Just as my political awakening happened in stages, it seems that the Opposition parties in this Parliament are awakening in stages and are coming round to the idea of borrowing powers for our Scottish Government. I welcome that, just as I look forward to their further awakening. I hope that they will agree with all of us in the SNP, who have long recognised that we will never achieve our aspirations for high-quality infrastructure and the prosperity that will spring from that unless we can obtain proper and adequate borrowing powers for our Scottish Government. I issue a caveat for Opposition parties: borrowing powers must be adequate and they must be appropriate for their intended purpose. The timescale for repayment must recognise the lifetime of the asset that is being funded. Just as we must fund capital assets appropriately, so must we be in a position to weather the ups and downs of the business cycle. An overdraft that is too small may be as bad as no overdraft at all. There is an urgency to all this in difficult times. The banks are still depriving the private sector of the oxygen of finance. Our budget will be cut year on year for the foreseeable future. I urge all members from across the political spectrum to add strength and force to our arguments for adequate borrowing powers; otherwise, there is a danger that in its present form, the Scotland Bill will become the anti-Scotland act.