Statutory responsibility for the implementation and administration of council tax, including eligibility for discounts or exemptions, lies with the relevant local authority. Ministers have no powers to intervene in individual cases. An unoccupied dwelling can be exempt when the liable person was formerly resident there and has moved to receive personal care, whether in a hospital, a home or elsewhere. However, local authorities must take all circumstances into account in assessing any individual’s council tax liability and there may be some cases in which that exemption does not apply.

Thanks to the member’s information, I am now aware of those circumstances. However, as I said in my original answer, ministers have no power to intervene. I advise the member that there is an appeals process that can be followed and that any challenge to the decision of the local authority can be taken to the valuation appeals committee. I refer the member to that source.

Gavin Brown will be delighted to learn that I have discussed that with the chair of the external advisory group, who understands the reasons why not to proceed with BRIS+ because of the circumstances around BRIS, in which delays have been down to local government auditing its own figures. For about the fifth time, I ask will Gavin Brown not accept that the delay in progressing is entirely down to local government and not the Scottish Government?

The Scottish Government provides a breadth of support to communities in East Ayrshire. It is the responsibility of the local authority and the community planning partnership to support local communities and to ensure that the resources they have available are directed according to local needs and circumstances. In 2013-14, East Ayrshire Council is receiving £229 million through the local government funding settlement, and East Ayrshire communities will also benefit from wider Government investment in, for example, transport, housing, health, justice, culture, sport and economic development.

As Graeme Pearson will be aware, Mr Ewing has established the Scottish coal industry task force. Between the work of that group and wider Government strategies we are doing our best to support communities in Ayrshire and elsewhere that are affected by such issues. I am more than happy to write to him about the actions that are being undertaken.

The work by the Government on planning has been proportionate and positive, and it has focused on encouragement, incentivisation, new investment, support and replicating best practice. The Scottish Government is convinced that section 41 is necessary to incentivise performance improvement. Corporate council attention is one of the things that we need to improve in order to achieve a better planning service. Section 41 will improve behaviour and outcomes, and there should be no loss of income if planning authorities step up to the plate as I believe they will. The high-level group on planning performance has already identified a set of 15 performance markers that reflect key areas of essential good performance and service quality across the planning service. The performance markers have been considered by COSLA and were welcomed by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee as a qualitative and quantitative method of assessing a planning authority’s performance. They are the aspects of good performance and service quality that I expect to see implemented consistently across Scotland. Too often, performance has been far too variable. The detailed practical arrangements for the use of section 41 provisions are being taken forward with our COSLA partners through the high-level group. Setting working arrangements and processes is an explicit part of the group’s remit. I have committed to informing the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee of the outcome of the discussions. We consider that working in partnership with COSLA, Heads of Planning Scotland, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers Scotland, the Society of Local Authority Lawyers and Administrators in Scotland and the Royal Town Planning Institute through the high-level group to agree the detailed practical arrangements is the best way forward. In the meantime, the Scottish Government continues to work closely with planning authorities to help them improve. For example, we recently provided each authority with written feedback on their second planning performance framework reports, bringing a particularly sharp focus to the agreed performance markers. Through our planning reform next steps programme and action plan, we are working with our local government partners to establish and roll out good practice on a range of aspects that will improve the quality of the planning service. In addition to that comprehensive action plan, and to properly establish a link between performance and fees in moving towards full cost recovery, it is only right that we can guarantee improved performance—as the old adage says, “You get what you pay for”. Therefore, for that and a number of other reasons, the Scottish Government does not support Margaret McDougall’s amendments.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is fair to say that some of the member’s points were fair and reasonable—those regarding what the Government was going to do anyway—but the member missed the point in some of her amendments. This is not a centralising Government; the Government already has the power to set planning fees, subject to parliamentary scrutiny—

And that has not changed in any way.

The member makes a helpful point. This financial year has seen an increase in planning fees of some 20 per cent, which is the largest increase since the Parliament was created. If we want to continue to invest in the planning service and to continue to raise planning fees, I must have a guarantee that we will get improved performance. Improved performance and increased fees to do the resource job that Mr Malik has requested be done go together.

Having launched Scotland’s town centre action plan on behalf of the Scottish Government, I am particularly heartened that the convener of the cross-party group on towns and town centres subsequently endorsed it and acknowledged that it had been largely well received. That is fair comment, and reflects the partnership approach to supporting and revitalising our town centres. The action plan is clear, but is not an end in itself. It helps to set the conditions for recovery and offers a range of actions that are appropriate to local circumstances. Town centres are important. They offer a base for small businesses and local jobs, support local economies, offer space for community and civic functions, give a town its identity and offer a sense of place for those who want to live in, work in and visit it. The Government recognises the importance of town centres. We met our commitment to carry out a national review of town centres, and in July last year, we welcomed the review group’s report, “Community and Enterprise in Scotland’s Town Centres”, which made key recommendations to help to support town centres. We are indebted to the chair and members of the external advisory group for the work that they have undertaken. The Government’s action plan is a response to the group’s recommendations. I have spoken with key stakeholders across the wider public, private and community sectors during the production of our action plan and beyond and have been encouraged by the initiatives that are already in place to support our town centres, although I recognise that there are many more opportunities to take. That is why our action plan focuses on what we as a Government can do to help town centres. It also asks that our partners work together to provide a joined-up approach to town centre regeneration. The review report called for action, and the Government has listened. For the first time, we have in place an action plan that sets the framework for town centre regeneration. I have lead responsibility for implementing that plan and ensuring that momentum is maintained across Government to deliver the actions that we have set out. In preparing the response to the recommendations that are set out in the review, I brought together senior officials from across Government who have a stake in the health of our towns. Together, we have identified the relevant policies, programmes and strategies that support and put in place the conditions to enable and promote local action.

We can do a range of things about buildings that have been left in a terrible state of repair. Such issues are the reason why we will take action through the proposed community empowerment (Scotland) bill. There are also other factors to consider, such as the use of compulsory purchase orders and, indeed, the VAT issue. It is ludicrous that the UK Government has decided that VAT relief should be given just for new build and not for town centre refurbishment. There is an issue in relation to financial incentivisation and legal and other actions, which the Scottish Government will take forward. There is also an issue to do with town centre consolidation, growth and adaptation to circumstances in what has been quite a challenging time. Internet shopping is a further issue, of course, but therein lies an opportunity, not just a threat, to town centres. Click and collect is one way forward, for example. The message is clear: by working together and putting our town centres to the fore, we can capture the opportunities to make them vibrant places where people can socialise, live and do business. Solving the issues that our towns face is not solely the responsibility of central Government; a great many people are involved in maintaining the health of Scottish towns, and I commend their work. Local solutions will be absolutely critical, but Governments should certainly remove any barriers that are identified. Our action plan is intended to add support and to stimulate and encourage action across the wider public, private and community sectors, all of which we have invited to contribute to our on-going efforts. The review group made a specific call for a town centre first principle, which would put town centres at the heart of the decision-making process. That principle would go beyond the existing sequential test in Scottish planning policy. The review group aspired to a town centre first principle that drives public sector investment decision making, aligns policies and targets resources to put town centre sites first, and encourages diversity and vibrancy. We broadly agree with that aspiration and we are now establishing a working group with COSLA to determine how a town centre first principle would work and be interpreted in practice. That group includes, among others, representatives of Heads of Planning Scotland, the Scottish local authorities economic development group, the Scottish Futures Trust and Architecture and Design Scotland. The principle will see a fundamental shift in public policy. To demonstrate that, we have agreed to amplify guidance in the much-read Scottish public finance manual to ensure that bodies acquiring and disposing of public sector assets and property consider the degree of priority attached to town centres. That shows the Scottish Government’s commitment to lead the way in how the public sector responds to the town centre first principle. We have launched a £2 million demonstration town centre housing fund to bring empty town centre properties back into use. We subsequently increased that by £750,000, bringing the total to £2.75 million, to support affordable housing projects as demonstration projects. Through that fund we will test the barriers to and opportunities in town centre living. Many of our town centres need to diversify. We announced the details of the seven successful projects in Parliament on 9 January. Many initiatives will be implemented in the next few months, including the expansion of the fresh start business rates relief scheme, which will give 50 per cent rates relief to businesses that take on even more kinds of long-term empty property. That includes more premises of higher value—of up to £65,000—and additional types of empty premises, including those previously used as pubs, hotels and restaurants. We have targeted a mainstreaming charrettes grant that will specifically support town centre charrettes. A project team has been appointed to develop a master-planning toolkit specific to town centres that will highlight good practice in design, accessibility and effective engagement with town centre communities. The national review was explicit about the need to create a longer-term model when it comes to making decisions about where local services are placed or where the focus should be in future town planning decisions. As a direct continuation of that thought, we will work with Architecture and Design Scotland and the Scottish Futures Trust to investigate ways of expanding the role of place-based reviews. We want to work with interested planning authorities to test new approaches for town centres. A recent consultation on the draft Scottish planning policy proposed a town centre health check to inform development plans and planning applications, the purpose of which would be to assess the strengths, weaknesses and resilience of a town centre, as well as gauge its vitality and viability. In November, we launched the consultation on the community empowerment (Scotland) bill. Community empowerment is about communities taking their own decisions about their future and unlocking the immense local potential that we know exists. The bill will give people and communities, and those supporting them in the public sector, a range of new ways to deliver a better Scotland. The bill will make it easier for communities to take over public sector land and buildings, and will improve and extend the existing community right to buy. It will also create flexibility to deliver locally led business rates relief schemes appropriate to local circumstances, in addition to our comprehensive national package of support through business rates relief. Many of the solutions outlined in the original review report are not for the Scottish Government to undertake directly, but our action plan is meant as an added stimulus to encourage and support action across the wider public, private and community sectors, all of which we invite to contribute to the efforts that are required. Through that engagement, we will facilitate action to address the local issues that are faced by our town centres. We will continue to support a range of demonstration projects to test emerging ideas from the review report and the action plan. We plan to support that as a demonstration phase with the provision of a new budget of £1.5 million in each of the financial years 2014-15 and 2015-16. I encourage all members to engage with local elected members, local partnerships, local chambers of commerce and local businesses and come forward with ideas for demonstration projects that can show the way to rejuvenate town centres up, down and across Scotland. That partnership approach will assist us in delivering the action plan to support town centres. We know that people care about town centres, and we will now be able to put the mechanisms in place to ensure that they enjoy the sustainable economic growth and recovery that the country is now experiencing. I move, That the Parliament supports the range of actions identified in the Town Centre Action Plan and welcomes the work of the National Town Centre Review External Advisory Group; recognises the importance of town centres as a base for improving local economies and for local business and employment; acknowledges that successful town centres provide communities with a range of accessible services and are attractive areas in which to socialise; agrees that local decision making and delivery is important to reflect the specific and diverse needs of Scotland’s town centres; recognises the benefits of having the most competitive business rates package in the UK through measures such as the Small Business Bonus Scheme, Fresh Start rates relief and by capping the 2014-15 poundage rate, and calls on elected representatives at all levels, local communities and wider public and private sector partners to continue to work together to revitalise Scotland’s town centres.

Will the member take an intervention?

To answer the very point, I say that I absolutely agree with the member about local authorities. That is why we are waiting for their response. What I have published is the Government’s response. The member is absolutely right about the actions that require to be taken by local authorities.

Of course, the member advocates for her local area. I expect her to do that. However, I do not accept that the demonstration projects are the limit of the Government’s ambition. There may be a way to take forward such a project without this specific fund.

To follow on from where Sarah Boyack left off, I say that modesty is my middle name, but I am delighted that Parliament has in the debate elevated my responsibility for town centres. I knew that I had a job on my hands to deliver the action plan and ensure that it is consistent, and to support town centres across Scotland, but I now have the new title of town centre champion. I will inform the Minister for Parliamentary Business of that following this afternoon’s constructive discussion. The debate has been good, and a number of ideas have been presented. Such ideas will feature as the work continues. I have never said that the action plan would go on a shelf and be an end in itself. It was the beginning of a debate about, and a process for, the tools that we can deploy to support town centres across the country. Our response is as concise as the external advisory group’s report is in focusing on themes, which is welcome. We could all regurgitate many words in talking about actions that we might want to deploy, but we are focusing on a specific action plan that outlines what we intend to do. There is a challenge for partners—not just in the public sector but in the private sector—in how they respond by supporting schemes such as local loyalty cards or participation in the digital revolution. Among the themes that we have outlined, we will put a great deal of emphasis on town centre living, vibrant local economies and enterprising communities in order to develop the entrepreneurial spirit that we know exists across the country, particularly among young people. We will emphasise accessible public services and the focus on digital towns and proactive planning, which we have discussed. I know that a number of members wanted to speak this afternoon but could not do so. They include George Adam from Paisley, who will be delighted that Margaret McCulloch mentioned Paisley as an example of a can-do town—it has a proud past and a promising future. Such branding is only too relevant to local communities, as Dr Elaine Smith said—

I am sorry; I meant Elaine Murray. We should focus on local branding—we must get that right—to promote the unique selling point of communities. The Borders towns have done well at establishing and focusing on a niche market. Margaret McCulloch was right about finding local solutions to the challenges that communities face. The approach to our town centres will never be that one size fits all. We will ensure that the support package exists for each town centre to find and promote its place in our nation. That is why I particularly welcome the development of charrettes. As I have said before, the charrette is not a French band, but a planning methodology that engages people in real time to produce an action plan that can deliver a practical and pragmatic vision for a community. That is why we are now directing our emphasis at town centres and at delivery of our telecommunications strategy. I will shortly launch a consultation on the introduction of a more liberal and permissive regime of consents for telecommunications apparatus in order that we can ensure that all parts of Scotland benefit from the digital revolution of which we are part. We absolutely want to make sure that advice and support on that are available for businesses. Gavin Brown’s contribution was pretty negative, all in all. He is well aware that the nature of the business rates incentivisation scheme is such that deployment of new targets is not a decision that is made by the Scottish Government but by COSLA, which wants to audit its own figures before we arrive at new targets. We have not moved the goalposts. We have analysed the business rates take, appeals and other factors.

We are abiding by the same rules that apply to and were deployed by the business rates incentivisation scheme. What has changed is the impact of appeals on the figures. That is a significant and material change, so we are perfectly entitled to take those figures into account. Why would we replicate in BRIS+ a scheme that has deficiencies that we want to iron out? Gavin Brown mentioned the reaction of the external advisory group, so I am only too happy to quote Malcolm Fraser, who said of the Government’s response on the town centre action plan—these are his words, not mine— “I’m impressed at the Government’s determination to promote a new, town-centred culture across its policy-making and decision-taking. Next is for Local Authorities to embrace the challenges and opportunities this brings, and for our business and communities to be encouraged and enabled.” Every member would agree that it is for others to consider their response to the external advisory group’s findings so that we can move forward in partnership. Sarah Boyack and Alison Johnstone mentioned accessibility in our town centres, and focused on cycling. The Government will give that further thought and deliberate on how we might take that forward. I know that four ministers were represented at a recent meeting on cycling. As I said, we will give it further thought. I will absolutely commit to the serious request from Bob Doris about how we tackle the issue of businesses that we do not want to see too many more of on our high streets, whether they be gambling premises or payday loan providers. I will therefore convene a summit to look at the planning, licensing, and any other functions and good practice that exist in local government and elsewhere that mean we can clamp down on that sort of property. I will do so on a cross-party basis and pull in interested members including Kezia Dugdale, who has raised the issue before. That is the right way to create the kind of diversity that our local communities want in our town centres. Jamie Hepburn made a point about how the policy applies. The town centre first policy is not a barrier to development and to growth. It is the extension of the sequential approach in which we apply a methodology to see whether, if development is taking place, it can take place in the town centre first. If it cannot, we look elsewhere. We are talking about enabling economic growth while considering net growth and displacement. I was asked why it is taking so long to introduce the proposed community empowerment bill. We intend to consult on it comprehensively because if there is one bill that we want to get right by engaging fully, surely it is the community empowerment bill. We are having an exhaustive consultation process to ensure that we get it right. Town centres are important to Scotland and I know that the FSB and other private sector organisations have impressed on the Government the importance of the small business bonus and having a competitive rates regime. That is why I am at a loss to know why the Labour Party has opposed our actions on matching the poundage south of the border, has opposed our actions on the fresh start initiative to incentivise people to open premises, and has opposed our actions on empty property rates relief. In fact, the Labour Party would rather compensate people to keep premises closed than let them open them and rejuvenate the town centres of Scotland.

For many years when the Labour Party was in office, the poundage was higher than the poundage under the SNP Government. Aside from that, Jack McConnell is not here, but other members of the Labour Party are, and they have said that they would sacrifice the small business bonus to pay for other policies that the Labour Party now supports. The package of business rates relief—with the extension of fresh start, the delivery of new start, which as I said is being copied south of the border, the matching of the poundage and the small business bonus, which gives so much relief—has been a godsend to town centres across the country. From our external advisory group analysis and our action plan, I am convinced that the proactive actions that we will take, the partnership approach that we have deployed, our decisions on budgets and the general enthusiasm that we will bring to rejuvenating our town centres will ensure that conditions are set such that our town centres will enjoy the economic recovery that has been experienced in so many parts as a result of the actions of the Government and others.

That is in the face of a reckless Labour Party that has produced no budget options to support our town centres.

I will leave with the conclusion that, when it comes to ideas, Labour has some but, when it comes to budget decisions, it has none. The proposal to sacrifice town centres by abandoning the rates package is a big mistake on the part of the Labour Party.

Complaints should be directed to the public body pursuing the compulsory purchase order. Where someone is not happy with the outcome, the matter may be referred to the Scottish public services ombudsman.

If it is appropriate and is not subject to any other complaints procedure, I am happy to make ministerial inquiries into the case to ensure that everything that was agreed to be done has been done. In more general terms, I am confident and satisfied that the processes in place both to challenge and complain about compulsory purchase orders are sufficient, as they have been reviewed. We are trying to streamline and simplify the process, while guaranteeing the safeguards that we would expect to be in place. However, if it is in order, I will certainly look into the individual case, if Alison McInnes would be so kind as to write to me about it.

Scottish Enterprise’s chief executive met Aberdeen City Council leaders on 18 November to discuss a number of issues, including a new exhibition and conference centre. That was followed by a meeting of Scottish Enterprise officials and council representatives on 12 December to discuss the proposal and how Scottish Enterprise might be involved.

Mr Macdonald helpfully highlights the importance of Aberdeen and the energy sector. I am sure that Mr Ewing particularly welcomes that contribution. The location is ideal for developing that sector and the conference strategy, on which Mr Ewing has led. Aberdeen should feature as a place of national and international significance. Scottish Enterprise has operational independence, of course, but we would all expect it to put a clear focus on the business case once that is received. Aberdeen would enjoy the support that has been expressed around the country, but it can be judged only on the basis of the business case, which we look forward to receiving. I checked the comparators in Glasgow and Edinburgh. In the past six years, Scottish Enterprise has not received a business case but, as soon as it does, that will be given due consideration and all worthy support.

I look forward to chairing the spring conference, but that is completely irrelevant to my ministerial role, so I will move on. The information that we have is that Aberdeen City Council has said that the debt has been paid—that is what Scottish Enterprise was told. We hold no information to the contrary. I am happy to ensure that the matter is clarified so that any financial decision by the council is taken within the prudential borrowing framework. That is what any elected member in the Parliament and the council would expect.

The Scottish Government, in collaboration with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Improvement Service, is supporting a project to enhance the role of community councils. The project will include exploring training opportunities for community councillors, making better use of electronic communication and investigating the possibility of running pilot projects to enhance participation in community councils.

Certainly, community councils are perfectly entitled to disagree with a local authority or, for that matter, the Scottish Government. They are independent and represent their communities, and I encourage them to do so enthusiastically.

In Glasgow, 8,440 business properties are benefiting from the small business bonus scheme. As a result, Glasgow businesses have saved a total of more than £79 million in business rates taxation since the scheme was introduced by the Government in 2008. The Scottish Government has committed to maintaining the small business bonus for the lifetime of the current session of Parliament and recently announced an expansion of the scheme to include an additional 4,000 business premises.

The Scottish National Party Government has delivered our pledges on business rates and the small business bonus scheme to create the most generous and welcome package of relief in these islands. The small business bonus is here to stay, even while the Labour Party abandons policies in this and a host of other areas. We know that the scheme has been of great value to Scotland’s businesses, particularly in town centres. That is why the small business bonus is here to stay.

I welcome Cameron Buchanan to his place as Opposition spokesperson for the Conservatives on the local government and planning portfolio. This is my first opportunity to do so since he became an MSP. We are very aware of the importance of the issue to the Portobello community. The bill represents a critical step in the process of allowing the City of Edinburgh Council to consider all the possible options and secure the best possible site and outcome for the provision of the new school. I formally record my thanks to the committee and its convener and to all the various contributors for their work, which has allowed us to reach this point. Having heard and considered all the evidence appropriate to the debate, it is fair to say that common good land has a long and incredibly complex history, and its treatment is complex, too, so I very much commend the efforts of the committee and the expert witnesses in seeking to bring the matter to a clear and satisfactory resolution. The City of Edinburgh Council has long identified the need to replace the existing Portobello high school building. As long ago as 2006, the council announced its intention to build a new school on Portobello park, which is its preferred site. I will not go over the history and legal challenges that have resulted in the need for a private bill but, needless to say, I am pleased that we are now approaching the point at which it will be possible for the council to deliver this key project from a position that ensures the fullest possible consideration with regard to delivering the best outcome for the Portobello community as a whole. The bill has no direct impact on Scottish Government policy and the Government does not have a view on the merits of the proposed site—that is entirely for the council to decide. However, we recognise that there is widespread agreement that the existing Portobello high school is no longer fit for purpose and we believe that the council should be able to achieve what it has identified as its best option. The bill will enable that to happen and so will help the council to meet its responsibility to provide a positive learning environment for young people in the east of Edinburgh. Whether through local delivery options or broader policy objectives, both central and local government partners have a responsibility to ensure that Scotland’s young people—our country’s future—are given the best possible opportunity to fulfil and maximise their potential. The bill demonstrates how effective partnership between local government, the Parliament and the Government can facilitate healthy debate as well as solutions to help meet local needs. More broadly, it is worth highlighting that the Government is content that the bill will have no direct consequences for common good assets elsewhere in Scotland. The bill is deliberately narrow in its focus and will deliver a local outcome to a local challenge. The Government fully recognises the special place that the common good plays in the life of the nation and of many local communities, and the bill in no way erodes that. I hope that members will forgive me for straying slightly from the specifics of the bill for just a moment, but the point is important. In recognition of the special place that common good holds, our draft community empowerment (Scotland) bill, on which we are consulting, includes provisions that will increase transparency about the existence, disposal and use of common good assets. That bill will also increase community involvement in decisions that are taken about such assets. In the context of today’s debate, I am sure that members will agree that that represents a welcome development that evidences the Government’s commitment not just to listen to local communities but to enable them to act in delivering local solutions to meet local needs. That reflects the objective of the bill that we are considering today in respect of Portobello high school. Linked to that, I have noted the committee’s comments with regard to the consultation process that took place on the proposals for the new high school. I respectfully suggest that there are almost certainly lessons learned that can be carried over into future community empowerment-related activity. That is something on which I will reflect further. To return to the bill, there is clearly no debate over the need for the City of Edinburgh Council to proceed urgently with the building of a new Portobello high school, having first flagged its intention to do so in 2006. The committee has received thorough and comprehensive advice and representations from the community, its representatives and expert witnesses, both for and against the council’s favoured option. The committee has also given cognisance to the role of the City of Edinburgh Council in respect of its function as the local planning authority, and to the role of the Parliament in relation to legislative competence. The approach that is proposed also broadly reflects current Government thinking in respect of community empowerment. Therefore, the process to bring us to this stage has been robust. However, by definition, there are always two sides to every debate, and I look forward to members’ speeches this afternoon.

Again, I offer the Government’s position, which, as is normal with private bills, is to remain neutral. However, I can say that we have certainly explored a constructive approach to the bill this afternoon. I think that the committee convener, Siobhan McMahon, helpfully and comprehensively covered the committee’s views and some of the detail, which made it clear that further work needs to be done as the bill progresses to take account of many of the expert views that have been expressed. There is, as Dr Elaine Murray so eloquently pointed out, a wider debate to be had about common good assets. I could be accused of being an anorak about common good funds, having been involved with them since the age of 16—[Interruption.] I hear Christine Grahame saying that she is the biggest anorak in the Parliament—

—and she might have a point. However, although there is a wider parliamentary debate to be had about common good assets, that is for another day. This afternoon, we are discussing very narrow and specific interests relating to Portobello high school and the bill before us. We look forward to the on-going consultation and engagement on the community empowerment (Scotland) bill, which will provide an opportunity for some of these issues to be aired. After all, members are right. Because of its very narrow focus, which was accurately highlighted by Cameron Buchanan, this bill is without precedent. Fiona McLeod was also right to highlight the issue of precedence and returned to the issue of consultation by exploring how local authorities make choices, engage with people and take forward that particular programme. Nevertheless, we believe that the process is robust. This has been a journey. People might well have changed their position on the matter over time as circumstances have changed or as a greater understanding of the available opportunities and options has been reached. Alison Johnstone helpfully made the case about circumstances moving on with regard to the condition of the building itself; indeed, that is the issue on which this debate has been particularly consensual. No one disagrees that a new school is required. Different sections of the community might debate where the new school should be sited, but this bill facilitates the option of proceeding with the council’s preferred choice. For all those reasons and given our understanding of the complexities of common good and other factors, Government will continue to be constructive and take forward consideration of such matters. Members will vote as they please at decision time but, although we recognise all the points that have been made in this afternoon’s debate, we will continue to remain neutral.

Will Hanzala Malik give way?

Given the rate at which the Labour Party has abandoned its policies yesterday and today, it will have none left by the end of the week, never mind by the next election. My question is about tax competition advantage. Did Mr Findlay not blow the gaff yesterday when he said that our corporation tax policy was fine as long as it was a British tax policy and applied across the British Isles? Does that not show that Scotland’s economy can be stronger only with independence?

The member is absolutely right that the debate is about choices and that today we are making a choice—the Labour Party is making a choice as well. Are the Child Poverty Action Group and all the signatories to its campaign wrong when they say that free school meals should be a priority?

Planning authorities are required to identify a generous supply of land for housing by allocating a range of appropriate and effective sites in their development plans. That is informed by housing need and demand assessments conducted by the planning authorities.

I do not think that it is the case that we are requiring local authorities to release more land than is needed; indeed, I have just explained that we are compelling councils to meet the numbers that they themselves have identified for housing supply. That is the right thing to do. We leave local authorities, at their discretion, to help with and lead on site selection. It would be better for planning authorities if they had identified appropriate sites in the first place. Ministers were presented with recommendations from reporters acknowledging the fact that there was not an adequate supply. We therefore brought forward the numbers—we did not add to them—so that local authorities can determine the right sites in good time. Those modifications are necessary and will help to deliver the housing that we need not just in the Lothians, but across Scotland. The system is working well, but planning authorities would do well to engage earlier to find the right sites and not leave it to reporters to find amendments.

This Government attaches great importance to the wellbeing of communities across Scotland, including rural Scotland. We provide a range of services and funding through a number of key partners that give communities the means to make a positive difference to their area and to market themselves more effectively. Notable successes include the LEADER programme under the Scottish rural development programme, the community account management initiative that is run by Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and the VisitScotland growth fund.

I am sure that Mr Stevenson welcomes the fact that the town centre action plan has produced a range of actions and methods, as well as a toolkit from which any community can draw to support itself so that it is more dynamic and vibrant and can be sustained in difficult times. As we deliver continued recovery, every part of Scotland can benefit from the funding packages that we have made available. I also draw more attention to community ownership, social enterprises in communities, the sense of place campaign, business improvement districts and the people and communities fund. Mr Stevenson will also welcome—as will most members of the Parliament—the announcement on business rates, which will continue to ensure that Scotland has the best package of business rates reliefs in these islands.

9. Cameron Buchanan (Lothian) (Con): To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers the Improvement Service’s project on enhancing the role of community councils to be sufficient in tackling the issue of participation. (S4O-02715) Throughout Scotland, thousands of community councillors are active in their communities, and that effort is very much welcomed. I am confident that the Improvement Service’s work, in addition to the contribution of other organisations such as local authorities and community councils themselves, will make a positive difference.

A range of actions will derive from the funding that we have committed to the Improvement Service, including training, mapping out the community councils’ relationship with other organisations, greater use of electronic communication and a number of new pilot projects to try to enhance participation in community councils. Mr Buchanan is absolutely right that levels of participation and turnout are not adequate. That is why we want to do more. More opportunities will also exist through the proposed community empowerment (Scotland) bill further to enhance the role of community councils. I look forward to the Conservatives’ proposals—in particular, to Mr Buchanan’s contribution—on how to determine what further action we can take to generate a great deal of interest in community councils so that they can more helpfully contribute to Scotland’s democratic life.

Yes—I am happy to look into that. The statutory function that community councils have is important. They are supported by Planning Aid Scotland. There is a role in that for community planning, as well as the land-use planning system. I will take Ms Boyack’s comment on board in the revitalisation of community councils throughout Scotland.

This has been a useful debate on the importance of development trusts and their place as community anchors and key organisations that deliver services and realise the local potential that exists throughout the country. The number of members who have been able to explain their local circumstances just goes to show the impact that development trusts have had at a local level. There are stories from right across the country that are inspiring and will fuel the debate around where power lies in Scotland as further opportunities emerge. I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate and the next diary commitment. I also congratulate her on securing by way of a ministerial response last week the pledge on the website—supported by civil servants who understand the task at hand, which is to ensure that development trusts are supported and made aware of further opportunities. Christine Grahame helpfully covered many of the issues around support for development trusts to realise local potential, generate income and be a social enterprise, as well as the obstacles that organisations sometimes face. Sometimes the obstacles are bureaucratic; sometimes they are about resource; and sometimes there are other barriers in the way, which other members spoke about. I hope that the work that the Government will undertake to support the third sector will address some of those obstacles, partly through the community empowerment (Scotland) bill and partly through a range of other actions that we are taking. One of the key things that Christine Grahame talked about was communities doing it for themselves. It is that sense of empowerment that makes the difference, so that communities are not disempowered but have the tools to do the job. The Scottish Government wants to create those conditions. That was touched on in Liam McArthur’s intervention on the sense of local empowerment, capacity and delivery. Stewart Stevenson, not unexpectedly, gave us a north-east perspective and explained how communities that have seen tough times have taken advantage of the opportunities that exist. John Wilson spoke about making things happen. That is very much what development trusts do: they make things happen. They do not just debate the issues, complain and criticise; they take projects forward and deliver them at a local level on the ground. Their very responsive nature was illustrated by his description of the range of services that are provided, including lunch clubs and a host of other services. He gave the example of the council official explaining what could not be done, which was overcome by a community-led determination to make things happen. I was asked about community asset transfers. We should behave right now as if the community empowerment (Scotland) bill was already in place, because we know that community asset transfers work. We know that community ownership works; it is an incredibly empowering device to make things happen at a local level. Neil Findlay outlined a number of cases. He spoke of the experience in the mining community, where despair was replaced by activity and a vision to deliver.

I am more than happy to be corrected. I was reflecting on the words of Jimmy Reid, who said that the greatest danger to our society is despair, when communities feel disempowered and do not have the tools to do the job. When communities feel empowered and have the right conditions and support, that can make the difference. That is why the empowerment agenda is so important. I still commend the work within the area that Neil Findlay mentioned and I agree that community trusts should not be seen as any threat to or replacement for local government services; what is being delivered by development trusts and other community anchor organisations builds on the statutory services. Annabelle Ewing spoke about the fantastic development trust in Comrie, with which I am familiar. Empowerment supported by community ownership helps to make the difference by making projects happen. Doing things for ourselves is an aspiration often repeated when it comes to development trusts and the projects that they have delivered. Mike MacKenzie mentioned the opportunities that have been realised during difficult economic times. That just goes to show that great projects can come from adversity, as we take advantage of the opportunities that exist. Through the community empowerment (Scotland) bill, which will, I think, transfer further assets into community ownership, through the expansion of the community ownership support service and through the support that we provide through DTAS—I was delighted to meet Ian Cooke today to discuss the bill—we can address some of the other barriers that exist and support and enhance community development trusts across the country. By doing so, we can upscale the great local-led work that we know is making a difference, and further replicate the success stories across the country that we have heard about. Those were best exemplified by Christine Grahame—other members gave examples, too—but it is worth mentioning the communities of Auchendinny, Gorebridge, Newlands, Penicuik and Silverburn and the work on the great Polish map of Scotland at Eddleston. Those are great examples of the work of development trusts. The Government will continue to support and commend their work. Meeting closed at 17:40.

Public service reform is delivering improvements in outcomes for people across Scotland. In the north-east, community planning partnerships are bringing partners and communities together to deliver better outcomes. Their single outcome agreements provide a clear plan for place and a focus on prevention. For example, the Aberdeenshire Council single outcome agreement has identified £3 million that is being invested in the development of extended early years provision to provide early intervention in the lives of children and families who require additional support. Another example is Dundee City Council and NHS Tayside establishment of an early intervention team to offer preventative support for families who are on the edge of crisis. That is groundbreaking in that it brings Barnardo’s, Children 1st, the Aberlour Child Care Trust and Action for Children together physically to deliver a joint service.

I am glad that Nanette Milne refined that question somewhat from her opening question. I focused on the Government’s preventative agenda, which we achieve in partnership, so we will turn to outcomes that matter in the north-east. We have policing plans, fire plans and single outcome agreements that focus on outcomes that matter and which move away from inputs, such as numbers of staff, stations or control rooms. What matters is outcomes—the effectiveness and efficiency of public services—around the four pillars of public service reform: prevention, integration, workforce development and improved performance with existing resources. The Government, its agencies and partners continue to work in partnership to focus on outcomes and to make the best use of resources. As part of that, we would welcome reduced crime, efficient responses to local issues and more fire prevention and community safety work. That is a proactive agenda. I am sure that Nanette Milne will be reassured by the consultation on the restructuring of some individual services, which will leave a strong footprint throughout Scotland, particularly in the north-east.

In response to the recommendations, in collaboration with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I have asked the Improvement Service to undertake a project to enhance the role of community councils, which includes a proposal to run pilot projects to increase the number of contested elections.

We will consider the findings of the project and continue to work in partnership with local authorities to support community councils, and we will work on the Government’s empowerment agenda, not least through the proposed community empowerment bill, to give community councils an enhanced role. I hope that that will increase participation in those bodies.

We are almost six minutes through Johann Lamont’s speech, and I have not heard a single thing that she happens to believe. Does she believe that pernicious taxes, illegal wars and regressive immigration policies are a price worth paying to stay in her beloved union?

At its third meeting, on 21 November, the group discussed fishing and aquaculture, enterprise and the Crown estate. We also agreed a joint communiqué on our current position, which was released following the meeting.

Yes. Indeed, last week, the Government committed to introducing a bill for an islands act upon independence. The best prospect for implementing the outcome of the ministerial working group’s discussions is with the full powers of independence, when decisions on, for example, energy, the economy and the Crown estate can be duly considered and, where necessary, legislated for by the Scottish Parliament. Today’s independence white paper indicates clear steps towards local control and community benefit from the foreshore and sea beds in the islands. The answer to the member’s question is, therefore, yes—with independence comes immense opportunities.

The agenda for that meeting has not yet been determined because we determine the agenda and content of these meetings in partnership with the our islands, our future campaign. We are working through a very ambitious work plan with the campaign and will continue to have a dialogue about the plan’s content and the agenda itself, which will lead to a prospectus by the summer in advance of the referendum. As well as those on-going discussions, which have been welcomed by the campaign and the three council leaders, dialogue is on-going in the convention of the Highlands and Islands and the Scottish cities alliance.

I can tell Rhoda Grant that the island leaders do not think that the issues are on pause. They welcome and whole-heartedly support the engagement that the Scottish Government is offering. We are building a prospectus. The island campaign has used the opportunity that the constitutional debate affords to build a package that suits the island areas, which is to be welcomed. We are having constructive dialogue in that regard, in the context of the prospect of independence, because independence is an empowering concept, and this Parliament, led by the Scottish National Party, has been an empowering Parliament. We will continue to empower local communities, along the lines of the Lerwick declaration, which is about subsidiarity, whereby communities can determine their future. With the transfer of powers from London to Edinburgh, this party and this Government will transfer more powers to local communities in the spirit of the Lerwick declaration, as is outlined in the white paper today.

I am delighted that Liam McArthur is being positive, as usual, about the package that is being created for the island areas. He did not complete the quotation from the council leader. I spoke to the council leader about an hour ago, who has said that he is delighted with the engagement and the offer from the Scottish Government. I had to double-check what the Westminster Government is offering the island areas right now. Mr Carmichael wanted to make a big impression when he came into office, and he has offered the island areas a ministerial desk—a desk! We are offering the islands empowerment, local control, local community benefit and constitutional protection in an independent Scotland. What a great offer, compared with a ministerial desk for a civil servant in Whitehall. Let me finish the quotation that Liam McArthur started. Steven Heddle said that the island councils want progress irrespective of the outcome of the referendum “whilst respecting the Scottish Government’s political position.” He respects the position of the Scottish Government, which many people are coming round to. The best prospect of implementing the outcome of the group’s discussion is with the full powers of independence and, in that event, we propose to bring forward a bill for an islands act. It is by the transfer of powers to Scotland that we can further transfer powers to all parts of Scotland, including the island areas. That is why the council leaders in the our islands, our future campaign are endorsing our work plan.

Mr McGrigor makes a fair point. The prospect of enhanced powers, subsidiarity and decentralisation will have ramifications and consequences for other local authorities and communities. That is why I attended the convention of the Highlands and Islands, engaged with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and wrote to local authorities such as Argyll and Bute Council to assure them that the consequences of the positive and dynamic discussion that we are having will benefit all parts of Scotland, in line with the Lerwick declaration.

As Minister for Local Government and Planning, I have ministerial lead for town centres and responsibility for the delivery of the town centre action plan, which was published on 7 November. That plan is a cross-Government response to the recommendations in the external advisory group report, “Community and Enterprise in Scotland’s Town Centres”. The plan will stimulate the debate on the future for Scotland’s town centres and encourage and support action from across the wider public, private and community sectors.

I welcome Margaret McCulloch’s welcome of my appointment to that dedicated post, to which I will give 100 per cent attention. I engage with a range of stakeholders on the town centre agenda because it is so important to the people of Scotland, and I congratulate the member on the work that she does in the cross-party group, which I was delighted to attend. I will shortly meet our partners, including the FSB, to discuss what they believe are shortcomings in the report and enable them to identify further actions that we can take. However, the areas that the FSB highlighted were matters for local government and not necessarily the Scottish Government, so I will continue to engage with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual local authorities. The FSB whole-heartedly welcomes the fact that the Scottish National Party Government has delivered the most generous range of rates reliefs in these islands. It also welcomed the retention and continuation of the small business bonus scheme and the expansion of the fresh start relief that incentivises landowners to open up properties rather than keeping them closed. I look forward to further engagement with all partners, not least the FSB.

There is some welcome news on retail sales in Scotland, but our response should involve more than just retail. Our plan is about community action to deliver innovative solutions to town centre issues, among a range of other actions that we will undertake. I commit to fulfil Christine Grahame’s request to deliver such a website to support our community groups in progressing their local plans.

I remind John Scott that the concordat with local government ensures that the de-ring fencing of a substantial amount of funds has given local authorities the ability to deliver their local economic development function. As part of the town centre action plan we have announced new resources, not least the town centre housing fund, which aims to increase the residential footfall in our town centres. We will look at further resources, but the package of business rates relief is now worth more than £0.5 billion, which is a substantial contribution that will help businesses in town centres. We will continue to work with councils throughout Scotland in delivering on the agenda. I launched the town centre action plan in Kilmarnock—not South Ayrshire, but East Ayrshire, which is close enough—because of the importance of the issue in that area. I welcome the fact that East Ayrshire Council has become the country’s first town centre first council, and I encourage other councils to follow in that vein. They will get a warm welcome from the Scottish Government, and we can look at further investment decisions to support our town centres at what has been a very difficult time.

Will the member take an intervention?

I may never convince COSLA that a penalty mechanism is in its interests. However, the Scottish Government believes that it is in the interests of the planning system not only to have positive mechanisms to improve performance but to have a penalty mechanism should all else fail.

For clarity, will Jenny Marra tell me whether the Labour Party supports sustainable economic growth?

Will Gavin Brown take an intervention?

I thank Gavin Brown. I do not have a dedicated speaking slot, but I am here to answer questions such as those he has asked. We have a high-level group, which has established high-level principles around what is good performance, thereby enabling us to define poor performance. There will be a range of measures whereby we will be able to determine whether a planning authority is performing well or not, in the way that Murdo Fraser outlined.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Is the member not conflating what she sees as consistency or centralisation and what we propose for planning? South of the border, if a planning authority is performing poorly, the minister takes absolute control of that planning department through his inspectorate. I am not proposing that for Scotland. We propose to encourage conditions that will improve performance and, if that fails, that the poorly performing planning authority will not enjoy continued increases in planning fees, which would be unfair.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will be happy to share all the workings of the high-level group with all members so that they are fully informed about the key performance indicators. I hope that that will give the member some reassurance.

The Scottish Government meets Scotland’s councils regularly, to discuss a wide range of issues. There was a meeting with East Ayrshire councillors and officials on 16 October to discuss the town centres review and the regeneration capital grant fund.

I am very happy to accept that invitation to meet Mr Coffey to discuss those matters and to indicate that I will go to East Ayrshire next week to work in partnership with others, including the council, on regeneration and town centre matters. I look forward to that and I will ensure that an invitation is extended to the constituency member and others and that we will carry forward discussions to achieve the objectives that the member has suggested.

More than 89,000 business properties in Scotland are benefiting from the small business bonus scheme. That means that two out of five business premises in Scotland are paying zero or reduced business rates under the SBBS. Many thousands of the businesses that are benefiting are located in West Scotland. Offering savings of up to £4,620 in the current financial year, the scheme provides vital support and help to small businesses throughout the country in the current economic climate. In the next few weeks, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, Fergus Ewing, will write to every business to ensure that no one in Scotland misses out who may be eligible for the small business bonus scheme but is not claiming.

I agree with Mary Fee that such initiatives are well worth while. If I remember correctly, I started the scheme when I was the leader of Renfrewshire Council and we gave the successor administration a range of good ideas about how we can support town centres. That is why I am particularly looking forward to the Government’s response to the external advisory group on town centres. I return to the small business bonus. I am sure that Mary Fee will welcome the fact that more than 2,500 businesses in Renfrewshire benefited from the small business bonus, to a value of more than £4 million in rates relief—of course, all opposed by the Labour Party.

Last week I launched the town centre housing fund, which is aimed at bringing town centre properties back into use for affordable housing. We developed that fund in response to the early ideas that emerged from the national review of town centres; we are currently considering the review group’s final report and recommendations, which we received in July. Our response will be published later this year, and will set out further measures that the Scottish Government will take to support and improve our town centres.

The town centre housing fund is a £2 million demonstration project, which will do what it says on the tin: it will demonstrate what can be achieved by repopulating—and potentially converting the status of—empty properties. We are inviting housing associations, local authorities and private developers to consider bidding for project funding. The fund is one of the early projects that has emerged from the town centre strategy, and I am sure that it will send a positive message throughout Scotland about our intentions to support our town centres. This particular project is good because of its ambitions to repopulate town centres, its footfall strategy and its approach to tackling blight in our town centres. Incidentally, our target of 30,000 affordable homes is very much on track.

Those issues must be considered in the round. As part of the town centre response, we will look closely at public sector properties and the role that they play in town centres. One of the external advisory group’s recommendations is for a town centre presumption in planning and in relation to public sector assets. The Government is actively considering that, and it will be reported on once we release the Government’s strategy on town centres. Footfall in town centres is of great importance, and will be a key consideration in any action that the Government takes.

The First Minister announced in the programme for government that the community empowerment and renewal bill will form a key part of this year’s legislative programme. We intend to publish a consultation on a draft bill in November.

Yes, I will. The Government will certainly consider that issue—it would be our intention to take that forward in the consultation on the proposed bill. The member asked about the timescale for the bill—the bill is a year 3 piece of legislation and is in keeping with the parliamentary timetable. I believe that we will not just fulfil but surpass our manifesto commitment. We have great support on the bill: we have the reference group and we are also working in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. This is an empowering Government and I think that it will be an empowering bill. I thank Jayne Baxter for her interest, as well as David Stewart, who also has an interest in the issue.

Residents and community councils have the opportunity to make representations in respect of planning applications. It is for the planning authority to decide how much weight is given to any representation in reaching its decision. When a decision is made and a resident or community council is dissatisfied, they may seek a judicial review of the decision. When there is a concern that procedures might not have been followed correctly, a complaint can be made to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman.

As the member will be aware, it would be inappropriate for me to comment on individual circumstances. However, if she cares to give me further details, I will have officials investigate the matter.

Will Iain Gray give way?

I can confirm that Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leaders took the decision, at their meeting at the end of May, that they did not want to consider the review of the 2012-13 business rates incentivisation scheme targets until the final non-domestic rates audited figures for 2012-13 are available. I can confirm that those audited returns are not due to be submitted until 31 January 2014, with the final validation not expected until 28 February 2014.

Mr Baker has misrepresented the circumstances, I think. The same rules and the same agreement apply with respect to local authorities. They have asked for time to look at their own returns to ensure that they are properly audited, and the Scottish Government is more than happy to give them that time, so that they can make the right decisions with regard to this particular scheme. We agreed that, if there were significant events, we would reconsider the targets. That is what has happened given a significant event in the shape of the loss of revaluation appeals. Aberdeen will, of course, get what it is entitled to. However, Mr Baker should be aware, from studying the facts, that the overall rateable value of non-domestic properties in Aberdeen actually reduced by £4.3 million over that financial year. I am sure that Mr Baker will study the facts more closely in the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Claire Baker welcome the fact that I have extended the review of Scottish planning policy until June next year in order to undertake a number of consultations—not least the consultation that has been announced?

Minimising the need to treat residual waste is at the heart of our zero waste plan. That is why we introduced regulations last year to transform recycling services and why we have set a 70 per cent recycling target for Scotland. Recovering value, including energy, from materials that cannot currently be recycled is preferable to sending them to landfill, where they create harmful greenhouse gases. That is in line with the waste hierarchy, which underpins the zero waste strategy. Applications for waste treatment facilities are determined solely on their individual planning merits.

Mr McMahon listed a number of formidable representatives for their communities in terms of the views that they represent. Scottish Government policy is clear, but we have to be very careful when considering planning matters. In planning matters, each case is taken on its merits, with all material considerations being taken into account. The planning system has that independence, where the local determining authority will consider a case in the first instance. As regards regulations, there is a role for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. The advice that we would give is that energy from waste has a role to play within a zero waste policy, albeit that it is a limited role. For those reasons, I think that it is important that we continue to ensure that the planning system stays above party politics, which is where I think Mr McMahon would rather take us.

I am very aware of Elaine Smith’s concerns about the application in her constituency and I am conscious of an outstanding commitment to meet the representatives of that campaign. She will recall that it was inappropriate to meet those representatives while the issue was live and then potentially challengeable by judicial review. Now that those considerations have taken their full course, I can meet the representatives and cover the issues that the member has raised in her question, but I repeat again that the planning system will consider each case on its merits, in line with Government policy.

The Scottish Government recognises the valuable contribution that small businesses make to our economy and is committed to maintaining a supportive environment to assist them to grow and thrive. For example, on 12 June we announced an £88 million investment in helping Scotland’s young people into work and supporting small business growth. The investment package includes a £37.85 million small and medium-sized enterprises growth programme to assist small businesses to grow and create an expected 3,000 jobs across Scotland. Earlier today, I outlined a range of reforms to the rates system to better support businesses, including the 89,000 recipients of the small business bonus scheme, who will be delighted, I am sure, that the scheme will continue.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am keen to hear more of the scheme in South Lanarkshire, and Linda Fabiani is correct to highlight the success that it and many other schemes have had. We have an on-going dialogue with local authorities to ensure that the various strands of our youth employment strategy are supported and can develop and are based on good evidence from areas where success is being achieved. We hope that such success can be repeated throughout the country. The strategy, with its range of packages, is led by the excellent work of the Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance, and is giving young people hope in these very difficult times.

I am glad that the First Minister is in the chamber to hear the recommendations from other members. The outcome of the consultation on business rates and the Government’s response were published today. The thresholds for rates, exemptions and so on would be a matter for the budget process. The SBBS has been particularly successful, and the number of recipients has increased. I am sure that John Scott will be delighted to hear that we are bound to consult on a proposal that will give further powers to local authorities to create local relief schemes that can further support economic recovery and regeneration in communities throughout Scotland, not least in our town centres. Small businesses will welcome that move, in addition to the most generous rates relief package that the Government has delivered.

Planning and regeneration can help to achieve sustainable economic growth by proactively supporting development that contributes to such growth and high-quality sustainable places. The planning system enables development of growth-enhancing activities by providing a supportive business environment while protecting and enhancing the quality of the natural and built environment. The current review of the Scottish planning policy will strengthen those principles.

The original timescale was that NPF3, because of the statutory requirements, would be concluded and adopted in June 2014, and that the Scottish planning policy, which does not require a statutory process, could be adopted by the very end of this year or the start of next year. However, I am convinced of the benefits of carrying out the consultation in tandem and giving the Parliament the opportunity to discuss the Scottish planning policy and national planning framework 3, so I propose a new timescale for the Scottish planning policy to be considered, so that we give the Parliament its say, with both documents being approved and adopted in June 2014.

This debate is about the Scottish Government’s two key planning policy documents: the national planning framework, which is our long-term spatial plan for the development of Scotland; and the Scottish planning policy, which sets out what we want the planning system to deliver at the strategic and local levels. I will highlight some key aspects of our proposals and touch on the extensive consultation process that we are currently engaged in, of which this debate is a key part. First, however, I want to set the policies in the wider context of planning reform. The central purpose of the Scottish Government is to make Scotland a more successful country, with opportunities for all to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. Planning can and must do more to contribute to that. I want the planning system, now more than ever, to focus on delivering jobs and growth; I want it to facilitate the investment in infrastructure that will be crucial as we make the transition to a genuinely low-carbon economy; and I want the outcome of the planning process to be better places—places that are better for us, which are more sustainable and which attract investment.

I am sure that Mr Harvie will be relieved to hear that we have greater protection of the environment at our core at the same time as encouraging sustainable economic growth. It is for those reasons that he can have the certainty that we are very mindful of our obligations. It is only through a well-functioning planning system—efficient, inclusive and focused on delivering high-quality development—that we can fully realise our ambitious plans. I will therefore briefly outline the next steps that I have identified for our planning reform. I want to underline our commitment in Scotland to a plan-led system. I do not mean a slavish adherence to lines on a map at the expense of good judgment and common sense; I mean forward-looking, place-based, visionary development plans that support growth and are produced on time. We need to focus on performance and resources. That is why we, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, have convened a high-level group to look at planning performance and work in partnership to improve it. I believe that an adequately resourced planning system is a fair expectation if we are to have a high-quality service and continual improvement. That is why in April, with the Parliament’s support, we increased by 20 per cent the cost of planning fees. It is also why we introduced the e-planning system, which has been such a great success, making the planning system more efficient and more inclusive, and allowing online access to planning information across the country. Five years since its launch, it is on track to deliver financial savings of £50 million during its first 10 years, all for an initial investment of £11 million. Today, some 45 per cent of all planning applications in Scotland are submitted through the e-planning website. The expectation cuts both ways, though, because an adequately-resourced planning authority must deliver the level of service that we all want to see. We are progressing that through the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. Margaret Mitchell has lodged an amendment that would have the Scottish planning policy underline the crucial role of enforcement in the planning system. In cases in which a failure to comply with planning requirements causes real problems for communities or risks serious environmental harm, it is absolutely right that the planning authority has the power to take timely and effective action to remedy the problem. I am therefore happy to accept the amendment in Margaret Mitchell’s name. I am convinced that ambitious policies and a well-performing planning system go hand in hand. That is why, throughout the spring and early summer, I have been leading an intensive engagement programme with people who have an interest in planning. I am delivering a series of workshops for front-line planning staff around the country that focus on our agenda of improved performance and culture change. In support of our consultation on national planning framework 3 and the Scottish planning policy, we are looking at holding a series of stakeholder events across Scotland—from Orkney to Edinburgh and from Dundee to Dumfries. I will visit many of the national developments that are proposed in our report, “Scotland’s Third National Planning Framework: Main Issues Report and Draft Framework”. On the first comprehensive review of the Scottish planning policy, a recurring theme in our stakeholder engagement has been that the SPP is serving us well for the most part. However, I want to make the SPP much clearer on the specific outcomes that we want planning to deliver. First and foremost, I want the SPP to be much clearer about how important it is that the planning system delivers jobs and growth. Development plans must be deliverable and informed by sound economic evidence, particularly the local economic strategy. The economic benefits of a proposed development need to be a material consideration. Significant weight should be placed on economic benefits and in particular on jobs. I intend to bring key policy messages on place making into the heart of Scottish planning policy. Our proposed policy reflects the issues that are being considered in our review of town centres, which will report shortly. In particular, we have widened the town-centres-first approach, so that not only retail and leisure developments but other developments that generate significant travel, such as schools, hospitals and offices, should be in the town centre wherever possible. Members might think from recent press coverage that the SPP and NPF3 are all about wind farms. That is far from the case, of course, but let me be absolutely clear: the Scottish Government’s support for renewable energy, including onshore wind, remains as strong as ever. Alongside that, we want to see more community benefits from new wind farms and more community-owned developments. We need the right developments in the right places. We are strengthening protection for our finest landscapes, including greater protection for wild land. We do not want to see new wind farms in our national parks and national scenic areas—our most scenic and iconic landscapes.

We are working on the definition of “wind farm”, but any reasonable person would understand that it means a number of wind turbines in a particular area. The policy in relation to group 1, “Areas where wind farms will not be acceptable”, constitutes an outright ban, for the first time, on wind farms in national parks and national scenic areas. I will be happy to get back to the member on wind turbines. I say again that individual planning applications are determined on their merits. I welcomed the engagement of the renewables industry, which will continue as we approach 23 July—the end of the 12-week consultation. I am convinced that we can deliver on our renewables targets, providing greater opportunities and greater protection where that is required. The challenge of climate change compels us to make the transition to a sustainable, growing, low-carbon economy. That is a key focus of our proposals for the third national planning framework. Sarah Boyack’s amendment notes that the climate change target for 2011 was missed, and it suggests that policies and investment are required to cut emissions further. We agree. The Government’s climate change second report on proposals and policies gives details of a package of measures to enable us to achieve our targets. We have already committed more than £1.1 billion over the current spending review period, specifically for action on emissions. The amendment in Sarah Boyack’s name highlights the importance of the planning system to sustainable development and the importance of sustainable communities in helping to achieve Scotland’s climate change targets. We agree on those matters, too. I am pleased that Sarah Boyack appears to be so closely aligned with the Government, and I am happy to accept the amendment in her name. I have already touched on what we propose for onshore wind energy through Scottish planning policy, but our ambitions for low-carbon energy infrastructure amount to far more than that. Grid enhancement is essential if we are to make the most of our natural energy resources, and NPF2 identified a suite of electricity grid enhancements as a national development. We propose to retain that in NPF3, updated to take account of current plans, particularly for offshore and international connections. If we are to reap the maximum economic benefits from the low-carbon revolution, we must ensure that we have the necessary infrastructure and a welcoming environment for the design, manufacture, installation and servicing of renewable energy generation in Scotland. That is why we want to give support to some of our best opportunities to do so—to our low-carbon enterprise areas, sites in the national renewables infrastructure plan, and other clusters of energy-related activity in places such as Aberdeenshire, Ayrshire and the three island authority areas. As part of our balanced energy mix, we very much want to see carbon capture and storage applied to gas and coal-fired power stations in Scotland. We have a number of projects in Scotland in which, with the right financial support, we can make that happen. The Peterhead carbon capture and storage project is an opportunity to develop the world’s first commercial-scale full chain carbon dioxide capture, transportation and storage project. It has secured preferred bidder status by the United Kingdom Government Department of Energy and Climate Change, and proposals for a new power station with CCS at Grangemouth remain on the reserve list.

I am sure that Scotland’s excellent record on energy and on ambitious climate change targets will continue with independence. In fact, I am sure that it will be enhanced with independence and that any on-going discussions with the UK Government, if they are mature, pragmatic and realistic, will benefit Scotland’s position as we reach the ambitions that we have laid out. I do not buy into the idea that the UK Government would be reckless if Scotland achieves independence. We see a pragmatic opportunity, and I am sure that the UK Government will see sense. As I have talked to people about what should be in NPF3, one thing that has been striking has been the support for green infrastructure. The central Scotland green network has been a very popular national development from NPF2. Therefore, there is no doubt that we want to continue to support it. We have also had much interest in the walking and cycling infrastructure. I therefore propose that the development of a national network of long-distance routes for walking and cycling be a national development.

That is an excellent point, with which I agree. I have been very impressed by work by, for example, the Scottish Wildlife Trust, which I visited in Cumbernauld, in looking at the pathways that connect urban communities with the environmental aspect and showing how we can connect ecosystems with economics. The central Scotland green network is a great example of where that has been done on a strategic basis. I am delighted to say that it is proposed that support for that should continue with national planning framework 3. The very important point about the understanding of the environment is central to the documents, and we want to bring that alive locally as well as nationally. On our proposed spatial strategy, we must of course recognise the role of our cities as drivers of economic growth, and we will do further work in both the cities and the towns to support economic regeneration, as I mentioned earlier. Examples of good planning that are supported through our proposals include the projects, which have been designated as national developments for the first time, at Ravenscraig and Dundee waterfront, where we were able to launch the proposals. There are further comments on the decarbonisation of the economy, alternative fuels, decarbonising transport, support for rail and modal shifts, and further energy aspects that relate to our low-carbon ambitions. We have also taken cognisance of how some NPF2 projects that have been developed and delivered no longer require the same consenting regime, and they therefore no longer feature in NPF3. Other changes will include the long-term ambitions at Scapa Flow and Hunterston, which other members may talk about. I believe that our policies represent something for every part of the country. They focus on sustainable economic growth while giving greater protection to the environment. We have to strike that balance for the right reasons and to achieve the Government’s overarching objective in consultation with communities across Scotland. I commend the motion and the policy documents to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of Scotland’s Third National Planning Framework: Main Issues Report and Draft Framework and the Draft Scottish Planning Policy; recognises the ongoing innovative work to engage the public in the development of the proposals; supports their focus on economic recovery, balanced growth and creating a low-carbon place; further supports the aspiration to ensure that Scotland is a natural place to invest in, by making best use of natural resources and protecting national assets; recognises the importance of placemaking and the opportunities to ensure that Scotland is a successful, sustainable place by supporting economic and regeneration priorities; believes that planning can play an important role in facilitating a planned approach to transport and digital infrastructure to make Scotland a connected place, and endorses the positive steps being taken to ensure that national planning policy plays a proactive role in supporting economic recovery.

I have said repeatedly that section 75 benefits should relate to the application and mitigation of a development, and not to the added extras that we know the public sector has sometimes acquired in more generous and plentiful times. Section 75 is still appropriate, but it should relate to the development in hand.

Surely any reasonable person who reads the priorities in NPF3 will come to the clear conclusion that the transition to a low-carbon economy is a central driver in our planning policies.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member for giving me the opportunity to say that, yes, the Scottish Government is just as committed as it ever was to sustainable development. Furthermore, the very project that Mr Pentland wants us to deliver in Ravenscraig—it involves brownfield regeneration and the creation of jobs, housing, industry and employment opportunities—is a wonderful example of that planning in practice. We are just as committed as ever. I hope that, once and for all, that puts the matter to bed.

If Jim Hume believes that it is not for local authorities to find the right sites, it must be for someone else. Does he suggest that we centralise all decisions on wind farm locations in Edinburgh, or at the reporters unit in Falkirk?

We have had a very good debate on national planning framework 3 and the Scottish planning policy. Let me begin by following on from what Sarah Boyack said. I agree with her that planning decisions are for the short, medium and long term. We should not make decisions that affect only the short term without considering the long term. That is why the aspirations that are set out in NPF3—a transition to a low-carbon economy, becoming an area in which people want to invest, providing connectivity and having quality places—are important. I believe that there is a strong sense of sustainability and sustainable development within that. On the economic cycle, clearly it would be beyond frustration to have a planning system that did not enable sustainable economic growth at this time to ensure that we build those quality places. All the speeches this afternoon, including the Greens’ comments, which were fully expected, help within that debate. Let me be clear that the importance of sustainable development has not changed in the new policy documents. The shift is towards a greater understanding of economic impact in the planning process and in the weightings that are used. Frankly, I find it bizarre that, in some determinations on applications, the economic impact has not featured. Imagine hearing the great news today that there is more money for wage support schemes and youth employment to get young folk back into work, only to be told that it will take two years to process the planning application to realise that economic impact on the ground. The planning system should enable the right development in the right places. Patrick Harvie rose— I think that I took three interventions earlier but, to come on to one of Patrick Harvie’s points, the reason why I use the word “balance” is that I believe that there is a balance between the economic impact and environmental issues. I have said clearly that development is not necessarily at the expense of the environment. In fact, the investment and planning proposals will help us to realise our aspirations on the low-carbon economy through, for example, the proposals on housing, transport and particularly the decarbonisation of energy. I welcome the support for that in the renewables policy, which has various new proposed categories to give the clarity that Jim Hume is looking for and to provide planning support for local authorities while still empowering them to find the right and most appropriate sites within the national parameters. A couple of technical questions were raised. Margaret Mitchell asked about the town centre external advisory group report. The group will report imminently. We are waiting for it to conclude its report before the Government responds. My understanding is that we are a few weeks away from that, or perhaps even less. Therein lies an opportunity to extend the sequential approach in planning. I apologise to Mr Johnstone for having to turn to such language, but we have to expand the sequential approach to ensure that town centres give protection to more than just retail. Town centres will change from their traditional patterns and will have new functions. There will have to be some diversification and repopulation and so on. Therefore, the planning guidance on town centres will, I think, be strengthened. There has been far more engagement on NPF3 than there was on earlier iterations—NPF2 and the original planning framework—which is to be welcomed. For example, this debate will inform the policies. I have been out personally to meet the public to discuss some of the priorities. There is an expectation that local planning priorities and designations will be consulted on, which includes through the community council liaison officers. On further opportunities, we are considering other sources of energy, but environmental concerns and assessments must be taken into account. Those sources are not seen as an opportunity in isolation, as we must consider the environmental issues. Heat maps provide an opportunity to more adequately connect heat source with provision and demand in a way that has not been done before. There are opportunities for transport connections and for various networks to connect Scotland and enhance the opportunities for offshore renewables. On renewables, some have said that the greater protection for the environment that will be afforded by the new policies will mean an overconcentration in areas that do not have that greater protection. However, that proliferation will not necessarily occur because, with repowering as well as the offshore opportunities and the changes in technology, one does not necessarily lead to the other. We can meet the renewables targets without some of the scare stories and fears about proliferation coming to pass. We are also consulting on cumulative impact and on extending the separation distances from communities. There are further technology opportunities, such as permitted development in relation to digital technology. I recently spoke about that at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which has considered some of the issues in detail. On green infrastructure, there are fantastic opportunities to connect urban and rural communities and to connect ecosystems with economics. That is why the central Scotland green network is such a welcome and on-going project in the proposed developments. I suppose that it is coincidence that we had 14 priorities in NPF2 and we have 14 in NPF3. Some of the previous ones have not continued, because they have been completed, have reached their consenting regime or are no longer appropriate, as Kenny Gibson explained in relation to Hunterston. Another example is the Commonwealth games projects, which will be concluded by the time we get to the implementation of NPF3 in June 2014. The proposed national developments have been welcomed in this debate. I did not hear much dissent in relation to those that are proposed, including Ravenscraig. Some members have recognised that that represents an opportunity for the surrounding communities, not a threat to them, although I understand Mr Wilson’s concerns. We have an opportunity to regenerate a part of Scotland that desperately needs it, bringing in not only housing, but education, a town centre and associated innovation. The grid infrastructure enhancements to enable us to achieve our renewables and energy capacity targets are a wonderful opportunity.

Clearly, I cannot prejudice individual planning decisions. The framework creates the planning hierarchy that gives certainty for investors and planners about the infrastructure that we need in order to meet our ambitions as a nation. That, in essence, is what these documents are about. Other new features include Dundee waterfront, with a connection between it and the city; the regeneration of Ravenscraig, which we have touched on; Aberdeen harbour, which has reached capacity and has room for expansion to enhance the economic vibrancy of the area; the Grangemouth investment zone; the high-speed rail connections; and the strategic airport enhancements, which are vital to allowing us to use airports as dynamic places in which we can do business, connect to the world and realise our local economic growth plans. Performance is clearly an issue in the planning system. That is why we have focused on the four pillars of planning reform, with a focus on the plan and on simplification and streamlining to take out of the system that which adds no value. On improved performance, to turn to Nigel Don’s point about resources, an increase in planning fees should encourage better investment in the planning system, which I believe will make a difference in delivery on the ground and will improve the timescales. There is no dilution of the policy with regard to brownfield sites and regeneration—indeed, we have strengthened it. We have not used the term “brownfield sites”; we have used the term “previously developed land”. However, as with many issues in this consultation, if people feel that there are gaps or that amendments are required, we will consider that language, as we want to ensure that there is not even the perception of a shift in the policy. We are focused on the climate change agenda and on using the planning system to achieve our climate change targets, which are the most ambitious in the world. We want to focus on architecture, place making, quality and the environment and we want to realise the aspirations of our country in a way that engages with the public. On enforcement, the system is only as good as the enforcement powers that we are willing to use, although that is more of a matter for local government. However, by accepting the amendment, I hope that we show that we will take it seriously. There is a question of balance. We argue over definitions. Chic Brodie made a comment about language and planning, but I think that these documents are clear, concise, positive and dynamic. They set the vision for Scotland and will provide a platform from which we can inject energy into other Government strategies to ensure that we can continue on the road to recovery in Scotland, increasing employment, developing sustainable economic growth, protecting the environment, achieving our targets, including our renewables targets, and creating the kind of country in which we all want to live, work and invest. As the minister with responsibility for planning, I will do my part to ensure that the system contributes to that in a positive way.

The Scottish Government welcomes all efforts that local authorities make to listen to the voices of local people when they shape their budgets. Our proposed community empowerment and renewal bill will look to strengthen the voice of communities in the planning and delivery of services across the public sector.

It is thoroughly good practice to consult local communities on the provision of services. The renewed community planning arrangements should ensure that there is a focus on community involvement as part of the process of public sector expenditure in communities. Best practice is absolutely to communicate, consult and engage with local communities.

The planning system plays a key role in supporting sustainable economic growth through the provision of up-to-date development plans and a supportive business environment for investment. Economic benefit, in particular job creation, should feature as a significant material consideration when determinations on individual applications are made. The public consultation on the draft Scottish planning policy, which is open until 23 July, invites views on appropriate measures to support sustainable economic growth and economic recovery. Responses will help to inform the finalised policy, which is due for publication and implementation by the end of the year.

The SPP review will draw that out as an important issue. I have some sympathy with what Annabelle Ewing says. Economic impact must be taken more seriously and given more clarity in consideration and determination of planning applications. It is important, at this time of economic recovery, that the planning system supports sustainable economic growth and considers fully economic growth and displacement to ensure that it supports the competitive business environment that we all seek to create. It is about leadership, culture and policy clarity, and those are what the draft of the planning policy will provide. I am supported in that by the Confederation of British Industry, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses, no less.

Community planning and the single outcome agreements are at the core of the Scottish Government’s approach to public service reform. Following the Christie report, the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities agreed a statement of ambition that sets out our shared aims for community planning and provides the basis for action to achieve those aims. That action includes requiring single outcome agreements to set out a clear vision of what each community planning partnership wants to achieve for its area, to include a sharp focus on key policy priorities and to show how each CPP will deliver prevention and the other pillars of public sector reform. All 32 CPPs have now submitted new draft SOAs and a process of assurance involving senior managers from across the public sector will commence shortly. The process will identify specific development and improvement actions for each CPP that will form part of the agreement of the SOA.

We have had a range of reassurances that the Scottish Government has been leading the way on tackling inequality in our preventative spend agenda and on focusing on community planning. As regards new developments such as the proposed extension of the legal duty, working closely with the Accounts Commission, the national group will deliver a focus on place, partnership and performance. Perhaps that is why the advisers to the United Kingdom Government who advise on issues such as early years have commended the Scottish Government as leading the way on prevention and early years work.

On the national measurements and the outcomes, a range of indicators are taken into account—not just gross domestic product economic value—in order to consider what progress we are making both nationally and locally. The local SOAs will have indicators that cut across a range of areas and focus very specifically on quality of life as part of the consideration around a sense of place. There is a range of indicators and I am happy to share them with the member to give her further reassurance.

The Scottish Government meets Scottish councils regularly and discusses a range of issues with them.

Without prejudicing any planning application—the member referred to one—I would say that the point I was making earlier was about considering economic impact in the determination of any planning application. The issues that she mentioned would therefore have a weighting within the system. Separately, the Government is pursuing a procurement bill that looks at social, environmental and local economic benefits as part of procurement. As part of the renewables strategy, we would want to ensure that Scotland benefits from every aspect of the technology and every part of the supply chain so that we maximise the benefits of the industry for communities across Scotland.

We share the member’s concern following OKI’s announcement about its Cumbernauld operation. This is an anxious time for the affected employees and their families, and the Government will continue to do everything that we can to help to establish the most positive outcome. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth met the OKI management team shortly after the announcement to begin to establish what can be done in that respect. Mr Swinney is visiting Japan this week and he will meet the president and chief executive officer of OKI Data to discuss the range of issues further. We are also maintaining close contact with the company through our partnership action for continuing employment—PACE—initiative, which stands ready to provide a tailored package of help and support for any employees who may be facing redundancy.

The Scottish Government will explore the reasoning behind the apparent decisions in order to ensure that there are as few job losses as possible. Our agencies are working on that as we speak. If job losses cannot be avoided, our PACE initiative, which is led by Skills Development Scotland, will engage to ensure that a tailored package of support is available and that—recognising the points that the member has raised—there is a comprehensive package that will support those who are affected by redundancy.

There are now 19 business improvement districts in Scotland, including three in Edinburgh and BIDs in Aberdeen and Inverness. Businesses in those areas are benefiting from improvements to the local environment and facilities, joint marketing and promotion activities, action to reduce crime and disorder, and joint procurement. BIDs are led by local businesses. They are good for those businesses and for the regeneration of our towns and cities.

I agree with Mr Biagi’s sentiments about how the BID has supported Edinburgh. The matter will be for local businesses to decide but, to continue that renewal and those achievements, I encourage businesses to vote yes—yes for sustainable economic growth to unlock local potential and boost the regeneration of our city. The argument sounds familiar: vote yes.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Scottish Government is actively working jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local government to review the BRIS targets for 2012-13, taking into account the latest business rates returns, which show that the loss from revaluation appeals is likely to be lower than previously predicted. If we had not reviewed the targets, local authorities would have stood to benefit from an unjustified windfall and not as a result of any action that they had taken to increase their collection rates or grow the tax base. The impact of the BRIS will not be known until the final 2012-13 audited non-domestic rates income returns are received from local authorities in February 2014.

The member should understand the full workings of the scheme. Aberdeen City Council has raised matters in relation to the overall take and the change in circumstances. However, if there were a significant event that led to a review of the targets, that would be in keeping with the original intent of the scheme. Members should bear in mind that the purpose of the scheme is to grow the tax base at a local level, to ensure that local authorities are thinking about that, and to improve the collection rate. Those are matters that are part of the current consideration. The appeals issue that I referred to cuts both ways. The distributable income is guaranteed by the Scottish Government to local government, so the other factors that I have referred to will feature in discussions that we will have collectively with local government through COSLA.

That is primarily an issue for local planning authorities. The Scottish ministers have no plans to introduce new legislation on the matter. Planning authorities must determine planning applications on their merits and in accordance with the development plan for the area, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The level of provision of a particular retail use is generally a determining factor only when the development plan contains a relevant policy.

I am happy to meet the member to discuss the options that are available. I understand her concern, but the planning process is probably not the most relevant vehicle through which to address the issue. There are reserved issues to do with regulation. The Scottish Government continues to support the promotion of credit unions. By working in partnership with others, we can provide constructive solutions on the matter that the member raised.

The Scottish Government believes that there is such a thing as society, that there is such a thing as Scottish society and that there is such a thing as global society. However, our society is not an equal one, and we know that the UK is becoming less equal. Jimmy Reid argued that the worth of a society should be judged “not by the affluence of the strong or the greedy, but by how it cared for the most defenceless sections of the community, the very young, the very old, the physically or mentally handicapped.” He described a Scottish tradition of compassion, egalitarianism and empathy and the sense of community that binds us together. We do not enter this world as equals. Disadvantage even pre-birth sets children up with barriers and immense challenges. That is why the Government is undertaking a bold early years strategy and preventative approach: “Early action—acting before problems arise rather than waiting to deal with the consequences—is common sense across the world but not yet common practice. Scotland is doing more than other countries to overcome this, in attempting to turn a strong Government commitment to early action into changes in public service delivery that don’t just tackle the stubborn social challenges Scotland faces but prevent them.” Those are not my words or the words of the Scottish Government but the words of Will Horwitz, who is policy adviser to the UK’s early action task force.

I agree with the member. We do not believe that our Scottish society is better, but we are no worse than any other society in the world. We just want to be equal and to share that compassionate egalitarianism, given the powers that we could have with independence. We have charted a different course on social policies that more closely reflect Scottish values. Free education, a national health service that is free at the point of use and progressive taxation and welfare policies that protect rather than demonise the most vulnerable are just some of those values. Sustainable economic growth is the objective of the Scottish Government. However, our national wellbeing will be judged not solely on economic growth, measures of GDP or economic value, but, through our national performance framework, on a range of measures assessing whether we are making Scotland fairer, healthier, stronger, greener and safer. This week, the Parliament debated universal services. I did not hear a critique of why the policies that the Government has continued with—the council tax freeze, free education, free prescriptions and free personal care—are misguided. They were described as popular. Is that not because they connect with the Scottish people’s sense of fairness?

If the member has studied closely Scotland’s fiscal position as published by John Swinney, she will be aware of Scotland’s fiscal strength and of how we could have more opportunities to build a fairer society by maintaining universal services with full access to Scotland’s resources. That helpfully brings us to the affordability of those prizes of devolution. Apparently, the criticism in the debate was around affordability—those policies must be surrendered in the straitjacket of being within the United Kingdom. With the resources available to us, we have been able to protect the national health service—resisting the dismantling and privatisation of the NHS that is taking place south of the border—and to protect, relatively speaking, local government to ensure that our front-line services are protected. The UK cuts are biting hard, but this country could do so much more with access to our own resources. Over the period 1980-81 to 2011-12, Scotland is estimated to have run an average annual net fiscal surplus equivalent to 0.2 per cent of GDP while the UK is estimated to have run an average annual net fiscal deficit worth 3.2 per cent of GDP. We could afford to be a fairer, more compassionate country with access to our own resources. On the most recent analysis, compared with the equivalent UK figures, Scotland’s public spending and spending on social protection are lower as a share of GDP, the total tax receipts in Scotland are higher per head and the net fiscal debt is lower. Scotland is ranked eighth in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development league table of developed nations in terms of GDP. Scotland pays her way and her hard-working people do not expect and have not asked for something for nothing; they ask that we use the wealth to build a strong and fairer society.

The figures show that Scotland, like most developed nations, has an issue with debt. However, our debt position is much stronger than the position of the United Kingdom. It is not a choice between austerity and debt. The fiscal position that Scotland could be in gives us a better way—it gives us choices of increased spending, reduced debt and an independence dividend from Scotland’s being able to tailor its economic and social policies to its own circumstances.

Absolutely. Tax revenue per head of population is higher in Scotland than the equivalent UK figure, which allows us to invest in our people and presents us with the ability to make choices about the kind of society that we want to build. On choices, for other Governments, unemployment has been a price worth paying whereas, for this Government, it is a call to action. The spending decisions and dedication of ministers such as Angela Constance, as well as an all-Government and all-Scotland approach, have produced lower unemployment, higher employment and lower youth unemployment compared to the situation in the United Kingdom as a whole. For many, the UK big society has meant, “You’re on your own.” The Scottish Government has mitigated the impact of welfare changes through the council tax reduction scheme to protect the recipients of council tax benefit, the Scottish welfare fund and increased advice support. However, mitigation can go only so far. The UK Government has chosen to reduce personal taxation for the richest and it is desperate to reduce inheritance tax, while its pernicious bedroom tax and other welfare changes leave us with the impression that it cares more about the dead rich than it does about the living poor. The society that Jimmy Reid spoke of is made up of the very people whom the UK Government is targeting. They are being demonised as a burden by a Government that Scotland did not elect. Nine out of 10 of Scotland’s members of Parliament at Westminster voted against the coalition approach. That is not the Scotland that we seek and it is not our society. We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity, through a yes vote, to create a constitution for Scotland that is based on consensus and engagement through a constitutional convention. Our ideas include rights on education and housing, a ban on nuclear weapons and setting of parameters of conflict, as well as constitutional protection for local government. What of global society and issues such as climate justice, trade, peace and international development? This year, Scotland achieved fair trade nation status. We have set the most ambitious climate change targets in the world and reinforced our links with developing nations. We share an enduring partnership and friendship with Malawi. Through the tough consequences of the economic downturn, Scotland has showed pay restraint. Tough as that is as the cost of living rises, it has helped to sustain many jobs in the public sector. The implementation and promotion of the living wage, allied to our pay strategy, has supported those who were previously affected by low pay. Just as we believe that the people of Scotland are best placed to make decisions about their future, we believe that the same is true of our local communities. We are blessed with immense natural resources but, as Jimmy Reid said, “The untapped resources of the North Sea are as nothing compared to the untapped resources of our people.” That is why the Government has been consulting on and will deliver a community empowerment and renewal bill. Communities must have a greater say in how their destinies are shaped. Just as we seek the powers to transform Scotland from Westminster Government, we can further transfer powers to local communities.

Those are not powers for their own sake, but a means to create the society and the Scotland that we seek. Social progress has been made with devolution, and the status quo has been challenged, with Scotland’s political parties across the Parliament pioneering ambitious legislation.

With a yes vote, progressive voices would be able to do as they say rather than simply say what they would do if only we had the power. With a yes vote, there will be nothing to stop us building the society that we seek.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Jackson Carlaw take an intervention?

We all understand the expression of Thatcherism and conservatism around wealth creation, but over that period starting in 1979 and through the 1980s, inequality increased, unemployment spiked to record levels, child poverty increased, pensioner poverty increased and income inequality rose. That is the reality of Thatcherism’s wealth creation, right across these islands.

Given her moral and philosophical outlook, would the member like to give us her view on the UK Government’s reduction of tax for the richest at a time when other Governments are having to make very challenging decisions?

Anne McTaggart’s amendment 5 reflects the amendment that she lodged at stage 2, and it seeks to widen the bill’s definition of a high hedge to include all types of trees and shrubs by removing the words “evergreen or semi-evergreen” from section 1. At stage 1, I said that the Government had quite a relaxed view of the definition in the bill and that it would listen to what members think is the appropriate way forward, but I made it clear that I would want to consult local government if we were to propose changing the definition substantially. I therefore wrote to local authorities at stage 2 to seek their views on the potential impact of widening the definition of a high hedge in the ways proposed. I remain grateful to Anne McTaggart for agreeing to withdraw her amendment at stage 2 to enable the Government to consider the responses from local authorities on the proposed change before reaching a decision on the issue. I have received a total of 18 responses from local authorities. There was a broad mix of views. One council welcomed the amendments and another council agreed that they should be made. A further council had no issues with them, and two councils had no comments. The remaining councils raised objections to them. Those objections included concerns that the amendments would capture field hedgerows; concerns about the potential impacts on wildlife and the appearances of towns; and concerns that decisions would be more difficult, time consuming and costly to make. Some of those concerns also reflected representations that I have received from the Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB Scotland regarding the potential impact on biodiversity of widening the definition. I have discussed those issues with Mark McDonald and considered how those concerns can best be addressed. I think that the key is to ensure that the Government’s guidance to local authorities makes it clear how those considerations should be taken into account in reaching decisions on high hedges, and I am satisfied that the bill will enable that to happen.

I am sure that that is a reasonable request and that those arguments can be considered when guidance is produced and issued in due course. I have every confidence that local authorities will use the guidance appropriately and will be able to take proper account of all the concerns in reaching their decisions. I know that the first step in that process was taken on Monday this week, when representatives of local authorities across Scotland attended a meeting with Government officials in Edinburgh to discuss the implementation of the legislation. I have confirmed to Mark McDonald that the Government would welcome the participation of the Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB Scotland in future meetings on the development of the guidance to ensure that their concerns are addressed. I am also content that the bill provides that local authorities can recover the costs associated with high hedges, although I am happy to keep that under review as part of the Government’s continuing dialogue with local authorities on the issue. I can confirm that the Government will support Anne McTaggart’s amendment 5.

Amendments 2 and 3 seek to impose a tighter timeframe for the review period set out in section 31A and a tighter timeframe for when a report must be made by a committee or sub-committee of the Parliament. Amendment 4 details what should be scrutinised by that sub-committee. Amendments 2 and 3 both provide for less time than was agreed at stage 2, when the Local Government and Regeneration Committee agreed to Stuart McMillan’s amendment adding section 31A to the bill. Margaret Mitchell suggests that it might be six and a half years before a report on the review is forthcoming, but that is the absolute maximum time period. At stage 2, I made the point that a future “committee would not want to be bound by a timescale that provided no flexibility”.—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 6 March 2013; c 1830.] I reiterate that point. Shortening the maximum review period to two years and the maximum reporting period to one year after that effectively gives no discretion to the future committee to determine its own priorities and set the appropriate timescales. On amendment 4, post-legislative scrutiny is not necessary for every piece of legislation that we produce. If it was, that would suggest that we did not have confidence in the legislation that we considered and enacted. A mandatory reporting requirement such as that in section 31A needs particular justification. I understand that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee had particular concerns in relation to this bill and that that is why we have section 31A. The review requirement was agreed by the committee at stage 2 to reflect particular concerns that were being expressed and to provide the comfort of post-legislative scrutiny on the bill. However, I have strong concerns about going further than section 31A goes. It is one thing to require a committee to report by a certain date; it is another to dictate in detail the terms of its report. Members can leave it up to a future committee to determine the content of its report. For those reasons, I encourage members not to support Margaret Mitchell’s amendments.

I am pleased to be here for the debate. A legislative framework to tackle high hedges was a manifesto commitment of this Government, and I am pleased to see it come to fruition. Mark McDonald has outlined the parliamentary history of the issue, which I do not intend to rehearse. As he said, legislation on high hedges has been a long time coming, which highlights just how difficult the issue has been to resolve. I thank Mark McDonald for introducing the bill. It was a significant undertaking that has nevertheless made speedy progress through Parliament. In February 2012, he explained to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee his reasons for not consulting on his proposal to introduce a bill, and here we are, slightly more than a year later, debating the bill at stage 3. Of course, that work could not have progressed so quickly without the work that my colleague Fergus Ewing undertook when the issue came under his portfolio, which was a strong foundation upon which Mark McDonald could build the bill. I, too, offer my thanks to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. I gave the Government’s views on the bill to the committee during its evidence session on 19 December, and followed the previous evidence sessions with great interest. I also thank the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. The level of detailed consideration given by all committees of the Parliament ensures that legislation is as good as it can be. The Government has supported the bill consistently during its progress through Parliament. We recognised that Scotland was the only part of the United Kingdom without high hedges legislation. Scotland has benefited in learning from other parts of the UK, and I hope that members will agree that we have before us a well-thought-out bill that will address high hedge problems across Scotland. As well as giving evidence to the committee during its stage 1 consideration of the bill, I was happy to participate at stage 2, during which amendments that sought to widen the scope of the bill were considered. At stage 1, I said: “The Government has taken quite a relaxed view on that ... we will listen to what Parliament thinks is the appropriate way forward.”—[Official Report, 5 February 2013; c 16391.] At stage 2, I advised that I had written to local authorities to seek their views on the potential impacts of widening the definition of a high hedge in the ways proposed. Earlier this afternoon, I outlined the responses that I received from local authorities in respect of an amendment at stage 2. I also advised that my officials, who have been supporting Mark McDonald, will work with local authorities to produce guidance that will address a number of their concerns, and I am satisfied that the flexibility within the bill will enable local authorities to address those and other concerns. The first step in that work with local authorities took place earlier this week when representatives from a number of local authorities attended an implementation meeting with officials. I was pleased that representatives from Scottish Natural Heritage and the directorate for planning and environmental appeals also attended to provide their input. It will be helpful for members if I discuss some of the detail of that meeting. It was a positive meeting, at which those who attended engaged openly with my officials on how best to make the bill work as we move forward towards implementation. Of particular interest was the guidance that will be produced to accompany the bill and what it needs to cover. As Mark McDonald suggested, there will be guidance for members of the public and for practitioners. Guidance for members of the public might contain examples of the pre-application requirements that local authorities might consider, how people might approach a neighbour who owns the high hedge, and what the process would be thereafter, should their approach have been unsuccessful. It would also detail how to make an application or appeal a decision. There was also a discussion about guidance for practitioners and what that might contain. Issues that might be addressed include the factors that a local authority might consider in making its decision, whom it might consult in certain circumstances and the impact of all those things on fees. I was pleased that the meeting was also attended by an official from the directorate for planning and environmental appeals, who was able to explain to those present the circumstances in which appeals could be made. The official also covered how appeals might work—for example, what advice might be required by those hearing the appeals and how that would be addressed. Those at the meeting also discussed the committee’s recommendation in its stage 1 report that the Scottish Government “examine the feasibility of establishing a central tree officer to provide a core of expertise to local authorities”. Although the initial views of the local authorities my officials met on Monday suggested no great desire for the provision of such a post, they indicated their willingness to give the recommendation further consideration. It was also pointed out that it would be important to seek the views of the councils that were not represented at that meeting. The committee also recommended that “the Scottish Government take the opportunity of the on-going review of Scottish Planning Policy to examine the issues raised such as residential development in proximity to woodlands”. I am happy to confirm that, as I indicated in my response to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee at stage 1, my officials will ensure that the issue is considered in the review of Scottish planning policy. SPP sets out ministers’ priorities for how we plan for Scotland, while the national planning framework sets out where nationally important developments should take place. The existing SPP was published in 2010. In September 2012, I announced a review of it, highlighting three key drivers: bringing the policy up to date; sharpening the focus on planning’s role in supporting sustainable economic growth; and emphasising the importance of place. The review has been informed by a period of pre-draft engagement, in which stakeholders’ views have been sought on how the existing SPP works in practice and on any priorities for change. With regard to place, we do not propose to change the policy, but the intention is to draw in existing policy from “Designing Places” and to set place-making at the heart of planning policy. The draft SPP will stress that, in order to create successful places, we must consider the relationships between buildings, natural resources, travel and other infrastructure. A draft will shortly be published for consultation and we expect the revised SPP to be in place by the end of 2013. It is also worth noting that the existing SPP contains policy on protection of woodland, the very point made by the committee in its consideration of the bill. I am pleased to continue to offer the Government’s support beyond the bill process itself and into the implementation phases; indeed, as members have heard, that work has already begun. The meeting that my officials had on Monday with representatives from local authorities was simply the first step. That on-going and valuable engagement with councils will ensure that the bill is implemented as intended and will provide local authorities with tools to help them. Any such tools need to be practical and workable. Given that Parliament has now agreed that the bill should be broadened, that implementation work and the provision of guidance will be particularly important. I welcome the bill and encourage members to support it at decision time.

I know that the member is deeply disappointed that those amendments were not supported. Does she accept, though, that the flexibility still exists for the committee to determine its own agenda and timescale for reviewing the provisions of the bill?

As has been said before, the bill will act as a deterrent and will help to resolve cases across the country. What evidence do we have that the bill can bring people together in a harmonious way? Well, this afternoon’s debate has shown that. If the bill can bring together the politicians of Scotland to reach what appears to be a unanimous conclusion on high hedges, I am sure that it will be able to resolve cases across the country. Perhaps the bill also provides us with lessons on how Parliament conducts itself, given the consensual and constructive amendments that were lodged by several members and which were accepted by the member in charge, and given the way in which the Government took forward suggestions from different places. That approach has left us with a robust bill. As Stewart Stevenson and Kenny Gibson mentioned, the bill will not solve every case in Scotland, but it gives us a great framework and foundation from which we will be able to resolve the great majority of cases by presenting the avenue that will now exist. The bill deals with a very human issue. Legislation, regulation and guidance may be required, but there is a very human issue involved in looking at how we can solve some of the concerns that people have. I was struck by some of the evidence that was presented to the committee on issues that the bill will provide a mechanism to resolve. One witness said: “Our problems with high hedges have caused embarrassment, fear, stress and costly fees to solicitors. None of this would have been necessary if there had been a High Hedges Bill in place and a way of achieving resolution to the problem of a mutual hedge dispute.”

The ever-helpful back bencher, Christine Grahame, has asked a pertinent question. As soon as the bill receives royal assent, we will work immediately—work will have already begun—on the guidance, and we will make progress towards implementation as quickly as we possibly can. We will look at the guidance, take on board considerations and, following royal assent, lead on to commencement. On Christine Grahame’s earlier speech, I recall that the Conservatives moved an amendment at stage 2 asking whether one single person could bring together legal expertise, planning expertise, horticultural expertise and casework expertise. Only one such person exists in this country, and that is Christine Grahame.

In progressing the bill, we have been able to rely on a range of professional and practitioner intelligence in order to provide a definition with which people are happy. I know that there has been among local authorities some concern about the bill’s implementation, which is why we are working with them to address their concerns in the way that I described earlier. Jackie Baillie pointed out the level of ministerial support that the member in charge enjoyed in taking the bill through Parliament. I asked officials to support Mark McDonald in progressing the bill, but Jackie Baillie’s description of how well a minister is supported now leaves me with deep and searching questions about what my civil servants have been doing over past months, given that Mark McDonald seems to be so well briefed. I am not sure that my horticultural expertise was up to the mark beforehand, but it certainly is now, in understanding the bill. However, I jest, because I know that the bill has achieved consensus among members. It will now provide a mechanism that can resolve issues in a very constructive fashion. It is important that we will have the opportunity to review the bill’s provisions in the light of practical experience. I reiterate that the committee can review the bill’s implementation at any time—subject to the maximum time limit that was agreed earlier—and in any area. The bill is a proportionate and appropriate response. It was right to go through the local government route as opposed to a judicial or criminal route to resolve matters; it was the right method to deploy in terms of a parliamentary response to the issues. It is no mean feat for Mark McDonald to have taken the bill through Parliament in such a timely and effective fashion, thereby succeeding where others—well intentioned though they were—were unable to progress a bill to this stage. I am delighted that the Government has been able to support the bill. I know that the member in charge of the bill now wants to say more on the bill’s final stage before it is passed—I hope—this evening, with all members’ support. Again, the Government supports the bill and will ensure that its implementation assists people through guidance and its relationship to Scottish planning policy and TPOs. I thank all members for their engagement in the process.

My opening remark concerns construction. I thought that the Labour Party’s philosophy was to invest in capital projects to stimulate the economy, but the spokesperson has this afternoon disowned that strategy. The order is about extra resources: some £70 million to make the council tax freeze real across Scotland, which will be warmly welcomed by hard-pressed families; and the £37.8 million for the Scottish welfare fund, which will protect many of the most vulnerable people in this country in the face of UK actions. On local government finance, the Labour Party has said that we should do what is being done in Wales. I inform members that the share of local government expenditure as a proportion of Government expenditure in Wales is 30.4 per cent. In Scotland, thanks to the actions of this Government, it is 37.6 per cent. On the issue of centralising Governments, it is this Government that has reduced ring-fenced funding from £2.7 billion to £0.2 billion in 2013-14. On the council tax freeze, which is fully funded, there is £70 million compensation out of a £10.3 billion budget. That overbearing centralisation amounts to 0.7 per cent of local government finance. As Kevin Stewart said, over the same time that the Scottish budget has grown by 6.4 per cent, the local government budget has grown by 8.9 per cent under this Government’s watch. I know that the Labour Party was not very good when it was the Administration, but it is not very good as an Opposition, either. It was revealed today that Sarah Boyack did not realise that, only a few weeks ago, the Labour Party voted against a £10 billion settlement for local government. Imagine the impact that that would have had on front-line services across the country. Labour thought that that was a draft order, but it was the order that released resources, just as the order that we are discussing today releases resources. I do not recall Kenneth Macintosh saying during the budget debate that local government should get one more penny. No such amendment was forthcoming from the Labour Party. It named three priorities, but local government was not one of them. There was no alternative budget, but there is empty rhetoric. Warm words from the Labour Party on the bedroom tax and other welfare issues are no substitute for the action that this Government is taking to mitigate the impact of decisions taken by people whom the people of Scotland did not elect.

No, I will not; I have one minute to go. This Government has acted to protect more than 560,000 council tax benefit recipients, through our reduction scheme. SNP members are right: if it were left to the Labour Party—or the Conservatives, for that matter—the scheme would not be in place and those people would not be protected from the consequence of the actions of the Conservatives. Mitigation is the best that we can do with the powers and the resources that we have at our disposal. However, the best way in which to mitigate the impact of the pernicious and cruel policies of a Government that this country did not elect is—[Interruption.] I see that Labour members know what is coming. They know that the answer is a single word: independence. That is the best way in which to protect the people of this nation. The order reflects partnership working with local government, which we will continue to engage in to defend our front-line services and the people of this country.

Scottish Government officials regularly meet Scotland Excel to discuss a range of matters in relation to public procurement. Earlier today, I attended a meeting of ministers, officials and local government representatives including Scotland Excel to discuss the standards and processes that are in place for school meals and local authority procurement of food and drink. In fact, I left the meeting to attend portfolio questions.

I am sure that the whole Parliament will benefit from the joint statement that will be released at the conclusion of today’s joint meeting with local government, at which two cabinet secretaries are present. I assure the Parliament that a great deal of intensive work is being done on the subject in partnership with Scotland Excel. The member will know that a number of tests are being done at present, and work is being done in partnership with agencies to ensure that quality is in place and that we can have confidence in the food supply. Scotland Excel has encouraged local authorities to adopt a precautionary approach at this time while it looks at both procurement practices and standards in school meals. I refer all members to the statement that will be released at the conclusion of the meeting on the next steps in relation to this serious issue.

I do not wish to pre-empt the bill, but it will present an opportunity to Parliament and those who are engaged in public sector procurement to consider social, environmental and economic benefits in future procurement—some £9 billion-worth of procurement. At the moment, the partnership that exists for procurement in the public sector, particularly in local authorities—whether councils are part of Scotland Excel and whether they adopt contracts—is voluntary. Of course, councils have the latitude to buy local within the parameters that are outlined in Excel, so some of the good work that exists in current procurement can be emulated. However, the bill could present further opportunities to include greater consideration of ethical and other benefits as part of the formal procurement process.

I reassure the member that a range of working guidance encourages local procurement. There is a myth that Excel deals only with national procurement, but there is provision to purchase and supply food and drink locally and for that to be included in contracts and specifications. Indeed, suppliers can provide on an authority to authority basis, rather than on a national basis. In terms of specific guidelines, there is strong quality assurance through nutritional requirements, the work of inspectors and a food for life catering mark initiative. A lot of progress has been made on the hungry for success initiative as well as on our work in partnership with the Soil Association. Across that range of activities, the emphasis is on trying to buy local as much as possible and on buying the best-quality produce. Those are factors within the current procurement process and we will continue to encourage them through the guidance that we produce.

The Scottish Government engages regularly with COSLA and other key partners and stakeholders ahead of a constitutional platform being developed.

It looks as though I am not the only minister who has had a promotion this afternoon. In line with the Electoral Commission’s call for both sides of the independence campaign to set out the process following the referendum, the Scottish Government has published a number of papers, including the paper outlining the transition to independence, the fiscal commission working group’s considerations, and a discussion paper about streamlining and strengthening economic and competition regulation. Those papers are helpful to the debate. I am glad that some people in the Labour Party are now recognising the opportunities that will be provided by a yes vote, and I look forward to them being joined by other members of the Labour Party in the forthcoming debate.

This has been a very helpful debate on public sector reform. Of course, the debate is characterised by the Government’s response to the Christie commission, which was very informative and has led to the four pillars of reform—prevention, integration, workforce or people and improved performance—in the challenging environment that many members have mentioned. I will focus immediately on community planning partnerships. The theory is that they bring together all the public sector partners and in some cases the private sector. I believe that the third sector is involved in every community planning partnership, and it certainly should be at every one. The partners should focus jointly on the needs of a community, with a focus on place. They should look at the data, build the evidence, consider which joint approaches will work in the community, listen to local aspirations and then deliver jointly on the ground. That is the way that it works in theory. Our guidance, which was issued as recently as last December, makes abundantly clear that that is what community planning partnerships should do. It is based on a statement of ambition about how public sector partners will bring their resources and input to the table. I will not deal with the issue just as a paper exercise. The cabinet secretary has tasked me with ensuring that things are happening on the ground. Since my appointment, I have been visiting local community planning partnerships across the country. Kevin Stewart is right that there is a range of performance in the partnerships and that the situation is variable, but a great deal of good work is going on, and I could list many examples. For a number of reasons, I am convinced that further progress will be made on public sector reform and community planning partnerships. The Government has succeeded in decluttering the public sector by way of streamlining and simplification. We have reduced the number of public bodies from 199 to 144, with a trajectory that will take us to 112. However, the issue is not just about structures.

I agree with the member, but that point was adequately answered by Stuart McMillan, who said that what matters is that the outcomes are robust and that people receive quality services. I do not want to be patronising, but the public do not necessarily need to understand the wiring board of public services—that is our job—as long as they get the outcomes that they deserve, resources are used efficiently and effectively and the decisions that community planning partnerships make involve proper engagement.

I will continue, because I am halfway through my time and I have not made nearly enough progress. There is an expectation that local communities will be part of the community planning process. We were asked what the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill will bring to the table. That bill will be an exciting, radical and bold opportunity to ensure that communities can take ownership of local facilities and assets and have greater participation in and engagement with decisions. Of course, we do not need a bill for public authorities to act in that spirit right now and to harness the untapped potential. The SOA guidance has been issued. The cabinet secretary is right that any barriers that have been identified might be a figment of some people’s imagination. People assume that there are bureaucratic barriers to joint working but, when exposed, they are not barriers at all. We have provided clarity to our key agencies on working together through community planning partnerships. There are three reasons why I think that we will make further progress. First, the duty on community planning partnerships will be extended beyond local government to all public sector partners. Secondly, the national group will deliver much of the evidence on what we know works and share that knowledge between and within community planning partnerships. We will not take a complacent approach to community planning partnerships, which is why the Accounts Commission for Scotland has been charged with inspecting them. That raises the bar and the expectations of what they can deliver. Structural change is on-going through health and social care partnerships to ensure that the resources follow the person in need. Police and fire restructuring will ensure that the resources stay at the front line. Personalised care will give more control to individuals. Digital services will ensure that our public service is responsive to need. The Auditor General has made it clear that public sector partners can work across boundaries to meet the aspirations. It is easy, I suppose, to provide a critique of some of the less well performing community planning partnerships and I am interested in the committee’s deliberations on the measures that the Government can continue to take to support the partnerships. However, there is some excellent work, such as the early years collaborative, which focuses on preventative spend. For the first time, we will ask—demand, if you will—of community planning partnerships what the local challenges and solutions for prevention plans are and what public sector partners are doing locally to tackle demand pressures on the system. That, of course, is helped by the change funds, which have delivered more than £500 million over the spending review period to ensure that they act as a catalyst for integration, joint working and prevention. Sarah Boyack’s and John Pentland’s speeches exhibited a lack of understanding of outcome-focused public services, because they immediately focused on the inputs and had the audacity to criticise the Government’s budget settlement, which has protected health proportionately, protected local government and delivered £500 million towards preventative spending, which will ensure change throughout the country. If the Labour Party had had its way, there would not even have been new money from the public health supplement. Across a range of areas, those interventions will make a difference. There are many great examples that we will want to mainstream: for example, integrated services in Highland, diversionary youth schemes in Renfrewshire and homelessness projects in North Ayrshire. I could go on with the great examples.

We will mainstream that good work and build it into community planning throughout the country.

I met the convener of the Scottish Local Authorities Remuneration Committee on 23 January 2013 and our discussion included the future work programme of SLARC. In line with the provisions of the legislation that created SLARC, I believe that there is no work to commission to SLARC at this time.

I have discussed the matter with COSLA and it is content with our approach and my view. I have also written to the relevant committee in the Scottish Parliament to seek its views. Many people would call for the abolition of SLARC, not least the leader of the Labour group at COSLA. We value its role, but there is no work to be commissioned at this time.

There is no work to do. I have to ask the Parliament: what is the point of appointing people to a committee with no work to do? That does not seem to be an appropriate use of public funds. If we require SLARC’s advice in future, we will be happy to take it. Sometimes we will agree with its recommendations, such as on ALEO places, and sometimes we will disagree with its recommendations, such as on substantial pay increases to councillors, which we do not feel are appropriate at this time. We value SLARC’s role and, if we require its input in future, we will of course seek it in line with the provisions in the legislation.

When the Labour Party was directly asked how much additional revenue or capital funding it would give local government, the silence was deafening on absolute figures and an alternative budget. I listened closely to Ken Macintosh’s speech in the budget debate yesterday; he said that he had only three simple requests. They were for extra resources for colleges, for housing and for rail. Not a penny was requested for local government capital or revenue spend.

In addition to the Barnett consequentials, of which a 28 per cent share will go to local government, there will be the housing resource from the Scottish Government, to which Mr Swinney committed the Government and Parliament. The views that the Labour Party says it holds would take away resources from local government, schools, roads and other priorities. Labour Party priorities depend on which debate they are attending, so members should expect no consistency from it on such matters. Margaret Mitchell asked appropriate questions about the business rate figures. We must look at the business rates incentivisation scheme in the end-year process, when we will have the outturn figures. I cannot say how much will be realigned through that and how much will be returned to local government through the 50 per cent mechanism, because targets are set for the end of the year. However, we will of course return to that.

Margaret Mitchell asked how many councils would benefit from the business rates incentivisation scheme. My answer is that we will not know until the end-year process takes place, when we will have the outturn figures on business rates and the targets that have been reached. However, local government has certainty, in that the Scottish Government guarantees the resource to local government. Labour conveniently left the non-domestic rates income out of the local government settlement figures, which is how it arrived at amounts of 50 per cent, 85 per cent and 83 per cent. Labour members have accused SNP back benchers of being loyal, but at least SNP members can stick to the same line in a debate, instead of giving four different figures in accusing the Government of reducing local government’s share of the resource. Incidentally, local government’s share has increased under this SNP Government, although it was decreasing under the Labour-Liberal Executive. An interesting statistic for folk who would like to indulge in doom-mongering is that, in the period when the Scottish Government budget increased by only 6.4 per cent, the local government budget increased by 8.9 per cent—by more than the increase in the Scottish Government budget. We recognise that times are tough. I turn to Willie Rennie’s speech. The cabinet secretary again clarified how the figures were produced and how, as a consequence of the 85 per cent floor, Aberdeen City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council received contributions that were less than would be the case under the funding formula. The 85 per cent commitment was delivered. Mr Rennie misunderstands that mechanism and also misunderstands the transfer to local government for police and fire services. The transfer from the Scottish Government to local authorities for police and fire purposes was largely ring fenced and was to be passed on to the police and fire authorities. By transferring the money—incidentally, the approach was agreed in partnership with local government in the spirit of the concordat and our partnership approach—local authorities have largely agreed with the transfer figures to the new single authorities. However, like Mr Kelly, Mr Rennie is obsessed with the constitution rather than with the bread-and-butter issues that we face daily. Mr Pentland pleaded with us to mitigate the impact of Westminster decisions, although we have done that in respect of council tax benefits and in other areas. Would not it be better to cut out of the equation the Tory-led Administration in Westminster so that we can make decisions for ourselves in Parliament with Scotland’s own resources?

I would like to make some more progress. The figures that the Labour Party has given are inaccurate, of course, because they ignore the non-domestic rates income. It will be for councils to make choices. I return to Mr Pentland’s colleague, Mr Bibby. We are no longer sparring in the council chamber—we are in Scotland’s national Parliament—but I am left wondering why he does not support the floor mechanism, which provides the safety net and the recognition of deprivation that we would expect in order that we can care for the most vulnerable people in our communities. The floor is not a disadvantage; it compensates less-well-off areas and gives additional resources to local authorities that are in positions such as that of Renfrewshire Council.

I would like to make more progress. I want to probe the then budget choice for Renfrewshire Council, which did not invest in some of the priorities that Mr Bibby suggested, but managed to find resources for new councillors’ accommodation, for big new flat-screen televisions in the council chambers, and for more senior Labour councillors. How are they the priorities of the people of Renfrewshire? A number of speeches have been made on what the order will achieve in respect of new resources for local government, in areas in which we have reached agreement, on commitments on free personal care, family support, teacher induction and the council tax freeze.

I believe that there is one that dates back some time. There we are. The Scottish Government has been exposed; my office has a television that was purchased some time ago by the parliamentary authorities. I thank Mr Malik very much for his intervention. I am not quite sure why the Labour Party would rather leave it to Westminster to determine our resources, when the settlement for local government achieves £9.7 billion revenue support and £552 million capital for local government. On capital to help to stimulate the economy, the deal that will be agreed with local government will encourage the transfer to capital and the new resources from the Barnett consequentials to be invested in new capital projects, which will be achieved timeously. Those decisions feel like the right kind of decisions to stimulate economic recovery at this time. The share to local government has increased under the SNP, and it will still be higher than that which we inherited from the previous Labour-Liberal Executive when it was in power. We are guaranteeing the non-domestic rates income for local government, and we have in Scotland the most generous package of rates relief in the United Kingdom. Rates relief amounts to more than £0.5 billion in Scotland. There is the small business bonus as well as the new town centre fund, which the Conservatives voted against yesterday in the budget process. The approach gives certainty, no surprises, investment in Scotland’s priorities, and the continuation of the council tax freeze. If I remember correctly, that was also a Labour Party manifesto commitment in the Scottish Parliament elections. That commitment has, of course, been abandoned since then by the Labour leader. Sarah Boyack asked what we are doing for the “hard-pressed” council tax payers of Scotland. In partnership with local government, we are freezing the council tax for the “hard-pressed” council tax payers of Scotland. That is a shared manifesto commitment. We are able to abide by that commitment, whereas the Labour Party is disowning it. A number of SNP members quite rightly identified the de-ring fencing of large sums of money from the Scottish Government to local government. That is absolutely the right approach. Willie Rennie asked us—

Just as we require to do, we want to seek to transfer powers from London to Scotland, but there is also the potential to transfer more powers to the local level. I will finish with a challenge—to the Labour Party, in particular. If it wants to revisit the distribution mechanism and how local government finances are distributed across Scotland, the cabinet secretary and I will be more than happy to work in partnership with COSLA to do that, because it will show the hypocrisy of the Labour Party and others on how local government finances are actually distributed.

I also welcome you back, Presiding Officer. I am pleased to participate in today’s debate and to reiterate the Government’s support for Mark McDonald MSP and his High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. Our 2011 manifesto committed us to introducing a bill to provide a legal framework for settling disputes relating to high hedges. I hope that today we will move that commitment on a step. I pay tribute to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its work and, in particular, the thoroughness of its report. In its consideration of the bill, it has been supported by the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Finance Committee. I also acknowledge the hard work and efforts of all those who gave evidence to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee during the oral evidence sessions in December, and of those who responded to the committee’s call for evidence. I know that the committee had to consider a wide range of views and talk to many experts—and not just from Scotland. There has been discussion of the effectiveness of the legislation in England and Wales, how aspects of the recent legislation in Northern Ireland might work and the slightly different legislative approach taken by the Isle of Man. The Government recognises the need for action to be taken in the area, especially following our 2009 consultation, which attracted more than 600 responses. That indicates the extent of the issue, which members will know about from correspondence. Members will also know about the frustration that the issue can cause constituents. The responses to the committee’s call for evidence and the evidence from Scothedge in particular made clear the serious impact that high hedges can have in the most serious cases. We recognise that Scotland is the only part of the United Kingdom that does not have legislation to deal with the problem of the height of hedges. That, of course, presents us with the opportunity to learn from elsewhere. The bill learns from the experiences of others—that is also evident in the accompanying documents. The work that Mark McDonald undertook, which is set out in the policy memorandum, shows that although councils can receive a lot of inquiries at the outset, those tend to be followed by a low level of formal complaints and an even lower level of necessary enforcement action by a local authority. That suggests that the very presence of legislation encourages the resolution of disputes between neighbours, as has been mentioned. Providing members of the public with mechanisms to resolve disputes about high hedges must be the way forward. Ministers have supported the bill from the outset. Mark McDonald announced his intention to introduce the bill on 8 September 2011. Ministers announced their support for him at the same time, and have continued to support his work through public pronouncements, particularly in the Government’s memorandum of 30 October 2012. We have also provided practical assistance. I welcome the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s thorough and detailed report. It is clear that no stone has been left unturned. The oral evidence sessions were informative and in depth. I do not intend to go into the detail of the bill; that is for Mark McDonald to do. However, I will discuss a number of the key conclusions that the committee reached, including those that will be for the Government to implement. When I gave evidence on 19 December, I said that I considered that the definition in the bill was appropriate, and I am pleased that a majority of the committee members agree. I indicated then that I felt that the definition struck the right balance and needed neither narrowing nor expanding. I am also pleased that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities supports the bill as drafted. I also note that the committee is content with the fee provisions as set out in the bill. As they stand, those provisions allow local authorities to set a fee at a level that reflects the cost of making a decision about a high hedge. That approach gives local authorities the flexibility to set a fee at a level that reflects their circumstances, while making sure that fees cannot be used to raise revenue. The bill also provides that local authorities can set different fee levels for different applications and can refund fees in circumstances that they will determine. The committee also considered the interaction between tree preservation orders and the bill, which takes a pragmatic approach to such orders. The bill will ensure that a high-hedge notice will not be frustrated by the TPO process, while recognising the protection that such orders give trees. The committee recommended that “the Scottish Government take the opportunity of the on-going review of Scottish Planning Policy to examine the issues raised such as residential development in proximity to woodlands.” I understand that the point attracted considerable discussion in the committee’s evidence-taking sessions and I am happy to tell the chamber that, as I have informed the committee, my officials will consider the issue as part of that on-going review. The committee also recommended that “the Government examine the feasibility of establishing a central tree officer to provide a core of expertise to local authorities”. I am happy to confirm that my officials will discuss the recommendation with local authorities as part of their preparations for the legislation’s coming into force. Of course, the committee has drawn from its detailed work a number of other conclusions and recommendations, some of which I have referred to and many of which will no doubt be discussed in today’s debate. Having set out the Government’s intentions in respect of the committee’s stage 1 recommendations, I am happy to reaffirm that the Scottish Government will continue to support the bill as it moves forward. I am aware that many of us are keen to resolve these issues, so I look forward to an interesting and enthusiastic debate. As has already been highlighted in the opening speeches, the bill itself is being informed and shaped by the on-going dialogue, and I commit the Government to continuing that dialogue as the bill progresses through Parliament.

We will all come back to the issue of definition. I look for a bit of clarity. At committee, the Labour Party supported the current definition. Has the position changed from what was agreed at committee and submitted in the report?

I thank Sarah Boyack for those helpful comments on the Labour Party’s position, because I was a bit unclear about where the party was going. It goes to show that the bill is a member’s bill and members within political parties can take different views. There is disagreement, diversity of opinion and dissent on how to take it forward—and that is just the Scottish National Party group. That shows that a listening group, a listening Government and a listening Parliament will help to shape the bill. I know that the planning system has made it when it features in this debate and has its own television programme on a Thursday night, “The Planners”—reality TV for the planning system. I am waiting for the first single tree or high hedge to feature in that programme.

No, it is on in the evening. High hedges are a significant issue. If Parliament was not legislating on them, people would rightly ask us why because, as I said, Scotland is the only part of the United Kingdom where there is no legislation covering the issue. Therefore, as many members have said, it is appropriate that we debate it and get the legislation right at the outset. I will focus on the definition and the options that are open to Parliament. The Government has taken quite a relaxed view on that. We have given evidence and given our position but have said that we will listen to what Parliament thinks is the appropriate way forward. The options that are now on the table, as has been outlined throughout the debate, include the review process—a sunset clause whereby we revisit the definition and other matters. If that option is chosen, I suggest and encourage our being as flexible as possible. The definition would be a question for Parliament to return to if the review process was chosen. Another option is secondary legislation. Members might say that I would, as a Government minister, want the ability to amend the legislation. The reason why I think that that could be helpful is that it would give us the ability to change the definition in the light of circumstances. However, it is for Parliament to choose which option it prefers: whether to expedite changes through secondary legislation or to prefer the review process, which could return us to primary legislation.

That is a fair point. I am trying to tease out the amount of flexibility that Parliament wants to provide for reconsidering the position in the future, if it thinks that the current definition might require to be revisited.

Circumstances might change in the light of how the act beds in, what the public make of it and how Parliament, the Government and local authorities respond. The debate is about the amount of flexibility that Parliament wants to provide. The Government does not have a strong view on whether Parliament should choose the review process or secondary legislation. As I have said, we are flexible and open minded about that. However, we should look closely at the evidence that we have received about the definition that is in the bill and at what happens in England, in Northern Ireland—where the legislation is relatively new—and in the Isle of Man, which has been referred to. If we were to propose changing the definition substantially at this point, I would want to return to local government to consult it on the change, because local government will execute the provisions in practice and it is working on the assumption that the definition will be as outlined in the bill. A number of other matters have been raised, including Government involvement in Scottish planning policy—that relates to the committee’s recommendation that we should consider the proximity of developments to woodlands—and having a central resource of expertise, which is a sensible suggestion that we are happy to explore with local authorities. I am not quite sure how to encapsulate Stewart Stevenson’s “little bit of a wiggle” in the planning system, but we can certainly try to express that through our planning advice notes. Colin Keir helpfully suggested that the matter is not frivolous, but serious. Like many members, Anne McTaggart focused on how the definition might in the first instance get better behaviour from residents. Graeme Dey explained that his issue was not necessarily with height but with width, and the hope is that the bill will create the right attitude of being a reasonable and responsible neighbour. We have not spent much time on focusing on appeals and how the directorate for planning and environmental appeals will take that forward—perhaps that will feature in the debates at stages 2 and 3. I am satisfied that the DPEA has the capacity to deal with appeals. As for fees, the important point is that the provisions are not about income generation by local authorities but are about early resolution of such antisocial behaviour matters. A soft cap will be placed on fees, so local authorities will not be able to generate more income through the bill; the fees will relate to the cost of taking the necessary action. Like every other member, I hope that we will, on a cross-party basis, continue to explore the bill, get the definition right and ensure that it has the impact that we all seek. The Government will continue to take a constructive and positive approach in the bill process.

Planning decisions should be made at the appropriate level. Whether a decision is made by the planning committee or is delegated to planning officials is a matter for individual planning authorities. Scottish ministers may occasionally call in cases for determination when they consider that it is appropriate to do so. The appeals process is also a feature of the planning system, under the provisions of the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006.

I disagree with the member’s comments. The facts speak for themselves: Scottish Government reporters overturn a minority of local authority decisions, which just goes to show—[Interruption.] I know that Labour members do not like the facts. That just goes to show that we are delivering our policies in harmony with and taking on board local people’s views as material considerations in any application. I recognise one of the applications that the member highlighted and point out that we have amended the appeals system with regard to statutory timescales, local review bodies and so on to give greater flexibility. Indeed, that was agreed at committee earlier this year.

Although I will need to stay within the statutory guidance on live planning matters that might be subject to judicial review, I am happy to meet the member’s constituents and representatives of the organisations that she referred to.

I have had the privilege of being Minister for Local Government and Planning for just over a year. During that time I have spoken to a wide variety of stakeholders from across the public and private sectors, visited planning authorities throughout the country and participated in extensive discussions with stakeholders about the contribution that planning makes and how we can ensure that it delivers its potential in supporting sustainable economic growth and creating more high-quality places for people to live in, work in and enjoy. Key points have emerged from that first year. Our planning system has a crucial role to play in supporting economic recovery and sustainable economic growth, but barriers still exist in the system that hinder economic growth and recovery. That does not mean that we should support any development in any location. However, we must ensure that the system operates efficiently and effectively. Leadership and culture change are more key to making improvements and progress than is further legislation. There is broad stakeholder support for the direction of travel and the collaborative approach that I have suggested. Progress in planning can be made only with the co-operation of practitioners. It is about having the right developments in the right places. Planning is sometimes about balancing our priorities for economic growth and environmental concerns.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In a debate on planning there is always a risk that individual applications or imminent applications will be mentioned. I cannot speak about the specifics of live applications. In general, I expect all local authorities that are pursuing projects to abide by the letter of the law and to adopt best practice in consulting on proposals. I expect the George Square proposals, in particular, which are potentially part of a tax increment financing project, to be able to demonstrate public support. Proper engagement with local communities is certainly part of the planning system. I offer that advice to the member. As I said, planning sometimes involves a balancing act between economic growth and environmental concerns. Both issues need to be fully considered. I appreciate that a range of factors influence investment, but I do not want the planning system to hold back good development or to delay growth. I had the pleasure of presenting the Scottish awards for quality in planning. That was planning at its best. I was delighted that last year the number of good-quality applications was high, which is testament to the continued hard work of the profession and the enthusiasm to deliver change of all involved. The awards demonstrate that improvements to the quality of the planning service and the outcomes that it delivers are achievable. I will talk about planning’s continuing contribution to the Government’s priority of sustainable economic growth, and provide the Parliament with the Government’s response to the consultations that we published last March. Before I talk about the way forward for planning reform, I will reflect on what has been accomplished over the past year. In March I announced a comprehensive package of measures, which produced a clear route map for planning reform and focused on four priorities: promoting the plan-led system; delivering and driving improved performance; simplifying and streamlining processes; and delivering development. I proposed a way forward that would ensure that planning procedures add value, are proportionate and better inform decisions. I set out that the delivery of my vision would be centred on collaborative working and culture change rather than endless legislative change. Regulations would be considered only if they brought about simplification and clarity. To support my priorities, I sought views through stakeholder events and consultation papers on options, including the revision of the development plan examination process, new planning fees and some specific legislative changes to simplify and streamline the planning process. Views on development charges to support investment in infrastructure were also sought. Since then, I have maintained momentum to support an approach to planning that is based on pace and pragmatism to support this Government’s economic strategy and its priority to deliver sustainable economic growth. I have committed to carry out a series of pilot projects to better understand processing delays and to identify practical solutions. In September, I provided an update on progress since March. I also launched the participation statement for the third national planning framework—NPF 3—as well as announcing a review of Scottish planning policy. I said that the key themes of NPF 3 are to support economic recovery and the transition to a low-carbon economy. I also highlighted other key objectives for NPF 3: facilitating the expansion of renewable energy generating capacity; adapting to climate change; adopting zero waste; having better connectivity; and strengthening green infrastructure. NPF 3 sets out where we want to see development of strategic importance to Scotland. We have concluded our initial engagement and over the coming weeks we will reflect on the views that we have received. Engagement has been extensive and has involved stakeholders across the country helpfully contributing their views. The NPF 3 main issues report will be published for public consultation in March 2013. It will set out the Scottish Government’s preferred option for NPF 3 along with alternatives. We intend to submit the proposed NPF 3 for consideration by Parliament before the end of this year and to publish the final document in summer 2014. We are currently reviewing Scottish planning policy alongside the revision of NPF 3 so that the connections between the two documents and the direction of national planning policy can be clearly identified. The Government’s economic strategy highlights the important role of our planning system in contributing to the Scottish Government’s purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. In the current economic climate, it is vital that the planning system plays a central role in supporting growth. Today, I want to discuss two important areas of work that will strengthen the contribution of planning to the promotion of sustainable economic growth. The areas on which I want to focus are performance and resourcing of the planning system, and the way forward in the light of the consultation response. We all share great ambition for the Scottish planning system. It is vital that we work together to help to deliver our shared vision of growth in a confident, modern Scotland with a vibrant low-carbon economy. Our planning system needs to be focused on that more than ever before. To get young people more involved in the planning system, I am providing an additional £36,000 to Planning Aid for Scotland. That money is to be used to get young people involved, in particular in the development of onshore opportunities that arise from offshore renewables. That funding comprises contributions from across the Scottish Government and reflects the contribution of the renewables sector to delivering a low-carbon economy, which is a key priority of the Government economic strategy and a Government-wide priority. I am also providing funding of £20,000 to Heads of Planning Scotland for training support. I am delighted with the work that was done to establish the new planning performance framework last year. That joint project between HOPS and the Scottish Government is supported across public and private sector stakeholders, including the Royal Town Planning Institute. The first round of performance reports includes a range of commitments to deliver high-quality customer service. I look forward to seeing rapid progress in service improvements, with the support of the industry, which will ensure that planning does all that it can to deliver sustainable economic growth for Scotland. Performance is improving but it remains far too gradual and variable. We need to increase our efforts and to tackle the specific causes of delay to planning decisions. Cross-sector commitment will be needed to ensure that everyone involved carries out their business reasonably and effectively. We have worked with Aberdeen City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council to better understand the practicalities of using processing agreements, which are a useful mechanism for setting out the expectations of those involved in managing major planning proposals. I have published a template for other planning authorities and developers to adapt to their needs. We will continue to work to promote processing agreements as a vital project management tool that allows developers to bring forward their plans with greater confidence. I recognise that planning authorities can find it challenging to deal with the increased volume of applications for wind farms. Accordingly, I announced £673,000 of funding to be distributed to the authorities that requested additional support to deal with applications for wind farms. The responses to the consultation on fees for planning applications and meetings that have been held with individual companies revealed that developers consider the proposed fee levels to be disproportionate. Many developers indicated that the new fee structure would act as a strong disincentive to development. I am committed to maintaining a business environment that supports sustainable economic growth and, therefore, I do not propose to implement the planning application fees that are proposed in the consultation paper. However, I accept the case to increase fees to finance much-needed improvements to the planning service. Subject to parliamentary approval, I propose to increase planning fees and the fee maximum by 20 per cent in April 2013. That will see Scottish planning fees remaining lower than those in England and Wales for most categories of development while generating between £4 million and £5 million to support the planning system. I remain firmly resolved that any increases must be inextricably linked to sustained improvements in performance. I will work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to set up a high-level group to review planning performance. That group will also look at proposals to link performance with wider reform of planning fees. I will continue to progress legislative powers, through the better regulation bill, to enable ministers to reduce a planning authority’s fees should the authority consistently perform poorly. I will now explain the way forward in light of responses to the other consultations. I remain committed to a plan-led system that promotes confidence and brings certainty for investors and communities.

There are safeguards in the system to prevent the resubmission of applications that are almost identical in nature to previous applications. I am more than happy to consider any specific case, especially if it has already been determined and dispensed with, to see whether a pattern is emerging and what further work can be done on the specific area. I want to continue the engagement of local communities in the planning process. I want charrettes to be adopted as part of normal planning practice across Scotland, engaging local people to influence the choices around how their areas will develop for the better. Encouraging people to engage in the planning system at that level seems eminently sensible. I am providing an additional £20,000 to Planning Aid for Scotland to deliver pilot projects that will investigate various ways of delivering charrettes to ensure that the approach is affordable and effective. In addition, I will work with Highland Council and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority to pilot the use of the charrette approach to help prepare the main issues reports of their local development plans. I hope that involving local people in that process will create a joined-up approach to planning and delivering development and regeneration, attract new investment and jobs and bring benefits to local areas. There has been little support for removing independent reporters from the process of development plan examinations, with most respondents favouring the retention of the current system, with some minor improvements. I am therefore proposing some refinements to the examination process. Where reporters identify a serious deficiency in the plan that cannot easily be rectified through the examination process, they will draw attention to that in a separate report. Such changes will allow the examination process to be completed and will prevent needless delays in the adoption of new development plans, but local authorities will still be held to account when emerging plans fall short of expected standards. After the conclusion of the current examination of the strategic development plan for south-east Scotland—SESplan—I will launch a review of strategic development planning. That review, which will take place in the summer, will take stock of the processes associated with the preparation of SDPs, based on stakeholders’ experiences of the first round of plans. There was significant consensus on our proposed legislative changes to some of the specific development management processes that were detailed in the consultation that was published last March. I have therefore laid legislation regarding amendments that are designed to streamline planning procedures and which will, in particular, remove pre-application consultation requirements from applications to change conditions on existing planning permissions. That change and a number of technical amendments to do with cases that are subject to local review will—subject to approval by Parliament—come into force on 2 February.

Yes, “charrette” is not a French band, but a planning approach that I want to encourage across Scotland. On the member’s specific point about engagement in the process, members of the public and communities will still have the opportunity to object and make known their views when a planning application is reconsidered. However, we felt that pre-consultation engagement was no longer required—for example, with complex major applications—because that will have been carried out the first time round. As I said, that change and a number of other technical amendments will be considered by Parliament in due course. I will also implement the improvements to permitted development rights that we proposed last year, with the exception of measures relating to agricultural and forestry tracks. In the light of the consultation responses, I feel that the most proportionate approach will be to promote best practice in the reasonable development of such tracks, but I will reconsider that position in the future in the light of experience. In addition, we have reviewed the guidance on planning obligations to support economic recovery and development, and I have asked for greater emphasis to be placed on a range of factors. My “Planning Reform—Next Steps” package focuses on leadership and culture change to ensure a higher-standard and more streamlined planning service. I believe that we have strengthened planning’s contribution to increasing sustainable economic growth, and I will continue to make progress to drive improvements and efficiencies in our planning system. I remain committed to delivering improvements to the planning system, in partnership with practitioners and partners. I am proposing not centralisation or a fundamental overhaul, but a methodical, actions-based approach that will help with the recovery of Scotland’s economy and will help us to build the kind of country that we all wish to live, work and invest in. I move, That the Parliament recognises the vital role that the land use planning system must play in supporting sustainable economic growth; recognises the importance of cross-sector collaborative working to enhance the operation of an efficient and effective planning system; supports progress on the next steps of planning reform including the launch of National Planning Framework 3, the review of Scottish Planning Policy, the introduction of the Planning Performance Framework and the agreement between the Scottish Government and COSLA on a way forward in managing planning fees and resources linked to performance improvements, and welcomes the provision of additional funding by the Scottish Government to local authorities to help them deal with applications for wind turbines, to Planning Aid Scotland to increase young people’s involvement in planning and deliver pilot projects supporting engagement, and to Heads of Planning Scotland for training support.

Does John Pentland acknowledge that, in the difficult economic circumstances that we face, such a substantial rise in planning fees without improved performance would be an unwelcome step and would not support the economic recovery? Is the view that he is giving the Labour Party’s position?

Does the member recognise that, in addition to the funding announcements that I have made, many of the proposed changes will save local authorities and applicants money, rather than adding any financial burdens? I hope that that reassures her. It is with exactly that sort of cost efficiency in mind that I have deployed the approach that we are taking.

Would it help Siobhan McMahon to understand that the financial support is not necessarily to allow more applications to be approved but to support the resources to analyse where it would be appropriate to site wind farms? The aim is to allow better consideration of wind farms and not necessarily to allow their approval. Most of the time, we agree with local authorities and they agree with us, as Chic Brodie said.

Does the member not recognise the fact—which has been repeated a number of times—that the Scottish Government agrees with local authorities in the majority of cases on appeal and that local authorities agree with the decisions that the Scottish Government determines under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989 in a majority of cases?

It is customary to say that a debate has been good, but I genuinely believe that it has been a good debate that has contributed immensely to consideration of the planning system in Scotland. I appreciate the contributions from every single member, although I would hate to see Christine Grahame comfortable with a subject as she questioned a minister, given how she questioned me having said that she was well outwith her comfort zone. All points are valid and will be taken on board. On the amendments, I do not think that the Government is that far away from the Opposition parties. However, although we can support the Conservative amendment, we cannot support the Labour amendment. The specific reason why we cannot do so was demonstrated in Sarah Boyack’s speech, which focused on the resourcing of local government, with that on-going inaccuracy that Labour seems to be wedded to that there has been a greater reduction in local government funding than there has been in funding for other parts of the public sector. Of course, the fact is that the share of spending support to local government is higher under the SNP Administration.

I will continue with my speech in order to get back on to planning as quickly as possible, but I will come back to the issue. I knew that Sarah Boyack would be unable to resist making the point about resourcing during the debate. However, the rest of her speech on the planning system was helpful. The resourcing of the planning system and which parts of various services they provide resources for are matters for local authorities. Some partners have said that the planning system is certainly a public service and that, if a subsidy is necessary, that is a good thing, as it assists in determining applications in a public-spirited way. However, we believe that resourcing is a factor in planning performance, which is why we reached the conclusion that there was a need for a 20 per cent increase in planning fees.

Where was Mr Pentland when the public health supplement was going through Parliament and the SNP was happy to put a levy on larger operators—the large retailers—in order to gain contributions to preventative spend? The Labour Party wanted to avoid that. The member has misinterpreted what I said around the planning fee increase. Twenty per cent, at this stage, seems appropriate and will result in an investment of £4 million to £5 million in the planning system, which will assist local authorities. We want to head towards full cost recovery of planning applications. That is a direction of travel that we support, but it has to be done in partnership with all the various partners and stakeholders to ensure that it reflects where we are in the current economic cycle and that those who are paying the fees can expect a quality service. I am not sure that that is the case across the country at this point in time. That is why we want to tie the fees issue to the issue of performance, so that people get what they pay for. We certainly aspire to having a properly resourced planning system. Engagement with the community is the driving force behind the charrettes. We have shed a great deal of light on charrettes, and a number of members have spoken about them. Sarah Boyack quite rightly raised the issue of the performance of Government agencies and partners. I have had meetings with them to ensure that they are contributing to good performance across the country and have met the targets that I have set them. Margaret Mitchell helpfully focused on the engagement with NPF 3 and covered some of the fracking issues that other members have raised. Although I think that there is clarity around where consents and guidance are required—SEPA produced guidance for some techniques late last year—I will give further consideration to how the matter can play into the SPP and the NPF 3 and to whether there is room to give further clarity. I was delighted to repeat the statistics on renewables and to state that, most of the time, we agree with local authorities and, with regard to the section 36 notifications, they agree with us. I agree with Margaret Mitchell about the need for a strong enforcement regime, because the planning system is only as good as the level of enforcement that we are willing to impose after the decisions are reached. I expected Alex Johnstone to focus on timescales, and I gave him a commitment to consider those legacy cases. It will not take 77 or 81 weeks. We have had early feedback on the reasons why some of those outstanding cases have been around for as long as they have. Various actions that accord with the next steps reforms that I have announced today and last year have been raised. Interestingly, the Conservatives, like Labour, support a higher increase in planning fees. I will take that on board in my on-going meetings with COSLA on how to resource the planning system. Mr Johnstone criticised the time that it has taken to take some decisions. However, when the Government makes decisions, it is important that we take the time to consult properly on our draft proposals. Joan McAlpine raised a number of important points about our renewables capacity and how renewables should be harnessed to provide Scotland with a reliable energy mix. She welcomed the range of measures that we have announced and focused on the idea that, when it comes to renewables developments, it is not simply the number of approvals that matters, but their placing in appropriate locations. John Pentland covered the balancing act that has to be done when decisions are taken. The views of local people have to be taken on board, but it is not a simple case of planners being control freaks and applicants being zealous. The balance of all interests must be taken into account. That will certainly be done as part of the joined-up approach that we have deployed and as part of the town centre review. John Pentland’s shameless pitch for Ravenscraig to form part of NPF 3 will be noted as part of the on-going consultation. Chic Brodie helpfully covered the economic partnerships in Ayrshire. He also mentioned the need to get more consistency in the performance of the 34 planning authorities—32 of which are local authorities—across the country. Mike MacKenzie said that he has been thinking about how to deliver a vibrant planning system since he made his first application 35 years ago. I am not sure that I was thinking about how to deliver a vibrant planning system 35 years ago, but I have spent the past year as a minister thinking about how to deliver a planning system that focuses on efficiency and place making in architecture, as well as early engagement, just as Mike MacKenzie suggested. [Interruption.]

Mark Griffin eloquently set out some of the challenges that we face on community engagement. Communities may not be engaged in the development plan process, but that sets the zoning from which planning application determinations may follow, so allowing greater community engagement at that stage is absolutely vital. Mark Griffin also covered the benefits of the charrette process and, like other members, pointed out that protests at the end of the process are more unhelpful than engagement at an earlier stage. Jamie Hepburn reminded us of the generous settlement that local authorities have received and how the new funding announcements should assist them to make the right decisions and the right improvements in planning performance. Anne McTaggart mentioned permitted development. I clarify that the permitted development changes relate largely to householders, so they will not necessarily have the community impact that she fears. Stewart Stevenson’s focus on the contribution that young planners have made was extremely welcome. He commented on the RTPI and the outcomes that can result from proper engagement, such as the central Scotland green network, with which he was closely involved. He also posed a valid question. Given the increase in permitted development rights and the fact that there are fewer applications in the system, why have costs increased? It would be unfair to expect those who pay the planning fee to fund a service that was not performing well. That is why we will return to the issue in the better regulation bill. Siobhan McMahon covered the issues of proximity and cumulative impact assessments. The SNH guidance is extremely helpful in focusing on appropriate locations for renewables developments and taking cognisance of any proliferations in particular locations. Mark McDonald spoke about the frustration with Aberdeen City Council over some local decisions but commended its hard-working planning service. John Finnie’s comments on rurality and super-sparsity were well received, and Willie Coffey, in setting out his desire for quality rather than carbuncles, also made a helpful contribution to the debate. Helen Eadie, too, made a helpful speech. She distinguished between the RTPI’s welcoming and its generally welcoming decisions by the planning minister and the Scottish Government, but I will take welcome or general welcome any day over the outright opposition to the planning decisions and changes that have been made in another place in relation to England. I think that we have been methodical in taking the right approach to delivering recovery and supporting sustainable economic growth in Scotland.

The national planning framework 3 main issues report will be published for consultation in March 2013. Following consultation, the proposed national planning framework 3 will be published in late 2013.

The review of Scottish planning policy and the national planning framework will run concurrently, which is helpful. Both focus on sustainable economic growth and, by working in tandem, there will be mutual benefits. We outlined how candidate projects would be assessed in the statement that I gave to Parliament earlier this year. I assure Linda Fabiani that all candidate projects will be assessed and that that will be transparent, with publication of how projects were considered as part of the process that I outlined.

The Scottish Government meets regularly with Scotland’s councils to discuss a wide range of issues. I last met Falkirk Council on 9 August.

Members will be well aware of TIF’s potential benefits. In November 2011, the Scottish Government invited Falkirk Council to develop a TIF business case for its £52 million project, focusing on direct investment to key strategic road improvements, the Grangemouth flood defences and site-enabling works. The council is working with the Scottish Futures Trust to finalise the business case and, when that work is completed, we will look forward to receiving it formally and will consider it in due course.

Delays in the planning system inhibit sustainable economic growth. As my statement to Parliament in September made clear, I put performance at the very heart of an efficiently functioning planning service. This is the first time that we have seen performance statistics showing the average time taken to make a decision. In addition to the next steps package of proposals that I have already announced, my officials will look specifically at why particular decisions took so long and identify where the barriers to determination were.

I am sure that Mr Johnstone would agree that I am always sincere when giving answers in Parliament. I agree that the 76-week timescale is unacceptable, but it is refreshing that, in looking at the statistics, we can flush out the issues that need to be addressed. We have gone beyond the traditional two-month and four-month targets. On what is happening in England, I think that the Conservatives would have us take the quite curious position that centralisation of the planning system should be the way forward in Scotland. That does not quite fit with the Conservatives’ other press releases on the planning appeals system, especially in relation to renewables and other matters. The Scottish Government will drive up improvement by delivering a range of actions, in partnership with planning authorities, key agencies and other stakeholders, in order to ensure that we have better performance. I refer Alex Johnstone to the better regulation bill consultation, which considers penalties when performance is not delivered. Crucially, this is about delivery. I ask him to reflect on the fact that approvals in Scotland—including housing—are at some 93 or 94 per cent. That shows that the system is working and that there is more than just timescales to planning: consents and confidence in the system are also required. We will continue to ensure that many measures are taken so that the planning system can contribute fully to sustainable economic growth.

We are funding the Development Trusts Association Scotland to provide the community ownership support service. The service, which was piloted last year, provides help and advice to community organisations that are interested in asset ownership. During the pilot, the service provided information, advice and support to more than 166 community organisations and 26 local authorities, with 29 community organisations receiving intensive support. It also identified promoting interest in urban areas as a key challenge. We have continued our investment in the Development Trusts Association and have asked it to identify further support that is needed for deprived urban areas as a priority group.

I expect all 32 local authorities to take a proactive approach in recognising the potential to unlock local opportunities through appropriate community asset transfers. To further support efforts in the area, the Government is conducting an exploratory consultation on the draft community empowerment and renewal bill, which potentially presents a massive shift of responsibilities and opportunities from local authorities and others within the state to communities. I am sure that the member will welcome the work on that bill.

The Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 does not require a separate street trader’s licence for an activity already licensed under a public entertainment licence. However, local licensing authorities enjoy wide discretion in how they administer local licensing regulations and can apply the law to the specific facts and circumstances of individual cases.

I advise Mr Lyle that local government has the discretion to deploy the law in the way that I outlined—it will depend on local circumstances as to what is appropriate. I of course encourage local authorities to act proportionately in delivering simplified and streamlined light-touch regulation while looking after both health and safety and proper hygiene. However, I remind the member that it is a matter for local authorities to determine, as long as they operate within the law. The member is perfectly entitled to offer a council appropriate advice.

The debate has been constructive and helpful, and it is unfortunate that Kezia Dugdale cannot be here. I pass on my best wishes to her. Only last week, we talked about the debate and I informed Kezia Dugdale that I was to respond on behalf of the Government. She said that it would feel like déjà vu and that there would perhaps be nothing new to add but, actually, there is. That is because of the uprating issue that members have mentioned, which has raised the profile of the issue once again. If this debate does nothing else, it puts in the public domain the issue of the living wage in a helpful and constructive way. Members have repeatedly covered the benefits of the living wage. I was struck by Patrick Harvie’s comment that the living wage is not the ceiling or the top level at which people should be paid, but the minimum, the floor or the starting position for a fair wage and fair recompense for work. I do not think that I have ever heard Mr Findlay be so reasonable, in calling for something that is not the revolution, but that is absolutely the right approach to take, as agreed by members across the chamber. Mary Scanlon deployed a useful tactic that should perhaps be encouraged—she could be the reasonable face of conservatism in the future. She spent more time talking about her role as a Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body member than she did saying as a Conservative that the living wage is unaffordable. We must be cognisant of advice and of the European Commission’s view on the applicability of the living wage to procurement. Further work can be done in relation to the procurement bill and John Park’s bill. I commend his bill and his speech in leading today’s debate. Many members—particularly Mary Fee and Christina McKelvie—covered the gender issues, as was appropriate. Mary Fee also covered the geographic issue. The benefit in dealing with geographic inequality is well worth considering. John Wilson posed a question—or rather, made a comment—on the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, which I will take up with the relevant minister. He made the appropriate tie with the minimum wage, which is in some ways the more effective policy to ensure full private sector compliance with paying reasonable wages. I am also familiar with the campaign for the minimum wage not to be based on age. Malcolm Chisholm made clear arguments for the living wage, as did Iain Gray, who made an important point about the power of persuasion and the culture of expectation for public sector contracts, third sector partners and others. The Government has tried to achieve what was suggested. What is the Government doing on the issue? In line with the Living Wage Foundation rate, we will uprate the living wage from £7.20 to £7.45 from 1 April 2013, as recommended. Through our pay policy, we are targeting pay uplifts to the least well paid in the core Scottish Government staff. We are encouraging partners and the private sector to deliver the living wage, and we are looking at what other devolved Administrations and public sector bodies can do.

That is a helpful suggestion. We are talking about raising awareness, working through the options that are available through procurement and dealing with the culture of expectation. We can study the analysis of the procurement consultation, which has closed, to see what other mechanisms we can use to encourage the private sector to comply. The member’s helpful suggestion relates not necessarily to procurement but to the conditions of grants, which are well worth exploring. Substantial progress has been made in local government. Seventeen local authorities pay the living wage and a further 12 plan to introduce it or have stated an intention to do so.

As a first point of principle, is it not better to give employees a proper wage for the job that they do? However, I understand the point that resources that are given to people with one hand are sometimes taken away with the other. That is why we need an integrated approach to welfare benefits and pay, to ensure that it pays to work. By delivering a proper minimum wage and a living wage, we can achieve that. I encourage the local authorities that have not yet delivered the living wage to do so. In my visits to local government and in meetings with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, I have raised the living wage. I am delighted that the pace of implementation has improved.

I am sure that opportunities are given through volunteering and so on, but I certainly suspect that the living wage should be delivered for paid staff, if we are debating that in the chamber. Neil Findlay rose— I have about one minute left to cover the Government’s response and I have taken three interventions.

To be helpful to members, I say that I will want to seek assurance on local authority compliance. It is not good enough just to say, “We are delivering the living wage,” and leave it at that. I must return to local government to ensure that it delivers the uprated level and to ensure that the policy is consistent and is not delivered with a one-off tick-box mentality. However, my view is that local government, as independent corporate organisations, recognises the importance of the living wage and has stepped up to the plate. The Government has been able to intervene on the inequality agenda, whether by protecting those affected by the UK welfare changes; in our pay policy, on which I believe that we are leading by example; or by preserving a number of universal benefits, which has protected some of the least well off. I think that our finding the resources to fill the gap—in the Scottish welfare fund—will also be welcomed as it will help to protect some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland. I am sure that we can build an expectation around implementation of the living wage, keep up the pace of policy commitment and ensure that we use every tool in the box to tackle the inequality, low pay and poverty that exist in our country. Frankly, in a country as rich as Scotland, they are unacceptable. Meeting closed at 18:06.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and I have offered to meet council representatives to discuss possible options, work through next steps and consider what appropriate support the Scottish Government can provide to assist the City of Edinburgh Council to fulfil its responsibilities.

I thank the member for the constructive tone in which she asked the question. The SNP Government is outcome focused. We will work to try to deliver the aspirations of the City of Edinburgh Council, and its preferred site is indeed the park. The problem has come about because of a legal determination. We will work through the options. The exploratory consultation on the community empowerment and renewal bill covers the issue of common good land, but it might not be timeous enough to give rise to a solution to this particular issue. I guarantee that the Government will be proactive and take a constructive approach to the meeting with the City of Edinburgh Council. I am informed that it has been scheduled for 13 November. I will be happy to update the member on the outcome of those discussions.

As the Scottish draft budget 2013-14 sets out, the Scottish Government expects that all public sector bodies will individually deliver annual efficiency savings of at least 3 per cent over the course of the current spending review. While there is no requirement for local authorities to report on combined efficiency savings, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has reported that local government cash efficiencies for 2011-12 total £428.8 million and that that represents above 3 per cent efficiency savings.

It is a matter for local authorities to determine the savings that they have to make. It is not just about the income that they receive from Government but about demand on their services. The financial pressures that each local authority faces will vary from one to the next. The engagement process that they deploy and deliver to determine which savings to make is a matter for them. The member could reflect on the fact that, as a share of Scottish Government spending, local government spending has been maintained by this Scottish Government and is far more generous than that which local government enjoyed under the previous Labour Executive.

The debt held by local authorities is kept within the prudential framework to ensure that any borrowing that a local authority chooses to make is within responsible limits, as determined by the financial regulations within which local authorities are expected to operate. That is kept under review and gives us some certainty that it is affordable and is delivering the economic regeneration that we were discussing earlier.

Those matters are under consideration. The Scottish Government has been discussing the potential impacts with partners and will continue to do so. It would be far better if pensions and other reserved matters were decided in this place rather than by a Westminster Government that the people of Scotland did not elect.

The Scottish Government has made an important strategic decision to move towards preventative spending, which means investing in health and other social policy areas. That ultimately saves public money in the long run, while maintaining or improving outcomes. Our approach to what are sometimes termed universal benefits supports that agenda. ?For example, by keeping people independent and living at home for as long as possible, we reduce the need for more expensive care in hospitals or care homes. By abolishing prescription charges, we are helping to ensure that our people receive the medical treatment that they need to lead healthy, productive lives. By providing free and more comprehensive eye tests, we can identify and treat a wider range of conditions at an earlier stage, reducing the need for acute interventions. By abolishing tuition fees, we are encouraging our people into higher education, irrespective of wealth, and supporting participation in the labour market.

It would be far more expensive to the public purse. In fact, the cost per head per annum would be some £82,000, including the overhead costs of the national health service. In comparison, in relation to home care, such an individual’s costs would be as low as £6,240 per annum. Although those figures are averages, I make the point that keeping people at home, in the community or in a care home is not just financially beneficial but socially valuable. It is vital that we protect such policies—policies that were delivered by devolution, but which can be safeguarded with independence.

I have not had any direct discussions with Orkney Islands Council on that specific issue since May 2012. However, ministers and officials regularly meet representatives of councils, including Orkney Islands Council, to discuss such issues.

I regret to inform the member that I am not a newcomer to local government finance; I was just looking at it—

That is a fair point. In the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, all parties came together to agree that the distribution formula is about as fair as it can be. Of course, each one of the 32 authorities would like a formula that benefits and would be more advantageous to it but, in essence, no alternative distribution mechanism has been found. We probe the integrity of the indicators that lead to the financial outputs and we will continue to do so, reflecting on the point that the member has made. However, to substantially change the distribution mechanism would require COSLA’s agreement and, as it stands, COSLA would prefer that we continue with the current distribution formula. That transcends all the political parties that are currently members of the convention.

That is exactly why the island communities enjoy the highest per head of population funding in all the local authorities. That mechanism is already deployed to ensure that the specific and unique circumstances that those populations face are taken on board, and there is specific support for the indicators that are more advantageous to the rural and island situation.

As I said, there are mechanisms in place to ensure that the island authorities are well supported. The top three island authorities have the most generous per head of population funding in Scotland. Other bid funding is considered on a case-by-case basis. However, I ask the member to reflect on the spending decisions that we have made that ensure that the island communities are supported, not only through the mechanism that I have mentioned but through other Government financial packages, such as the road equivalent tariff.

There are now 15 operational business improvement districts across Scotland and a further 18 BIDs are in development.

Yes.

Data are not held on a constituency basis, but official statistics published on 24 October show that almost 3,600 business properties in South Lanarkshire are benefiting from the small business bonus scheme. That is the highest number since the introduction of the scheme and would have saved small businesses in South Lanarkshire, including those in Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse, more than £28 million since 2008.

For some of the reasons that Christina McKelvie gave, the Government has secured the small business bonus. That is delivering for businesses, which is why we have committed to it for the lifetime of the parliamentary session.

At an earlier stage, Ms Mitchell proposed that empty properties should not be subject to tax increases until they had been wilfully unoccupied for 10 years or more. I appreciate that in amendments 8, 15 and 17 she has made attempts to change that proposal, which was rejected at stage 2. However, I am unconvinced of the difference in intention between seven and 10 years—a difference of three years. Margaret Mitchell’s attempt to improve on her original amendment fails to address the significant problems that we identified at stage 2. Seven years would still be far too long to leave owners without encouraging them to do something about bringing their properties back into use. Fundamentally, if one believes—as we do—that the change to rates relief will incentivise properties back into use, why wait seven years? As I said at stage 2, the Scottish Government believes that it would be extremely difficult for a council to verify that a property had been wilfully unoccupied throughout a seven-year period. The creation of a bureaucratic system to include a requirement for the owner to satisfy the local authority that they have been trying to occupy the property over a seven-year period would be difficult for business as well as local authorities. Even the detail of the amendments gives us an insight into how problematic it could be. Amendment 10, in the name of Gavin Brown, seeks to allow properties that are being actively marketed a grace period of up to 15 months. An obvious weakness is that nothing in the amendment would require that the marketing price be realistic. Again, the amendment misses the point that, right now, the level of non-domestic rates means that it is cheaper to keep properties closed than it is to have them open for business, unless they are eligible for one of our many other generous reliefs.

As has been explained before, there is a world of difference between domestic properties and non-domestic properties in terms of how such a system could be administered. I remind members that we have the most generous package of rates relief in the United Kingdom. I understand that Mrs Mitchell was, in lodging amendment 9, attempting to protect serviced office or business-park accommodation. However, in reality, the amendment would simply create scope for tax avoidance, because any owner could—often cheaply and temporarily—subdivide a property in order to avoid rates increases. The Government cannot support any of the amendments in the group, but will continue to listen to stakeholders and adapt policy to fit what they tell us would assist their particular needs. The new fresh start relief scheme, which I announced at stage 2, will create a new incentive to encourage our entrepreneurs to occupy long-term empty retail and office property. That relief will also encourage use of long-term empty new-build property as offices and shops. So, high streets and new developments will benefit. Mrs Mitchell may also be interested to learn that, in the rates consultation that we will publish shortly, we intend to ask whether local authorities should be given wide powers to offer local relief. That approach could address concerns that were raised during my extensive engagement. Currently, no such flexibility exists. I urge members not to support any of the amendments.

The Scottish Government does not support amendments 11 and 12. Although I understand that the intention behind them is well-meaning, speculative development is more greatly affected by the general downturn and issues of bank lending. Many new eligible developments without a pre-let would benefit from the fresh start initiative after 12 months on bringing their property into use on occupation. I believe that the unintended consequences are that amendment 11 could create an incentive for people to make their properties unsuitable for occupation and thereby avoid paying tax, even with regard to new builds that are nearing completion. For those reasons, the Government cannot support the amendments, so I urge Mrs Mitchell not to press them. Non-domestic rates are not a profit tax or an operational tax; they are a property tax and our duty should be to deploy policies that incentivise their use, not policies that create loopholes.

Mr Pentland’s amendments 3 and 4 seek to require the first regulations made to be subject to affirmative procedure. However, the Subordinate Legislation Committee had no concerns about the continued use of negative procedure for regulations. That should not come as a surprise, because the norm in that regard is the negative procedure, which was good enough for the previous Scottish Executive. Negative procedure is common for most rates matters, and amendments 3 and 4 would create a more onerous procedure than can be justified. Mr Pentland will be aware that regulation changes will go to committee. In the case of empty property rates relief, the appropriate subject committee will be the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. Ministers are not removing parliamentary scrutiny but applying consistency. Sarah Boyack’s amendment 5 seeks consultation before the bill comes into force. I welcome her intention, but the Scottish Government has undertaken extensive stakeholder engagement and will continue to do so. The engagement has led to the refinement of our proposals—for example, the fresh start initiative—and informed the wider rates consultation that we are about to launch.

We will make regulations that mean that if we want to vary rates relief we will return to the Parliament. That is consistent with most other rates matters. I do not see what issue Mr Brown has with that approach. The engagement has involved those who do not support our direction of travel, and it has informed the approach that we are taking, as well as future proposals, and will inform the consultation that I referred to earlier. Although a BRIA was not conducted, there has been a level of engagement that goes beyond a traditional BRIA, as I understand it. That will feature more fully in the debate later on. I have said before that the impact of the policy will remain under review. As such, I can confirm today that the Scottish Government will undertake post-legislative scrutiny of the empty property rates reform. A similar process was undertaken by the United Kingdom Government in command paper 8411, “Memorandum – Post Legislative Scrutiny Rating (Empty Properties) Act 2007”. The Scottish Government’s scrutiny will take place in early to mid-2015, once sufficient time has elapsed to collate data on the impact. I will ensure that the convener of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee is kept informed. To assist members, last week I provided an early draft of the regulations that I intend to lay under the new powers created by the bill if it is passed today. The bill is an enabling bill, but the Scottish Government has made its intentions on the use of the powers known. To consult further now, giving the impression that we may not proceed as proposed, would cause unnecessary short-term delay and uncertainty as we approach the new financial year. Generous reliefs will still be available. I want to get on with promoting those proposed reliefs, including industrial and listed building exemptions and the fresh start initiative. I hope that sight of the draft regulations, the consistency and the intention to undertake scrutiny provide enough reassurance to allow Ms Boyack and Mr Pentland to withdraw their amendments and support the bill.

Mr Hume and Mr Brown oppose the action that we are taking but offer no credible alternatives to address the problem of empty properties. By opposing the enabling powers, Mr Hume would even deny the Government the ability to deliver the fresh start initiative. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee rejected an amendment from Jim Hume on 26 September. He complained that he did not have a vote, but that was because he is not a member of that committee. The enabling powers to which I referred give us the flexibility to vary the percentage of unoccupied property relief that is given and the classes of property to which the percentage will apply. Surely Parliament wants ministers to be in a position to respond quickly to changing circumstances, while maintaining parliamentary scrutiny. The status quo would mean a Government bill every time that we sought to amend the relief that was to be awarded. That would be inconsistent with other reliefs. Mr Brown and the Conservative Party oppose the variation of empty property rates relief. Their opposition is at least consistent—except where they are in power, of course. However, such opposition is no reason to try to create a bureaucratic and overregulated regime for the Government to take decisions, which must be proportionate to the sums that are involved. Mr Brown is renowned for his sense of proportionality, but he would have us create an unprecedented legal framework for an £18 million variation of a £2.4 billion rates budget. Throughout the policy’s development, I have emphasised that I will listen. If Mr Hume and Mr Brown had constructive alternatives, I would gladly have considered and responded to them, but the members have presented no alternatives. Others have been more constructive. That is why I proposed a new subsection at stage 2 to allow the creation of the fresh start initiative, which Mark McDonald originally suggested. Mr Hume’s amendment would scrap that new incentive despite the widespread support that it has received. The enabling powers that are created by the bill are only one of the multiple strands that we are taking forward to encourage economic regeneration. Other streams will follow in the community empowerment and renewal bill and the town centre review. They will identify key issues that affect the viability of Scottish towns and explore other measures to bring vacant commercial and residential town centre property back into use. The Government retains the most competitive business rates system in the UK, with the small business bonus scheme now at record levels. New statistics that have just been published show that, through the scheme, the Government has removed or reduced taxation for more than 89,000 premises. That figure is up by almost 4,000 from last year. I think that every member in the chamber agrees that the empty premises that blight many high streets are a problem. Neither Mr Hume’s amendment nor Mr Brown’s provides any constructive ideas to tackle that problem. I therefore urge members to reject them.

The figures are not true, of course—but even the figure that the Labour Party has conjured up excludes £2.3 billion of non-domestic rates from the local government settlement. The member cited evidence of the experience in England. Let us put assertion and opinion to one side. What evidence is she referring to?

Will the member take an intervention?

Sorry. Can the member say that again?

I am happy that the member will take my intervention. Perhaps she would like to have another go at citing exactly which evidence she was talking about when she said that there was substantial evidence. If Glasgow City Council is right, that suggests that more than half of all empty properties are in that city, which should be a call to action to do something about it. I suspect that the Scottish Government figures are absolutely correct.

In light of what the member has just said, does she have a view on the UK Government’s intervention on listed properties, which will be exempt from rates? Meanwhile the UK Government has slapped VAT on those who choose to refurbish properties to try to bring them back into use. Does the member support that UK Government intervention?

Does the member welcome the fact that we consulted businesses on this issue, including the business improvement district steering group, which supports our direction of travel in relation to empty property rates relief?

Will the member give way?

I will ask Michael McMahon the same question that I asked Sarah Boyack. What evidence is he specifically referring to?

I would consider it a pleasure to continue until that time—[Laughter.] After those popular opening remarks, I begin with the least controversial part of the bill—the housing support grant. Shetland Islands Council has benefited from that and indeed will continue to benefit from it, as a result of an offer made to the council and accepted by its leader. I would say to Tavish Scott—who is not here at the moment—that that goes to show how strong ministerial assurances are in the Scottish Government, and that we can deliver on our promises, as we have done in this instance. I believe that the policy intention of the other elements of the bill will be delivered, too. There is a great deal of consensus around the empty homes action and it is right that local authorities will have the discretion to choose which level will be appropriate for their local circumstance. Anne McTaggart made the point that perhaps 50 per cent will be more appropriate in some circumstances, but it will be for local authorities to choose whether they apply 0, 50 or 100 per cent on top of the council tax for empty properties. It has been suggested that we have not taken on board many of the Opposition’s comments. In fact, at stage 2 I moved a number of amendments on behalf of the Government that were a consequence of listening to stage 1 proceedings and other contributions to the debate. For example, we capped the council tax increase at 100 per cent at the request of the appropriate committee. Sarah Boyack asked about local income tax. We will consult on that during our current term in office. We would want to look at any policy implication, including how we could bring further properties back into use. On a more controversial subject, we must tackle the blight of empty commercial properties, particularly in our town centres. I am still at a loss to explain why Opposition members do not get the rationale that it is simply unfair for a Government to make it cheaper to keep properties closed than it is to open them up for economic regeneration in local communities. It would be wrong to suggest that there is no support for our policy. There is a great deal of support for the policy, whether it is for travelling to business improvement districts or from local communities who do not see why their taxes are contributing to a subsidy to keep properties closed. Margaret Mitchell was wrong to suggest that the rates relief system in Scotland is less generous than the system in any other part of the United Kingdom. In fact, the relief that we give to Scottish business is more generous than the relief in any other part of the United Kingdom. It now costs more than £0.5 billion but is targeted appropriately at local businesses. Three in five premises in the commercial sector pay zero or reduced business rates as a result of the policies of this Government, which the Conservatives used to support but voted against at the last budget.

I can confirm that the rates relief offered in Scotland is more generous than the relief offered in any other part of the United Kingdom. The poundage delivered by this SNP Government was matched to the poundage in England, which was more generous than the position under the previous Labour Executive or the Conservatives. On the subject of consultation, I would argue that to have ticked a box on a BRIA and left it at that would have been unacceptable in the circumstances. That is why I have engaged with many members in the private sector—

I would like to make progress. There are a number of questions to which Gavin Brown wanted answers. There has been on-going consultation, engagement and refinement of our policy, such as the fresh start initiative. I cannot believe that the Liberal Democrats will vote against that, as it delivers an incentive to provide rates relief to those people who bring unused properties back into use, which is a position that they supposedly support. I will return to Parliament to ensure that the regulations are given the robust interrogation that members would expect, consistent with equivalent reliefs such as the small business bonus scheme. I have committed the Government to post-legislative scrutiny so that we can test the impact of the policy in our communities. The Conservatives have talked about “a tax on distress”. I bow to their experience in delivering taxes that cause distress. For example, the VAT rise cost Scottish business and Scottish consumers £1 billion. Where was the BRIA for that? Their approach was to apply VAT when people were trying to refurbish listed properties in Scotland. This is not an operational tax; it is a property tax.

I support the BRIA approach, but the level of engagement that I have deployed in relation to empty property rates relief is better than that which it would have received through a BRIA.

Please let me make some progress. I asked a number of Opposition members for the evidence and the response was, “You know, the evidence.” I have looked at the evidence and, in particular, the Lambert Smith Hampton report that was published by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which Margaret Mitchell wanted me to look at. That report identified that there had been an impact in England and that there had been demolition of properties to avoid non-domestic rates. However, that related to industrial properties, so this Government’s response was to exempt them from the variation. That shows that we have responded to concerns. I have further evidence in support of the Government’s position. The Association of Town Centre Management Scotland has been mentioned. Its most recent statement welcomes the plans to offer businesses entering long-term vacant property a 50 per cent discount for the first 12 months under the fresh start scheme as a credible package of measures to support town centres and high streets that is being introduced by the Government. It states: “We think this can help stimulate growth in the economy.”

The bottom paragraph of page 2 states: “The sector most impacted by APR was industrial property.”

It seems a logical response for the Scottish Government to exempt industrial property, just as we have done with listed property. Our range of reliefs will still be more generous than that in any other part of the United Kingdom. I have cited other areas of support, but it was the UK Conservative Government’s command paper that said that there was no evidence to suggest that the variation caused any disturbance in the private sector because of the other factors that were in play. Indeed, it said that to change the policy would be “unaffordable”. The Labour Party’s responses were most disappointing, because the legislation is about incentivising the use of empty properties. It is about making savings, too. The £2.3 billion that is raised through non-domestic rates goes to public services. Why does the Labour Party talk in terms of what is on and off the table? Why does it say that free prescriptions are not to be delivered and that free education, personal care, travel and a council tax freeze for hard-pressed families are unaffordable, but that the £18 million subsidy to businesses to keep their premises closed is on the table and affordable? That says much about the Labour Party’s sense of priorities.

I am in my final minute. It is fair to say that an empty property rates relief policy, which was invented by the Labour Party and continued by the Conservatives and the Liberals, is not one that the SNP Government would naturally feel a sense to adopt—and we have not adopted it in the form in which it affected England. We have refined the policy and we have mitigated the impacts in Scotland by providing exemptions. In considering the most generous package of rates relief in the United Kingdom and in looking at the incentive scheme in Northern Ireland, we have ensured that we have the right balance to tackle the blight of empty properties in our town centres and empty homes across Scotland. We have ensured that we deploy appropriate policies that contribute to the regeneration of our country and which, importantly, sustain the budget that Mr Swinney has balanced for a number of years. All that we have heard from the Opposition is opportunism and a lack of alternatives. I commend the bill to Parliament to ensure that we tackle the issue of blight across Scotland.

Mr Henry referred to the consultations that councils have carried out—in this case, Renfrewshire’s. Is he aware that when the choices were outlined and communities asked whether they supported the council tax freeze—no matter whether it was SNP policy—the public in Renfrewshire, even in light of all the information, still chose to have it?

This Government sees planning as a key component of delivering sustainable economic growth, with planning playing its full part in the finance, employment and sustainable growth portfolio and being geared towards contributing to the Scottish Government’s purpose of delivering that sustainable growth. From the top-level strategic plan to the detail of the Scottish planning policy and front-line implementation, our duty is to ensure that the system moves forward and continues to make Scotland the best place to live, work and invest. Planning is a priority for this Government and, as we stated in our manifesto, “a more efficient and effective planning system will be good for investment and growth.” The Government’s economic strategy, which it published in 2011, highlights the role that our planning system has to play. Today, I want to announce three important areas of work to strengthen planning’s contribution to increasing sustainable economic growth and to reflect on the progress that has already been made in Scotland to drive forward improvements and efficiencies in our planning system. Those three areas of work are: the review of the national planning framework; a review of the Scottish planning policy; and an update on the “Planning Reform—Next Steps” package of measures that was set out in March. As I mentioned in my statement to Parliament on 28 March, work on the third national planning framework has begun. The NPF is a spatial strategy for Scotland’s development over the next 20 to 30 years and I want that future to be about ambition, opportunity and place. I said in March that I saw the key themes of NPF3 as being helping economic recovery and supporting the transition to a low-carbon economy. I remain of that view, but there are other broad objectives that must be remembered, which include creating jobs and supporting people; moving to zero waste and improving green infrastructure; adapting to climate change; and improving connectivity through better transport links, energy networks and broadband. Today, I have published our participation statement for NPF3, which sets out how we will go about preparing the new national planning framework. In responding to the development of the second national planning framework, Parliament asked us to go further to ensure comprehensive and meaningful engagement for NPF3 by beginning early and sustaining participation throughout the process. The participation statement shows that we have already started doing that. For example, we have consulted a wide range of stakeholders to shape the engagement process, including community groups, business interests, professionals and public bodies, whom I thank for providing their thoughts, advice and time. We will prepare a report on the main issues instead of preparing a detailed and full draft proposed framework, which will deliver a much more effective way of presenting different options and seeking views on them. In 2007, cabinet secretary John Swinney set out the criteria that ministers would use to identify national developments for the current national planning framework. We consider that those criteria remain relevant and have updated them to reflect current circumstances and priorities, and, in particular, our economic strategy. Proposals must make a significant contribution to sustainable economic growth and they must be nationally significant—not just regional. In addition, national developments must make a significant contribution to one or more of the following: job creation and skills development; meeting our Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and an 80 per cent reduction in emissions by 2050; adapting to or mitigating the effects of climate change; the zero waste plan; the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets; delivering jobs and investment; strengthening Scotland’s links with the rest of the world; improving our digital, transport, energy, utilities or green infrastructure networks; and improving the quality of the built or natural environment where we live and work. We will use those criteria to assess all candidate national developments that are proposed to us, and we will identify those that we think should be designated as national developments in our main issues report, which is to be published in spring 2013. Fourteen national developments are currently identified in the second national planning framework, from the Forth replacement crossing to the facilities and infrastructure related to the 2014 Commonwealth games. We will consider whether each of those should remain as a national development in NPF3. Some of them may not—for example, those that are already consented and on track for delivery. However, it is likely that several existing national developments will be carried forward into NPF3 and updated and modified as necessary. When the second national planning framework was being prepared, Parliament took a close interest—and rightly so—in the process for identifying national developments. The Scottish Government has put in place improved consultation arrangements for finalising national developments and is making accessible more public information about how we assess them. Today, I intend to issue a call for candidate national developments. I want, as far as possible, to hear about proposals for national developments as early as possible. That will enable us to properly assess projects from the outset, so that we have the best candidates. We want to be open about the information that we receive about all candidate national developments and about how we assess them. Therefore, we commit to publishing all suggestions for national developments and supporting information that we receive and to publishing our assessment matrix at the same time as the main issues report. Today, we also publish the scoping report for the strategic environmental assessment of NPF3. This is the first stage of the SEA process and will accompany other assessments on equalities, business and regulatory impact, and carbon. The NPF is the spatial strategy that indicates where we want to see development in Scotland and which developments are national priorities. The Scottish planning policy is about how that vision is delivered. In 2010, we published the current SPP, which consolidated into a single policy 21 previous policy documents on topics such as housing, renewable energy and transport. It reduced our weight of planning policy by some 80 per cent—down to just 55 pages from 400—and our planning policy is clearer and more proportionate as a result. Although the policies were largely developed before the economic downturn and in a different planning culture, that consolidation has proved to be innovative and effective. Today, I am announcing a review of the Scottish planning policy to ensure that it remains fit for purpose and meets the challenges presented by the economic circumstances that we now face. The SPP makes it clear that sustainable economic growth is a material consideration and indicates that planning should proactively support growth-enhancing activities. That does not mean development at any cost. Protecting community and environmental benefits will continue to lie at the heart of our policy. Indeed, the Government economic strategy is clear that the quality of Scotland’s built and natural environments is vital to the success of the economy. The Government economic strategy is clear on the priority of developing good-quality, sustainable places. We will therefore look to make place more central to the policy. I have set the Scottish Government a challenging timescale, which is to complete the review and publish a revised SPP by the end of 2013. I have asked my officials to carry out the review of the SPP alongside work on the early stages of the review of the NPF. That means that interested parties will be able to see the connections between the two. The Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 introduced the biggest changes to the Scottish planning system in a generation. Those changes have made a difference. Our subsequent planning reform actions include: completion of the e-planning programme; investment in practitioner training; service improvement plans from Government, planning authorities and agencies; delivery of efficiencies in the operation of the planning appeals system; and earlier and more proportionate involvement in planning from agencies. It is worth noting that, last week, our United Kingdom counterparts announced a series of amendments to the English planning system. In Scotland, we have already gone a long way towards addressing issues that are being looked at south of the border. We have permanently increased permitted development rights for householders, reducing regulation, and we are taking forward changes for non-householder developments. We have introduced measures to enable developers to revisit legal agreements that have made developments unviable. We are addressing performance through a new performance framework, which has been developed by and with planning authorities and which has been welcomed by many stakeholders. We are working with partners to improve handling of major planning applications, through better use of processing agreements and initiatives such as planning protocol in enterprise areas. We are working towards streamlining multiple consents processes and ensuring that appraisals and assessments are conducted without adding unnecessary financial burdens and time delays to the planning process. We have a comprehensive, joined-up package of reforms in Scotland to tackle issues in the short and long term. My next steps statement in March contained a package of measures, which focused on ensuring a fitter, more streamlined planning system, giving a higher priority to place than to process. I take this opportunity to update the Parliament on the measures. We published the analysis reports on “Planning Reform—Next Steps” last week. Shortly, I will begin to lay legislation that will simplify the regulatory burden for developers and planning authorities. We have worked with planning authorities on progressing their development plans and exploring new ways of working. In recognition that it is not just about legislation, we are working to improve culture, leadership and delivery. Planning authorities approve around 93 per cent of applications, but performance remains variable across the country and needs to improve. We want the process to be more predictable and more proportionate. Following the publication of the new planning performance framework in March, I am looking forward to receiving the first annual performance reports this month, which will cover the quality of services and commitments to future improvements. I have made it clear that there will be a direct link between performance improvement and an increase in planning application fees, on which we have consulted. I will confirm the way forward in that regard in the coming months. Making the system work more efficiently is not an end in itself; it is about supporting economic recovery, providing a supportive business environment and—importantly—promoting quality of place for people to live in, work in and enjoy.

I thought that the harmony that had developed between Sarah Boyack and me would perhaps continue with her opening question, as I agree that we have lessons to learn from NPF2 about the process and what can be transplanted and augmented in NPF3 by way of participation and involvement. There will be projects that can adapt, and there is a monitoring arrangement for the work in NPF2. That is reported to us, and we consider it closely. However, we are setting an ambitious agenda for Scotland, and the national planning framework will certainly cut across all agendas and strategies. Whether we are talking about our marine, renewables or regeneration strategy, it is clear that we want a joined-up and strategic approach to our ambitions for Scotland. On the bigger and better question, if we had all the powers of an independent nation we could do even more to realise the ambitions that, I am sure, members of the Labour Party share. However, we will get on with delivering a very ambitious agenda with the tools that we currently have.

On the connection to other bills and benefits, economic benefit is, of course, a material consideration in any planning application, and each planning application should be judged on the merits of its case. Economic benefit is already taken into account in the planning function. Through the Scottish planning policy review, I want to ensure that appropriate weighting is given to economic benefit and economic development in any planning application and in the implementation of the policy. It is appropriate that we should consult on that to ensure that we get the maximum benefit and get the policy right. On enforcement, we are currently looking at how we can ensure that the planning system is fit for purpose and can adapt to the circumstances in which we find ourselves. I remain interested in how individual planning authorities execute their regulatory and enforcement functions, of course, and would be happy to have further talks about how the member thinks they could be strengthened, taking that opportunity forward, but this is about ensuring that the system delivers and supports the development that we all want to see.

The “National Planning Framework 2 Monitoring Report 2012”, which was published in March, concluded that wind farm development “has not physically impinged on ... landscapes safeguarded by designations to any significant extent”. We have produced guidance on the cumulative impact and effect, which is considered with any application, and we have gone to great lengths to ensure that our environment is protected and that our renewables policy is delivered in a way that is sensitive to the local environment. That work and that on-going approach will be built into both our national policy and local policy as it applies in such determinations.

The city of Glasgow is clearly a major driver in the Scottish economy—that point is well made. However, the Government has outlined a policy approach and new resources to support the cities, both individually and collectively, to ensure that through the city strategy there is greater effect from the cities working together. The development opportunities that will be presented and the developments of a national scale will reflect the place of cities in our strategy. At this stage, as we move towards NPF3, we are looking to the opportunities that exist across cities, towns and villages and rural Scotland. Of course, cities will play a central part in that, as they already do in the Government’s over-arching economic strategy.

I am sure that Mr Gibson would not want me to prejudge the outcome of both the ongoing engagement, through the participation statement, and the process that I have outlined today. It is possible that projects identified in NPF2 may not progress to NPF3 but each case—each candidate project—will be considered on its merits. Some projects may not progress, but we will engage in the process and whatever we do will be done in a very transparent and open way.

The national community planning oversight group has had a very productive first meeting. It will assist in combining both spatial planning, as discussed today, with community planning—it has the potential to do that. The group will provide guidance, support and leadership in the way that we would expect in order to realise the ambitions outlined in today’s strategy.

Indeed, Presiding Officer, and when Mr Pentland locates his own he will be able to read eagerly the call for national candidate projects and he will, I am sure, assist his local authority to progress the Ravenscraig project to transform it into the kind of project to which he aspires. For the member’s benefit, I say again that whatever we propose will be decided according to an assessment matrix that is published and which will have participation and involvement in every priority. Every project will be fully considered. I know that the Ravenscraig project is very close to the member’s heart and I am sure that he can compose with partners a case that ensures that, in addition to the range of supports that the Scottish Government has already delivered for that initiative, it gets the priority that it deserves.

The member might be aware that through our on-going reforms we want to remove processes that add little to decision making on planning. Sometimes interventions, however justified they might be, can be frustrating. As for the case the member has highlighted, the member will also be aware of Lord Gill’s Scottish civil courts review, which made a number of recommendations on public interest litigation and looked at, for example, judicial review procedures, time limits and case management by the courts. We are now preparing legislative proposals for civil courts reform with a view to issuing a public consultation by the end of the year.

In response to Parliament’s request about its involvement in NPF2, we have made amendments to the process for NPF3, some of which are outlined in the participation statement. On whether Parliament will have a say before the conclusion of the process, my answer is yes. Final decisions will, of course, rest with ministers, but members will be able to input on the issues. What will be helpful in that will be the kind of main issues report that we have for planning, which will present options, rather than a fait accompli or a recommendation without any options. That, together with the assessment matrix and the publication of all national candidate bids that are made, will result in a very transparent, open and engaging process. On planning fees, it is proposed that such fees will be capped. The costs will still be less than those in England but will leave enough finance to support planning authorities in delivering the kind of planning service that they want—and we would expect them—to deliver. However, planning fee costs, application costs and the performance delivered must be linked. Such an approach will not deliver complete cost recovery; however, it will contribute much more to the planning fee system, and further detail on how we will deliver that link can be found in the March statement; the consultation, the responses to which were published online last week; and the consultation on the better regulation bill, which is live. As for the impact on business, we propose to deliver systems that take as much of the burden as possible off business while still protecting the environment. As a result, many of the impact assessments will still be necessary, but we want to deploy them in a proportionate way.

Indeed, I cannot prejudge any planning application but, speaking in general terms, I note that support for a plan-led system gives local communities a great deal of power as it ensures that local plans reflect their wishes. We support a plan-led system, but decisions and determinations on applications can depart from the zoning of a local plan if material considerations allow that. Economic benefit would be one such material consideration, so in some cases complete adherence to the local plan might not be delivered because circumstances lead to another conclusion. The review of Scottish planning policy will be designed to support greater weighting for and emphasis on economic benefit. The approach might therefore give further support and strength to those who wish to secure sustainable economic growth in such areas.

I assure the member and the whole Parliament that whatever we do in respect of planning reform will be methodical, will engage stakeholders and will take the profession and local authorities with us, because it has to be delivered in partnership. Sometimes, planning is perceived to be a process of conflict between applicant and objector. It is important to focus on partnership and to take a can-do approach. Planning is about enabling development and not about being seen to stifle development. That said, whatever we do has to create places in which people want to live. It is also about protecting the environment and ensuring that processes are right and have been reviewed and delivered in a methodical way. That is exactly the process that I have undertaken as the planning minister, as I outlined in March and in my statement today, and I will continue with that approach as we turn to further legislation. I will, of course, watch carefully what happens by way of planning reform in other parts of the UK, but we will take only the best from that. I believe that we in Scotland have delivered much of the best reform, both in the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 and in further refinements. Whatever we do will be delivered in a methodical way to support sustainable economic growth, not necessarily to grab headlines but to deliver the kind of society in which we want to live.

I am delighted that there is such enthusiasm in the chamber today. It seems that members have not heard enough from me on the subject of planning and want me to return to the subject in a future debate. [Interruption.] I hear dissension from the Labour Party. I am, of course, more than happy to return to the chamber to outline our vision for Scotland and to discuss how we will deliver a planning system that is fit for purpose and use every lever at our disposal to deliver sustainable economic growth.

I reassure the member that we are trying to be as engaging as possible. We are putting more information in the public domain than ever before and we are being fully transparent about how we will deliver the programme. Crucially, participation will be on-going and it will evolve and adapt to circumstances to ensure that people feel that their voices are being heard. If Mr McNeil would like to contribute his views on how I can further improve that, I will certainly be interested to hear from him.

The Scottish Government intends to review business rates later this year.

The review will consider how the business rates system can better support business and economic growth. It will cover a range of issues, including the effectiveness of current tax breaks—worth more than £540 million this year—rating appeals, transparency, tax avoidance and other matters. However, we have committed to continue the small business bonus scheme for the lifetime of the Parliament, thus providing a lifeline to more than 85,000 small business premises across Scotland.

I confirm that such matters can feature as part of the review that we are about to conduct.

Business improvement districts such as those in Inverness and Elgin enable the private and public sectors to work together and invest in improvements to the local business environment while contributing to the wider regeneration of the local community. Businesses also benefit from the sharing of good practice across BID areas.

Yes, absolutely. The Scottish Government concurs with those words. A number of BIDS are being developed—18 are at the development stage, six of which are in Mr McGrigor’s constituency. I hope that the Oban result is positive, leads to change and further contributes to the agenda to regenerate that community through, for example, the CHORD—Campbeltown, Helensburgh, Oban, Rothesay and Dunoon—programme .

I confirm that we support that BID proposal. I support it personally and, diary permitting, I will try to make the deadline for the ballot. I look forward to a positive outcome. I hope that BIDs will help to regenerate communities such as Hamilton.

We are determined to see an improvement in performance across Scotland and we have already worked closely with planning authorities on the new planning performance framework. Authorities’ first performance reports are due this month and we will discuss with them the implementation of their service improvement priorities.

A range of activities can be undertaken to ensure that individual local authorities’ voices are heard, including through the professional organisation Heads of Planning Scotland, through the continuing consultation “Planning Reform: Next Steps”, through the national planning policy framework and through the performance framework. There is a range of ways in which local authorities can contribute their views on how planning can be shaped to support sustainable economic growth in Scotland.

I inform Mr Johnstone that I will return to Parliament next week with a comprehensive statement on planning matters. It will show that, once again, the Scottish Government is ahead of our United Kingdom counterparts on matters such as planning and supporting economic recovery. We will, of course, examine whatever measures are announced in England or other places and ensure that we have a competitive edge. I am sure that Mr Johnstone will listen carefully to my announcement to Parliament next week.

I am delighted to lead this debate to highlight the exploratory consultation on our proposed community empowerment and renewal bill. I will set out why the Government believes that it is a crucial element of our legislative programme and why the consultation provides a real opportunity to shape the proposed bill. I will cover what I mean by community empowerment, why the Parliament should be debating community empowerment now, and why the Government believes that the proposed bill can make a difference to the lives of our fellow Scots. I welcome the Labour amendment, which we are minded to support. Just as we believe that the people who live in Scotland are best placed to make decisions about its future, so it follows that local communities are best placed to make decisions about their future. This Government has a track record of delivering policy and financial approaches that allow local solutions and decisions to flourish. What do I mean by community empowerment? During my summer visits, I have been enthused by a range of local projects such as the Shetland Community Bike Project, St Abbs community centre, Campbeltown regeneration, and the food train in Dumfries and Galloway. Those are just some examples of community-led activity on the ground. Community empowerment is the community owners of Gigha increasing the population of the island, improving housing and creating jobs and businesses. It is the people of Govanhill bringing their swimming pool property back to life, creating an arts and health centre and a range of social enterprises—I look forward to visiting them shortly. Community empowerment is the work of community-based housing associations, charities, community councils, collectives, uniformed organisations and many others who make our communities so vibrant. It is the hundreds of development trusts realising the potential of local facilities, ambitious community renewable energy projects, and the daily actions of volunteers who give of their time to support their community. Every day, across the country, thousands of volunteers are working to create better futures for their families, friends and neighbours. In Scotland we cherish community, with a belief that we can take our own decisions and do things for ourselves but, as we know, unnecessary barriers sometimes get in the way. It is this working together, to deliver what local people know will make a difference, that is community empowerment. Our approach has economic activity, tackling social injustice and empowering communities at its heart. Why should the Scottish Parliament be debating community empowerment now? Colleagues in the chamber are only too aware of the significant challenges and pressures that still face too many of our communities and people. Those pressures will not be eased in the face of the continuing Westminster cuts. Whether problems are those associated with inequality, drugs and alcohol, ill health, chaotic lifestyles, rural isolation or crime, we know that the evidence tells us that we cannot solve them without local people playing an active role in delivering the solutions. We cannot keep doing things to people. We must do things with people and trust them to do things for themselves. The commission on the future delivery of public services in Scotland, which was led by the late Campbell Christie, made that point repeatedly and strongly. The responses to Christie from the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities agreed that that was a crucial element in the reform of public services and the review of community planning, and a vital ingredient in the preventative spend agenda. Community empowerment is not about dumping liabilities or unfair responsibilities on communities while the public sector walks away. On the contrary, it is about providing the tools to do the job, and addressing what are seen as blockages to progress. That is why I am delighted that we are working in partnership with COSLA to develop the bill. We will work alongside our partners in the public, private and third sectors to ensure that we are doing our utmost to support and encourage community empowerment. This morning we held the first meeting of a cross-sector reference group, and I look forward to working with the group as ideas move ahead and the bill evolves. Why is the Government considering legislating on community empowerment and renewal? A lot is going on that we can celebrate, and there are fantastic examples of community-led action that is supported by the public sector, but we can do so much more. The ideas in the consultation are aimed at removing barriers, upping our collective game, making standards more consistent and cementing good practice in the legislative framework. Not every action will require legislation, and resources must follow the aspiration. Our consultation has the potential to deliver the biggest transfer of power to communities since the creation of the Scottish Parliament. Ideas that are being progressed include an urban community right to buy; a right for communities to request to take over unused or underused public sector assets; a right to challenge the quality of service delivery; a greater say for local people in how local budgets are spent; strengthened compulsory purchase powers; an overarching duty on the public sector to engage; and a duty on all public sector partners in relation to community planning. We are also exploring issues to do with supporting common good funds, support for allotments, tenant-managed housing and participatory budgeting. The decisions on whether to take ideas forward will be informed by the response to the consultation and by the practicality of the ideas. Legislation must be effective and meaningful. We must be able to realise ambition in practice. It is right to ask questions now, to give everyone a chance to have their voice heard in the debate. We are at the start of the process. It might be that not all the ideas that we are asking about go forward, and there will be great ideas that we have not thought of. That is why the listening process continues. There is much work to be done. The exploratory consultation period closes on 26 September. We have built into the timetable the opportunity to consult on a draft bill next year, which will mean that we get the technicalities right and proceed with workable legislation, which is fit for purpose in the years to come. I look forward to working with people across the country, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and the Parliament to establish how best we can do that. Our proposed bill is not the only example of the Government’s commitment to supporting community empowerment; colleagues across the Government have invested in a range of work. For example, since May 2007 more than 800 grants for community renewables, worth some £16 million, have been allocated under the community and renewable energy scheme and its predecessor scheme. We also set a target of 500MW of community and locally owned renewables by 2020.

The relevance of that intervention to the debate is not clear.

I will continue. In the community-owned renewables sector, more than £2.4 billion could be generated over the lifetime of projects that are led by communities and rural businesses—that seems like a sizeable contribution to change in this country. The approach will ensure that local people can use their skill and determination to benefit from a crucial plank of our future economic growth, by investing in their own futures. We have delivered a new Scottish land fund, worth £6 million over the next three years, so that many more communities can follow in the footsteps of pioneers such as the people of Eigg and Assynt and reap the rewards of land ownership. We are investing around £6 million per year in community anchor organisations such as housing associations and development trusts, through our people and communities fund, which enables organisations to increase their role in supporting employability and early intervention projects. For the Government, community empowerment is not a peripheral issue but sits alongside our core belief that the people of Scotland are best placed to take decisions about their futures. Empowered communities are central to shaping a modern Scotland and reforming public services, along the principles of the Christie commission—prevention, integration, workforce development and improved performance. Empowered communities will play an increasingly important role in a confident, prosperous and democratically vibrant nation. We believe that Scotland’s greatest asset is our people. Our communities are a rich source of creativity and talent, and the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill will be a major opportunity to help to realise our potential as a nation. I ask members to join us in developing the crucial work to strengthen and grow empowered communities across the country and I ask them to support the motion, which welcomes the consultation on the proposed bill. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the current exploratory consultation on the proposed Community Empowerment and Renewal Bill and the commitment to ensuring that Scotland’s communities are supported to take independent action to achieve their goals and to have their voices heard in the decisions that affect them; commends the Scottish Government’s continued efforts to work in partnership with COSLA, local authorities and the wider public, private, third and community sectors to further this aim; congratulates the many individuals and organisations from across Scotland who are making a positive difference in their communities through community-led action, and encourages everyone with an interest to get involved and share their ideas on how to empower Scotland’s communities by responding to the consultation paper.

These are helpful contributions, and it is right that the Opposition should ask what our intent is. However, I restate that this exploratory consultation is to capture ideas and suggestions that can be taken forward. Asking for concrete answers at this stage is not necessarily relevant, as we are continuing to gather information about what people aspire to and how it would work in practice.

I clarify that I requested the debate so that the Parliament could help to inform the future debate and work. That seems a democratic thing to do. In addition, I am trying to highlight the consultation so that we can encourage all parts of Scotland to contribute to it so that we get it right.

To give direct reassurance on that point, in my ministerial portfolio I am involved with all those agendas to ensure that we produce a strategic plan.

This has been an excellent debate, which has—as Sarah Boyack said—raised the opportunities that exist in terms of taking forward the bill. Through the consultation, there have been a range of methods—we will continue to bring forward the ideas and the practicalities to ensure that this works. I say again to Sarah Boyack that we will accept the Labour amendment—I feel a closeness with the Labour Party on this debate. Clearly my red tie is having more benefits than I envisaged when I put it on this morning. There may be tough choices ahead, because clear conflicts could arise in relation to areas such as assets. However, the cross-sector reference group this morning, the parliamentary debate and the discussions in other places all show a great deal of enthusiasm for the bill—not just for the legislative framework that could be produced, but for the guidance, best practice and resources that can be found to ensure that we meet the aspirations that have been outlined by many members. It is important that we turn ambitions into reality and ensure that it is sustainable, so that projects that are created through this work can survive into the future. Further work is also to be carried out on empty properties. Although there is no immediate asset management account plan, Scottish Enterprise and others are working on a register of empty properties, which is a tool that could assist communities in identifying what is available. Claire Baker and Sarah Boyack raised the important issue of inequality. Our ensuring that the bill’s proposals are consulted on or implemented will not make inequality worse: it will tackle inequality. I assure members that the membership of the reference group includes Oxfam, Shelter Scotland, the Scottish Community Alliance, the poverty truth commission, the Scottish Youth Parliament and many others. Membership alone does not tick a box—of course it does not—but I seek to reassure members that much work will be done to ensure that the concept and the issues around inequality will be addressed. Annabelle Ewing is right to be excited about the programme and the proposals, and she is right to identify the can-do spirit that it could encourage. Aspects of the bill could also make progress on empty and dangerous buildings. Claire Baker said that we should be sensible and proportionate, which is absolutely correct. She also mentioned the potential of community energy projects, from which we could also learn lessons. She referred to council decision making and how it affects individual local elected members: we want to engage further with COSLA and councils on the proposals. Sandra White is an enthusiast for the programme of community empowerment. She is such an enthusiast that the consultation was launched in her constituency, which I know she welcomed warmly. That is a good example of a facility going from council ownership towards community ownership. Malcolm Chisholm has made a substantial contribution to community empowerment—not just to this debate or as a minister or MSP, but in so many other ways. We recognise that and want to build on the best practice that previous Administrations established by taking on board the comments about state-aid rules and best practice. He made a helpful suggestion about having an online hub to promote best practice in community-led projects. We created an online hub some weeks ago—our-great-ideas.org—so we are ahead of Malcolm Chisholm with that idea, but he also identified some good work that is being done by the Labour-SNP Administration in Edinburgh, just as many other members have been able to identify great projects in their areas. We are considering David Stewart’s bill, but we believe that a range of powers could be considered with local government to tackle enforcement and private sector property that might need to be addressed. Alison McInnes was right to cover the Christie commission and its important place in the debate. She referred me to the Carnegie Trust, which is also a member of the reference group. It is a rather large reference group, but we have made sure that all interests, including the private and third sectors, are represented in order that we get things right. The group is co-chaired by COSLA. Alison McInnes was also right to say that we are talking about more than just legislation or regulation; we are talking about culture, leadership and the practical support that can be provided to deliver community empowerment in the way that has been suggested. Of course, there is a crossover with the planning system, community planning and geographic planning as they affect communities. However, I disagree with Alison McInnes’s perspective on police and fire reform. From my experience in local government, and now as a minister, I believe that the emerging accountability will be better than it was under the previous arrangements that we had in relation to those services. I agree with Mike MacKenzie on the dedication of volunteers in a number of projects across his constituency, some of which I was able to visit during the summer recess. Anne McTaggart raised a question about the process. There will be an on-going debate, consultation and reference groups. Roadshows have been done with local government and others. There is a website, and packs were sent to community groups across the country to raise consciousness of the concepts as proposed in the exploratory consultation. Of course, there will be an opportunity to review the draft bill when it is presented to Parliament. I, too, commend the Glasgow stalled spaces initiative for what it has achieved. We want to replicate that type of project across the country. However, the work is about resources—human and physical—and we must ensure that the appropriate checks and balances are in place. Mark McDonald made some helpful suggestions, as always, and Margaret McDougall’s contribution was also helpful, as she identified the barriers that exist in some community asset transfers. We want to explore those technical issues to ensure that we can remove any unnecessary barriers from the system. We do not want simply to create burdens on communities. We want to empower them genuinely in the way that Bob Doris described. He described the scenario in which a council determines which assets to dispose of, and sometimes they are the liabilities, or the less attractive community facilities that might otherwise have been heading for demolition. The bill could represent a step change in the process. Communities could lead the process of transfer and could determine which facilities are appropriate to be transferred as local community projects. George Adam mentioned good practice in local area committee funding in Renfrewshire, and Alison Johnstone made an important point about financial powers and how they should be addressed. Margo MacDonald made a number of points in her interventions, including a naked attempt to lobby on behalf of her pet project, which I will certainly pass on to the sport minister. Chic Brodie asked how radical the debate should be. I say to him that I want to “set the people free” through the community empowerment and renewal bill. We want radical suggestions to change Scotland for the better. He also said that we can have action now and that we do not need to wait for legislative change, and he is absolutely right. There are many actions that can be taken now to empower communities, to standardise consultations and to transfer assets. The views from the grass roots so far have been encouraging. I found the Conservatives’ contributions to the debate disappointing—in stark contrast to the contributions from every other party in the chamber. We will require legislation and other measures. We want to give communities the tools to do the job, but our approach is absolutely not the big society, which would be the kiss of death for proposals in Scotland. For the Conservatives in England, the big society means that people are on their own, whereas for us, community empowerment means that we will give them the tools to do the job. That is genuine empowerment.

I am reaching the end of my speech. We are making a genuine attempt to empower communities and we are listening to people, as a listening Government. Just as we believe, as a Parliament and a Government, that the people of Scotland are best placed to take decisions about their future, communities are best placed to take decisions about their future. We are raising ambitions for Scotland, realigning resources, removing barriers, unlocking potential and delivering new powers and new rights to communities in a way that we have not been able to do before. We are unlocking human potential towards a renewed democracy. There is more to this debate than just finance: it is also about general wellbeing. We support the principle of subsidiarity. Just as we want powers to come from London to Edinburgh, we want to transfer more to communities, in the spirit of this debate. The proposed bill represents the biggest potential transfer of powers to local communities since devolution. If that is what we can do with devolution, just imagine what we could do with independence.

Can Willie Rennie advise members in which financial year the Scottish Government overspent its budget?

I thank Kevin Stewart for bringing this important and timely motion to the chamber for debate. It is timely because an opportunity still exists to take the issue forward following Aberdeen City Council’s decision at the end of August to abandon Aberdeen’s city garden project. Lewis Macdonald mentioned this Administration’s record in relation to Aberdeen. The SNP has a proud and strong record of supporting all our cities, but particularly the city of Aberdeen, whether by addressing the financial concerns around grant distribution, through the massive investment in the city, or through some of my colleagues—in a previous life, as elected members—sorting out the local finances of Aberdeen City Council. The future of Aberdeen is crucial not just to the city and its people but to the whole of Scotland, such is the scale and significance of that great city. Aberdeen is Europe’s energy capital and it is recognised globally as having the second highest concentration of offshore energy expertise after Houston, Texas. It is home to multinational operators and contractors, as well as to many Scottish supply and service companies. The city is renowned for its technology and skills, supported by two universities and two colleges of further education. The energy industry also supports a thriving business community with a robust professional and financial services sector. I could go on about the strengths of Aberdeen, but we prefer to focus on the opportunities that have been presented to Aberdeen. We therefore noted with great interest the proposals to transform Aberdeen’s centre by redeveloping the Union Terrace gardens to boost the city’s prospects for further global investment. Following an international competition to redesign the Union Terrace gardens, it was announced in January that the granite way proposal had been chosen as the winning entry for the city garden project. The design sought to transform the gardens into a contemporary space for park and cultural activities. A referendum was held in Aberdeen last February. The residents participating in the referendum were asked to choose between retaining the existing Union Terrace gardens or replacing them with the proposed city garden project design. The facts speak for themselves. A total of 165,830 voting packs were sent out with 86,568 votes cast. The turnout of some 52 per cent far exceeded many people’s expectations. It was announced on 2 March that 45,301 people had voted for the city garden project design, while a total of 41,175 people voted for retaining the Union Terrace gardens. Voters had therefore backed the project by a majority of 4,126.

I do not have that information to hand, but I am happy to provide it. What I do have is the advice given by the council to councillors and the Scottish Government and to which I will refer shortly. The demonstration of public support for the project was an essential step in taking forward the city’s tax increment finance proposal. Mr Macdonald has made the point that the city council had a mandate not to proceed with the project. I would argue that the referendum was the mandate to deliver because councils will be elected on a range of promises. Mr Macdonald’s argument would suggest that the SNP has a mandate to go straight to independence for Scotland by virtue of the fact that it won the election. Of course, a referendum is a far more appropriate way to test any particular proposition, as attractive as that concept may be.

I am happy to confirm that I have a minister with a very strong record, as per the Electoral Commission’s recent report into the running of elections. I believe that the findings of that referendum are robust. I am confident that they reflected the wishes of the people of Aberdeen. On the back of public support, we wished to consider Aberdeen’s plans further to use tax increment finance to redevelop Union Terrace gardens because of the potential of the proposal specifically to lever in private sector contributions—potentially some £55 million from private donors—and to improve public confidence. However, in view of the local situation it was necessary to gauge that public support, which was demonstrated through the referendum. Following the referendum result in favour of the project, we were looking forward to receiving a full TIF business case showing how TIF would be used to support the investment of—

Of course.

I cannot think of any circumstances in which the people of Renfrew would turn down a donation of £50 million to their community and, in so doing, turn down Government support that could refresh their city or town centre in the way the Labour Party in Aberdeen has done. It is therefore surprising and disappointing to learn that on 22 August Aberdeen City Council voted to abandon the city garden project. It did so in the full knowledge that it would terminate the application bid—which otherwise could have been progressed—to support the regeneration of Aberdeen. Why am I so confident? I have here the advice given by the council to councillors, which said that, without the private sector donations on the scale of the city garden project, the four other projects are not viable as a TIF scheme because they cannot lever sufficient private finance. There we have it. Nanette Milne is absolutely correct—it is Labour that pulled the plug on the scheme for the city of Aberdeen.

I confirm that the progress that was being made with the Aberdeen application was in harmony with what the Scottish Government was looking for. What Labour has done in Aberdeen is pulled the plug on the established process and taken it back to square one, signalling a substantial change to any potential application, with no tested public support and no obvious private sector contributions. That is a complete change to the position that was presented previously and which inspired so much confidence. There is time for me to close with an opportunity. The project need not be dead. The Labour Party may have killed off the aspirations this week, but I know that Labour members are not necessarily adverse to U-turns, especially if it might be in the interests of the people that they represent. I encourage the Labour Party in Aberdeen to return to the Scottish Government with a business case that involves the city gardens and we will look at it again in making the project happen—otherwise, it will forgo the generous priority status that it was enjoying. Meeting closed at 17:57.

I am pleased to open today’s debate on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. First, I welcome Margaret Burgess as minister designate for welfare and housing and commend Keith Brown on his contribution to the housing portfolio. The bill will contribute to measures to reduce the number of empty properties—whether they be homes or shops or other commercial properties—so that we can make best use of existing buildings and minimise the number of properties that fall into disrepair and become a blight on our communities. I thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their scrutiny of the bill so far. I was pleased to see in the stage 1 report of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee that there is much common ground between the Scottish Government and the Parliament on the importance of tackling empty properties. I am grateful to the committee for supporting the general principles of the bill. Keith Brown—then Minister for Housing and Transport—and I have looked carefully at the recommendations that were made in the stage 1 report. I will outline a number of actions that are proposed to respond to the issues that were raised. Of course, I will write to the committee to respond to all its recommendations. Indeed, this debate will further contribute to the on-going engagement that I have committed to within and outwith this chamber. I have met various organisations to hear their issues and consider how our proposals can be refined and improved. The Scottish Government has carefully listened to the experience of stakeholders, MSPs and councils. We welcome the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s support for our commitment to tackling empty homes. We want there to be a reduction in the 25,000 homes that are sitting empty long-term, while around 140,000 families are on waiting lists for a social rented home. We agree that giving councils the flexibility to increase council tax charges for certain long-term empty homes is a useful additional discretionary measure for the toolbox of functions that councils can deploy to help, encourage or, where needed, push owners not to leave their homes lying empty while there is such need. We also agree that council tax is not the only answer. We have been funding the empty homes partnership to provide support to councils in tackling empty homes. We are also now part-funding three empty homes officers on a pilot basis, shared across seven councils. We are pleased to say that that is now starting to pay off as the number of councils that are actively working to tackle empty homes is increasing each year. Although advice and support from a council can be enough in many cases, we also recognise that some owners need financial help to bring their homes up to standard. That is why we have doubled the amount that is available through the empty homes loan fund to £4 million. We will help make at least 160 extra empty homes available as affordable housing in addition to the existing £1.75 million of innovative empty homes projects that we are already supporting. In relation to the increase, we have also taken on board comments about the need for clarity and the avoidance of complexity in relation to the types of empty home owners who deserve special treatment so that they are excluded from any council tax increase. That is why we propose to focus the exceptions on only those who are actively trying to bring their homes back into use, either for sale or for let. We are consulting on that, and on other aspects of the draft regulations, which flesh out the details of how any council tax increase would operate. We plan to amend the bill at stage 2 in response to the stage 1 recommendations as they relate to unoccupied homes. We intend to lodge an amendment that will increase from £200 to £500 the maximum level of penalty charge that a council can charge an owner who fails to provide information on whether their home is unoccupied. As the committee suggested, that should help to deter owners from deliberately avoiding providing information or from providing false information. We will also lodge an amendment that will limit in the bill the maximum amount of council tax increase to 100 per cent of the applicable standard rate, rather than just place that restriction in regulations. That is a response to the concerns that the Subordinate Legislation Committee raised about the potential for future regulations to allow for higher increases. We welcome the committee’s general support for the proposals on business rates that will allow us to introduce regulations to reduce the level of empty property relief for commercial properties that have been empty for more than three months. I continue to talk to stakeholders about the provisions and again state that we will return to the Parliament with the details of the regulations should the bill be passed. An important point is that the bill makes no change to empty property relief as it stands; rather, the bill creates an enabling power to decrease or, indeed, increase the rates discounts through regulations. That is no different from the ability that the Government already has to change through regulations many rates reliefs, such as the small business bonus scheme or the United Kingdom’s first and only renewable energy relief. I emphasise again that we remain flexible in our considerations. Yes, we must make savings, as a consequence of deep UK Government cuts, but we aim to ensure that the measure acts as an incentive to bring empty properties back into use. The policy will therefore be supported by our efforts on regeneration and our imminent town centre review. Opposition for its own sake is no substitute for constructive suggestions to make the bill more effective. That is why the stakeholder engagement has been so important. I welcome the encouragement from Mark McDonald MSP to look at the incentivisation scheme in Northern Ireland, which provides relief to ratepayers after they fill empty properties. That could potentially be a further incentivisation as part of the package. I can confirm that we are considering how such a scheme could operate in Scotland and, if it is supported, how it could form a stage 2 amendment. Our stated intention is to vary, from April 2013, the discount that empty properties receive after the first three months from 50 to 10 per cent. I reiterate that, as a result of our learning from experiences elsewhere, industrial and listed properties will continue to receive 100 per cent discount for the duration for which they are empty. In comparison to the council tax provisions, which could affect about 25,000 home owners and under which, for good reason, rates across the country will be potentially variable, the changes to empty property relief will affect a much smaller number of property owners and will be consistent across Scotland. Therefore, in view of that and of the scale of the savings that are involved, it was decided that it would be disproportionate to conduct a business and regulatory impact assessment. Modest but necessary savings will come from the policy—it will be £18 million a year from 2013-14 compared to a forecast business rates income of nearly £2.5 billion. The package of rates relief will remain the most generous in the United Kingdom. Indeed, the current cost of empty property rates relief is £757 million over the five-year revaluation period. That is more than the sum involved in the popular and effective small business bonus scheme, which has made such a difference in these difficult times. Overall rates relief per year now exceeds £0.5 billion. To ensure that the relief is properly focused on supporting sustainable economic growth, we will shortly launch a consultation on the rates relief system. The Finance Committee queried the impact on the public sector. By providing estimates, we have shown that the cost to the public sector is relatively minor. The benefit to local government services is that all non-domestic rates are of course passed back to local government for the funding of local public services. We welcome the support in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s stage 1 report for our plans to abolish the housing support grant. The grant has become an anomaly since the introduction of the prudential borrowing regime, which requires councils to ensure that they borrow funds only if they are confident that they can pay them back. Therefore it must be councils’ responsibility to ensure that they can balance their housing revenue accounts each year. That will allow us to make better use of our housing funding by focusing on only key priorities in an equitable way, rather than simply servicing councils’ interest on historical debts. Despite that, we recognise that Shetland Islands Council has continuing high levels of housing debt due to having borrowed significant amounts over many years from the council’s harbour fund. Keith Brown, as Minister for Housing and Transport, met the new leader of the council back in July and explained that the £15 million in funding being requested by the council was not a realistic scenario. We expect the council, as recommended, to take a hard look at its housing service to ensure sustainability, just as all other local authorities are required to do. I too have met Shetland Islands Council, and officials are in discussion about easing the affordable housing situation on the islands. I believe that there is a desire to tackle the challenges that were inherited by the new council administration. I commit to further engagement. I hope that the Parliament considers our amendments at stage 2 and in essence supports these key measures to bring back into use the empty properties that blight our communities—domestic and non-domestic. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc.) (Scotland) Bill.

I thank the member for taking an intervention; I understand that we have some time in hand. Rather than do a few weeks’ short-term work on a consultation about what the bill and regulations could look like, was it not better to take time over the past months to consult stakeholders, as we have? Is that not exactly the consultation and engagement that she expects?

It is a fair comment to say that some information on the projections of the costs to the public sector was not provided to the Finance Committee, but that was then provided to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, where those facts and figures were accepted and the debate was able to move on. Margaret Mitchell also needs to move on.

When I said that we would listen to stakeholders and the Parliament, I meant it. We are also listening to this debate, which will inform consideration and amendments at stage 2. If the member is asking for clarity on when responses will be provided to committees, I can tell him that we will ensure that committees have our response and recommendations by early next week, to inform stage 2.

We have heard from the Conservatives that they are willing to continue the policy in England. Is the same true of the Liberal Democrats?

The bill creates an enabling power. If that was passed, I would have to return to Parliament with the regulations to vary rates relief. The regulations would change the rates relief that people enjoy. The bill gives us the enabling power to achieve that. Our stated position was that what we proposed in the budget would be outlined. Since then, I have consulted members and stakeholders on that—hence the suggestion in relation to Northern Ireland. I would have to return to the subject in regulations.

Will the member take an intervention?

I speak in the spirit that we have the time and the member seeks the information. He is correct that the information was not available to the Finance Committee, but it was available when the Local Government and Regeneration Committee considered the bill and it is covered in that committee’s report. I can tell him exactly what the figures are. The maximum impact on the NHS is £300,000; the maximum impact on Scottish Enterprise is £400,000; and the maximum impact on councils is £1.7 million, but councils would benefit particularly from the £18 million saving that the proposed change would generate.

Would the member like to take a further intervention?

I am trying to be helpful. It is true that the Government has set no targets. Any figure between zero and 5,500 properties could be brought back into use. However, setting an arbitrary target for the number that might be brought back into use would be complete guesswork that would not inform the debate.

I thank the member for offering an intervention. I clarify that the discretionary power will be for the empty homes element alone, and will be for each local authority to decide. The empty property rates relief scheme will still be universal and consistent across the country. The reason for that is that it is welcomed and supported by the private sector, which wants a consistent scheme across the country.

The member’s comments are helpful. I talked about amendments that the Government is considering. In the same spirit, will the Opposition suggest, here and now, how the bill might be improved?

This has been a highly encouraging debate in which a number of issues have been raised extremely constructively. I particularly welcome the Labour Party’s expressing its concerns and seeking information that may lead it to alter its position. I will rise to the challenge that Elaine Murray set. She asked whether I would reassess and reorder the financial information to give a fuller perspective on the bill as it has evolved, taking account of today’s debate. Yes, I will. If that will help us to reach a satisfactory conclusion, it would certainly be worth doing. Alex Johnstone was right to say that when I had been fairly recently appointed I had quite a hard time at a meeting of the Scottish Property Federation. He was right that I am not used to being in a hall in which everyone is against me, including the panel and all the members present—unlike the Conservatives. He may have experienced that in his own party, but I am unaccustomed to such a political environment. During my time in local government, I once attended a Tory party conference. I was informed that I was given a better reception than the then Tory spokesperson. Maybe that is why I did not feature in this week’s Cabinet promotions. On the subject of the reshuffle, Sarah Boyack said that she did not prepare as she might have done because she thought that the reshuffle might affect me. I missed the reshuffle because I was at the conference of the Institute of Revenues, Rating and Valuation as the reshuffle was happening—such is my dedication to the issue of rates. I am more than happy to be leading on both parts of the bill. Malcolm Chisholm described it as a bill of two halves, and both will make a difference on the issue of bringing empty properties back into use. There is also the important issue of Shetland and the housing support grant. John Pentland had a helpful approach to dealing with interventions, which was to accept an intervention only if he thought that it would not progress someone’s career within the Government and the Scottish National Party. I have never seen the SNP back benches so animated, nor so many spontaneous interventions. Every member of the SNP is fit for government, which may not be the position with the Government down south at Westminster. I welcome Kevin Stewart’s comments on how the bill can be improved and Nigel Don’s contribution from the perspective of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I turn to some specific points. It is right that we should give local authorities discretionary power to take the right steps to tackle the scourge of empty homes in their areas. When so many people are waiting to be housed, empty homes are a scandal. It is appropriate that there is consultation on the regulations so that we can ensure that they are right. We are taking on board the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s concerns and the contributions made in Parliament today.

That is right. Contrary to the position expressed by Alex Johnstone, only 2,000 of the 25,000 long-term empty properties liable for council tax are social rented houses. Returning to empty homes, there is the package of incentives, there is the funding support to bring empty homes back into use and there is the proposed new power, to be used at the discretion of local government, which can make that difference. Shelter Scotland said that it “believes that charging a council tax levy on long-term empty homes is useful and appropriate where: It is part of a package of measures being implemented by a council to bring long-term empty homes back into use”. That is a welcome statement, which is in the spirit of the bill as introduced. On the housing support grant for Shetland Islands Council, there has been a subsidy over a period of time—some £80 million in support since 1979. By anyone’s reckoning, that is a generous package. However, given the issues with which that council is wrestling at the moment, we want to ensure that we consider its finances in the round and work with it in partnership to support the transitional arrangements. That was referred to in members’ contributions to the debate. There are alternatives to simply raising rents to ensure that the impact on tenants in that island authority area is mitigated. Much of the debate focused on empty property rates relief, which is perhaps not surprising, given other discussions. I reiterate that the power is an enabling power. Why is it so important? The Scottish Government has always tried to ensure that the system of rates, rates support and rates relief in Scotland means that we have a competitive advantage over the rest of the United Kingdom. The enabling power in the bill means that we will continue to have the flexibility to change, via a statutory instrument, rates support to ensure that if any other part of the United Kingdom changes or varies its support, we can do so just as quickly and effectively—and in the same way that we can deal with the small business bonus or indeed poundage. Interestingly, the system of there being ministerial responsibility to bring regulations to Parliament for scrutiny—using secondary as opposed to primary legislation—was good enough for other Administrations in respect of poundage and the small business bonus, so why not with empty property rates relief as well? I have had a number of discussions, not just with representative bodies—as important as they are—but with individual owners of small and large properties. I have also had discussions with the Association of Town Centre Managers, the Scottish Property Federation, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry and councils, in addition to the conference to which I referred. I have consulted with a wide range of stakeholders to ensure that we can refine our policy to achieve the savings that we must make and to deliver the incentivisation to bring empty properties throughout Scotland back into use.

Of course that would be very helpful to the discussion. As part of the rates review, we will consult on how the rates system works and whether the reliefs are proportionate and contribute to sustainable economic growth. There will also be a support package for our town centres as part of the town centre review; that was a manifesto commitment and we will progress it imminently. Another measure to refine the policy could mirror the scheme in Northern Ireland, where relief is given once a property is filled. That is the type of constructive suggestion that we have heard from Mark McDonald, which will help to ensure that the policy more effectively meets the ambition that other members of the Parliament say that they share.

After passing the primary legislation, we would look to return to Parliament to introduce the statutory instruments. That could be just before or after Christmas, but we will do so as quickly as we can. There is on-going consultation and engagement. It is important that we talk to individuals, property owners, representatives and professionals who are working in the sector to ensure that we get the legislation right. We have been asked again and again by the Opposition why there has been no BRIA. I have explained the difference, and the consistent approach that we have taken in keeping with the advice on the issue. I argue that on-going consultation and refinement of policy is better than a BRIA, because we are not just consulting on what was proposed in the budget, but refining our policy as we go along to ensure that it has the greatest effect when it is implemented. I referred to the overall rates review that we will conduct. Our rates package is more generous than that in any other part of the United Kingdom, with more than £0.5 billion going towards support for a range of organisations and sectors so that they can survive. Some parties in the chamber voted against that generous package, which is the most generous in the United Kingdom. We are confident of our figures. We have been asked why they do not match up with those that the Scottish Property Federation has provided. The answer is clear: we used the data that is provided by local government and our own statisticians, whereas the Scottish Property Federation has modelled its figures on a sample. We are confident about the projected savings that could be achieved and the numbers of those who would be eligible for support. We are incentivising owners with a support package, but it is worth putting that into perspective. We have to make savings because of the cuts from the UK Government in Westminster, but we must put into perspective the £18 million of savings from the proposed changes to empty property rates relief against a rates income of £2.5 billion. Even with the proposed reforms, which may change as a consequence of the debate, the cost after reform over the revaluation period will still be £721 million over five years. That is actually more expensive than the very popular and effective small business bonus scheme, which will cost a projected £697 million over the same period. If circumstances change, we will, if the bill is passed, have the flexibility to adapt to ensure that we are at the cutting edge of delivering the right financial packages for Scotland’s commercial sector. We have learned lessons from what happened in England and elsewhere, which is why we are continuing relief for industrial and listed properties. Some anecdotal experiences have informed that opinion, which is right. It is right that we provide practical help to organisations and companies that may want to promote their empty properties further, and Scottish Enterprise and other agencies are working with us on that. However, when it comes to evidence for the policy, we cannot look at what happened in England in isolation, because the euro crisis and the recession happened when the policy there came in. Soon after, of course, came the UK increase in VAT, which had a cost to the commercial sector of more than £1 billion in Scotland alone. There is no control situation to enable us to understand exactly what the impact of the policy would be or what the evidence said either way, for or against it. The policy was, of course, designed by Gordon Brown. I am not given to quoting him, but I will give again the quote that was given earlier. He said: “commercial property lying empty should not continue to be given such generous business rate relief, particularly because that leads to higher rents in the areas with highest demand.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 21 March 2007; Vol 458, c 822.] That was the Labour Party’s position, which the Tories now want to disown in the newspapers. However, the UK Government is continuing with that policy and, in spite of all the rhetoric about George Osborne reviewing it, nobody seems to have told his minister for local government, who produced a paper that said that there was no evidence that the policy had a negative effect and that changing it would be unaffordable. It seems that it is good enough for the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats in England, but not in Scotland for some reason. The Conservatives say, “Do as we say, not as we do.” Many members have helpfully explained the rationale of how reducing empty property rates relief will stimulate action and ensure that properties are occupied. Joan McAlpine’s contribution was very helpful in that respect. Jim Hume referred to the carrot and the stick, and we have both incentivisation and the proposed changes. I have outlined the maximum cost impact on the public sector, but that pales into insignificance, of course, against the £18 million saved as a consequence, which will make a contribution to local services. The policy must, of course, come with a package of actions to support our town centres. That is why I welcome the town centre review, which will take place imminently. We are working hard on the planning reforms to ensure that we create the right conditions for Scotland and the right controls to enable sustainable economic growth. It has been said that one element of the bill did not have much support. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors has said: “RICS Scotland wishes to see all land and property to have a purpose and be used efficiently. Empty property does not make valid contributions to the Scottish economy, environment or, generally, the sociability of places. Therefore, RICS Scotland agrees with the Scottish Government that the issue of unused and vacant properties needs be addressed, and would welcome positive measures that revitalise Scotland’s high streets and town centres.” Therefore, across Scotland there is increasing support for our proposed measures to realise opportunities in our communities to tackle unused and underused properties. Our approach will be further expanded in the community empowerment and renewal bill, but the package will meet both aims of achieving the savings as outlined in the budget and—as refined—delivering stimulation to support activity to fill hitherto empty properties. Up to 5,500 empty commercial properties can potentially be filled, and empty homes can be filled to house people who are in need and are desperately looking for accommodation. The measures are designed to make the greatest change to support Scotland, and I think that they will have the right effect. Therefore, I ask members to support the bill to give us the enabling power to make that happen.

Is Jackie Baillie revealing that, having supported the Scottish Government’s plans for health and social care integration, we are now seeing an exhibition of the Labour Party playing politics with that subject, as was revealed by local government Labour in The Herald?

I am sure that Lewis Macdonald wants fair representation for local government, so will he comment on the emerging practice of Labour local authorities stacking delegate entitlement in order to ensure that Labour secures positions in organisations such as COSLA?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Government’s proposed reform of empty property relief for commercial properties, as set out in the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill, which also includes a provision to allow for increases in council tax charges on certain long-term empty homes to help councils in encouraging more owners to bring their empty properties and houses back into use. In itself, the Government’s proposal in the bill will not change commercial empty property relief. The bill will simply create the enabling power to increase or, indeed, decrease the rates discount for empty commercial properties by future regulations.

I am happy to discuss that further as I continue, but the fundamental power that we are seeking in the bill is the enabling power to vary those reliefs. The member referred to a decision being made “immediately”. We are not immediately making a decision. There will be further consideration of the bill and specific regulations in due course by the Parliament. The regulations will be considered by the Parliament in the same way as the small business bonus scheme and the United Kingdom’s first and only renewable energy relief regulations have been considered. The process is accepted by all parties in the Parliament. Empty premises currently receive a 100 per cent discount for the first three months and a 50 per cent discount for an indefinite period thereafter. Industrial and listed properties receive a 100 per cent discount for the duration of the period in which they are empty. It is our intention to vary the 50 per cent discount that empty properties receive after the first three months to 10 per cent from April 2013. We have no plans to change the discount for industrial and listed properties. Gavin Brown made fair points about experience in England, and lessons have been learned from the policy that was deployed there. There are two driving forces behind the policy. First, we think that it will incentivise some landlords and property owners and managers to bring commercial properties back into use. There is evidence that rents remain stubbornly high even when there is demand to occupy properties.

I do not deny that Annabel Goldie has experience in the area. I have experience in leading a public-private partnership in Paisley, in Renfrewshire, to try to regenerate the largest town in Scotland. I am sorry to say that landlord support and engagement was part of the issue—and is an issue in trying to regenerate town centres throughout Scotland. Scotland will still have the most generous package of reliefs in the United Kingdom. That is partly due to the help of the Conservatives under the previous Administration, when we introduced the small business bonus scheme, which has been successful. The Government has continued the scheme, but the Conservatives opposed the most recent budget, which featured the scheme. The second driving force behind the policy is to raise income—that is absolutely the case. In the face of swingeing UK cuts, we have had to balance the books and reflect on the contribution that £18 million will make to local government, to help with funding in the public sector. Gavin Brown asked why there was no assessment, which is a fair question. It was deemed that such an approach would not be proportionate, given that the policy will bring in £18 million in revenue in the context of the £2.4 billion that is generated through business rates income.

I am four and a half minutes into my speech and I should make progress. Over the five-year period before revaluation, £750 million will still be dedicated to empty property relief—indeed, even after the reduction in relief the figure will be only marginally lower that it currently is. The small business bonus scheme and other reliefs, which amount to £0.5 billion every year, will continue. If members think that a reduction in rates relief is the wrong policy, I wonder why Labour introduced such a policy in 2008 and why the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats—the Liberal Democrats are again not in the chamber—retained the policy objective. If there is evidence that the policy has failed in England and Wales, why has not the policy been reversed? We want to learn lessons from what has happened in England and Wales and ensure that the policy can be deployed in a way that supports sustainable economic growth. However, we cannot disentangle the evidence, because the policy was introduced in England in 2008, at the time of the bank lending issue, changes in shopping patterns and the recession. The VAT rise that the UK Government introduced—with a £1 billion price tag for Scotland, of course—also affected the commercial world. It is fair to say that it is difficult to draw conclusions from the experience in England. However, the policy has been sustained in challenging financial times. By working through our regeneration and town centres strategies, we can ensure that there are incentives to use empty properties. Empty property relief is part of the rating system, on which we will consult during the summer. It is a property tax. Many would ask why it is just the active premises that pay that tax and subsidise closed premises in the overall tax take. We are not dismissing the concerns of the private sector. I am listening to a wide range of stakeholders on the proposed reforms to empty property relief. I emphasise that there is flexibility in our approach, which the Parliament and the committee can consider when it comes to looking at the regulations. The assessment of the policy will continue. There is no rush to make a decision. We have outlined a flexible approach and we will continue to listen to people. We will also use agencies such as Scottish Enterprise to promote properties, with the new property database that was announced recently, to give maximum possible exposure to the empty properties that exist. Whatever we do, the Scottish Government will ensure that we have a competitive edge over our counterparts in the rest of the United Kingdom. I move amendment S4M-03397.1, to leave out from “is concerned” to end and insert: “welcomes the measures that the Scottish Government is taking to help tackle the prevalence of empty properties afflicting Scotland’s high streets by creating a new incentive, which links to the Scottish Government’s regeneration strategy and future town centre review, to bring these premises back into economic use; notes that, even after reform, empty property relief will remain significantly more generous than that available in England and, in particular, that Scotland will retain 100% relief for industrial properties; notes the considerably greater impact on Scottish business of the UK Government’s VAT rise, which is expected to cost Scottish business £1 billion, and congratulates the Scottish Government on the wider package of business rate relief measures, worth over £500 million per annum, that has ensured that Scotland remains the most competitive place to do business in the UK.”

I make the point again that the Government is taking a flexible approach. We will listen to stakeholders, to the committee and to the Parliament. We are listening—we have not set in stone what we propose to do. We have outline proposals. We will continue to listen if there are any constructive suggestions.

Given that this point might well be reiterated again and again by Opposition speakers, I must point out that the issue of demolitions in England refers specifically to industrial properties. Under our proposals, such properties would still be exempt.

Margaret Mitchell paints a pretty grim picture of town centres in Scotland. If that is the case under the current regime, why is the status quo so acceptable?

I am sorry to interrupt the member’s speech, which is very enlightening, but I must clarify that we are not seeking power for ministers; we are seeking the power to vary by regulation. The regulations will be presented to Parliament for consideration. Members will still be able to scrutinise and, indeed, object to the regulations.

Michael McMahon asks how the proposal will support the public sector. He is right to identify that elements of the public sector would pay more if relief was reduced, but all the funds that will be saved—the £18 million—will go, through non-domestic rates, to public sector projects.

The Scottish Government is trying to show that it is an internationalist Government that is willing to learn lessons from across the United Kingdom. Michael McMahon rose— Oh, come on. I have only just started.

Okay.

When members kept referring to the demolition of buildings in England, I had to say that those buildings were industrial properties. The fact that industrial properties will continue to be exempt in Scotland shows that we have listened and learned and that it is the other parties that have not moved on. It appears that unionism is alive and kicking in the chamber, although policies of unionism that are deployed and implemented by the Labour Party and continued by the Conservatives and the ever-absent Liberal Democrats hold true except for viewers in Scotland, where there is—in those parties—denial on introducing and deploying such policies. The issue is serious, and I have tried to be consensual in my approach in the debate and to make it clear that the Government will continue to listen to—and to learn from—the private sector, partners and parliamentarians. I have been asked specific questions, which I have tried to answer. The debate has moved on from the debate in the Finance Committee, although I admit that a number of probing questions were asked there and that specific information was sought, much of which was provided in due course to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, including how the formula and figures were arrived at, how the policy would be deployed and how it would affect different parts of the public sector. We were able to explain that the impact of the proposed changes to rates relief would be a maximum of £300,000 for the NHS, £400,000 for Scottish Enterprise and £1.7 million for councils. However, we should bear it mind that there will be a saving of £18 million of revenue, which will all be retained for the public sector in the face of savage UK cuts to the Scottish Government budget. The Government’s flexibility and willingness to listen is very much on the record. I have had a number of meetings with stakeholders and I will continue to have such meetings as we approach the bill’s enactment and the subsequent regulations that Parliament will consider.

Certainly, I will—but after I have made my next point. Margaret Mitchell asked earlier whether we would ensure that our policy and the rates review would not be implemented in isolation, would tie in with the town centre regeneration strategy and would be worked up in partnership with the private sector. I will, of course, commit to that, because it makes sense for the rates system to be tied in to whatever incentives or town centre regeneration proposals we produce.

That is not the case at all. We are saying that the bill will give us the power to introduce regulations to vary rates relief as we do for the small business bonus scheme, so the same kind of approach would be taken. However, we must balance the budget. The figure in the budget was £18 million, but we are trying to be flexible in asking whether there are different ways in which to deploy the policy to achieve the objective of incentivisation while sustaining us against the budget pressures that we encounter. Mark McDonald made a helpful suggestion in that regard around what is happening in Northern Ireland. Despite the rhetoric, the Westminster Government and the Welsh Assembly Government have not yet changed their policies on empty property rates relief, although they may be considering doing so. The power that we seek through the bill will give us the ability and adeptness to change the policy that applies in Scotland.

I want to make progress. Northern Ireland has been able to develop an incentivisation scheme—which Gavin Brown may be interested in—to bring properties back into use. If properties that have been empty for a time are brought back into use, they may be eligible for rates relief at that point. The Scottish Government is interested in that proposal and in how it could be applied here, which shows that we are prepared to be flexible about the details when the regulations are introduced. We want to implement the policy with a partnership approach. I do not dismiss the concerns that have been expressed, but I am mindful of budget debates in the chamber in which Opposition politicians have often simply cried out for more. I come to the Conservatives’ position. At least the Labour Party supported the public health supplement, which is a radical tax that will contribute to preventative spend. The Conservatives said that the bill is the wrong prescription at the wrong time. It says a lot that they would, to fund some of their pledges, re-introduce prescription charges. Their solution to some of the budget pressures in Scotland says a lot about where in Scotland they think the burden of taxation should rest. Of course, we are judged by our deeds and not just by our words. The £18 million that would be saved or generated through reduced rates relief pales into insignificance compared with the £1 billion VAT bill that was landed on Scotland as a consequence of a UK Government decision. Through our policies and their application, the full package of rates relief that is over £0.5 billion a year, including empty property rates relief, will still be at a very generous £721 million after the reform, which will ensure that Scotland has an advantage in the competition to be the best place in the United Kingdom in which to do business. We will continue to work in partnership with the private sector and others and we will maintain our “listening Government” approach in order to achieve that objective.

I—again—make the point to Gavin Brown that a business and regulatory impact assessment would have been on the proposition that was announced at the budget. I have repeatedly said that we are listening to the various stakeholders to see how the policy might be developed. As that engagement is on-going so, too, is the assessment. Surely that shows that we are listening, that we are looking at the potential impact, and that we are taking that on board to see how we can refine the policy. Surely that is an approach that he would appreciate.

The Scottish Government will propose legislation to extend the council tax exemption for students, as set out in our manifesto. Ministers consider the current council tax system to be unfair and intend to consult others on proposals to replace it as a whole with a fairer local tax later in the parliamentary session.

Yes, I do. Whatever we do in relation to the issue, we must handle it carefully. It is important that council tax exemptions and their definition do not affect other welfare benefits to which students may be entitled.

The current council tax system is unfair and the Scottish Government will consult others later in this parliamentary session to produce a fairer local tax that is based on the ability to pay. Business rates will be reviewed over the summer.

No, I do not accept that proposition. The council tax freeze has been fully funded and has been a great relief to many households in Scotland. The financial package that ensured that the council tax freeze was in place was agreed by all parties in Scottish local government through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The council tax freeze is fully funded and sustainable, and it is a great relief to households across the country.

The average band D household will have benefited from a cumulative saving of around £487 over the period of the council tax freeze, between 2008 and 2013. That compares with an increase in the average band D council tax of £441—an increase of 62.4 per cent—between 1996-97 and 2007-08.

The review of community planning and single outcome agreements, which was conducted jointly by the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, was completed at the end of February. A set of actions to implement the review’s conclusions has been agreed with COSLA and is being taken forward.

Yes, we can. There exists a window of opportunity, now that councils have secured their mandates, through single outcome agreements that focus on the pillars of public sector reform that we set out in our response to the Christie commission. They are prevention, integration, workforce development and improved services. The new arrangements for community planning and single outcome agreements will achieve the aspiration that Mr Campbell outlined.

We have no plans at present to review the planning legislation and guidance on the siting of mobile phone masts.

It is for individual public sector organisations to determine the policy that they regard as being appropriate on location of masts on their property. Some councils have adopted a precautionary principle while others have taken a different approach. It is important that the Government remains sighted on all health and safety concerns, reviews and research, so that the policies that we adopt are appropriate and proportionate to the health concerns of our communities.

Scottish ministers consider a range of indicators when determining applications, including dated correspondence that has a legible name and return address, is received within the appropriate timescale and, crucially, gives the reasons for supporting or objecting to a development.

I cannot, of course, refer to any individual live application, but the Scottish Government expects clarity so that people know what they are supporting—or, indeed, opposing—and that the rules apply equally to both sides.

Will the member give way?

I have had no formal discussions with Aberdeen City Council on its plans to improve public buildings.

The Scottish Government has made it clear that it is up to Aberdeen City Council to decide whether to proceed with using tax increment financing for the city garden project, and that continues to be the case. In view of the referendum, it would be very disappointing if the city council did not take that opportunity.

Mr Macdonald is absolutely right. I would be the first to say that, as an independent corporate body, the council will make that decision. However, it would be wise to listen to the people of Aberdeen, who voted in a democratic referendum to proceed with that project. Perhaps the council would be wise to listen to its electorate’s views on pay rises for elected members as well.

We have been working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which represents all local authorities in Scotland, to agree protection for the most vulnerable when council tax benefit is abolished in the financial year 2013-14.

The Scottish Government has expressed its concern about many of the welfare changes that the UK Government has proposed. We will do all that we can to mitigate the impact on our local communities. On the issue of council tax benefit abolition, our actions will ensure that, in North Ayrshire, more than 19,000 people will be protected by the Scottish Government in partnership with local government. In Scotland as a whole, the figure is 560,000. Pensioners, carers, the disabled and those who are unable to work will be protected by the actions of this Government.

Local authorities’ duties to collect and recover local tax arrears are set out in legislation. It is for each authority to interpret and apply the relevant legislation when seeking to collect both community charge and council tax debts. The Scottish Government does not currently issue guidance on collection or arrears.

As I said, decisions on recovery of local tax arrears, including for council tax and the community charge, are for each local authority to make in line with requirements that are set out in legislation. Nonetheless, I am aware of the member’s close interest in the subject and can tell him that, as responsibility lies with local authorities, the Government has not been involved in formal discussions, although we would expect local authorities to pursue debts and arrears pragmatically, taking individual circumstances into account.

Is the member proposing that we remove any view that a local member should not prejudice a planning application? Secondly, does he now not support the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, which was agreed across the chamber and ensured the right of appeal to reporters?

Jackson Carlaw has somewhat disappointed the people of Scotland by outlining a prospectus for conservatism as we enter the local government elections. It was unfortunate of him to refer to leadership contests because, of course, the First Minister has been in office for longer than the party leaders that he has demolished in the chamber. I am quite sure that there will be a good result in the council elections and the independence referendum and that the First Minister will continue in his style, which all members love. [Laughter.] I admire Jackson Carlaw’s style. I love the comedy turn of his contributions in the chamber. This morning, we disappointingly heard another comedy turn instead of a proper policy speech on localism as we understand it, or how we can empower local government to make the right decisions for local people. His speech was deeply disappointing in not referring positively to what the Conservatives would do differently with local democracy and the principle of subsidiarity, which we support. The referendum in 2014 will give the Parliament and the people of Scotland an opportunity to transfer powers, not from local government to the Scottish Government, but from the London Government to the people of Scotland, either at local government or Scottish Government level. This Administration has a fantastic record of working in partnership with local communities and local government to arrive at the right decisions for local people. Let us take the historic concordat, which reinvigorated the relationship with local government. It is praised right across the political spectrum.

Of course the concordat is praised. Members should not take my word for it; they should take the word of a Labour councillor—the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities president, Pat Watters. He has praised the concordat and the Government’s continuing relationship with local government. [Interruption.] The Conservatives laugh. Pat Watters is loyal to his party, but he is more loyal to local government. The concordat ensured that the Government had a positive and constructive relationship with local government. It also ensured a new financial regime that saw local government’s share of spending increase under our Administration in comparison with spending under the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. It ensured that ring fencing was reduced. After the reform of police and fire services—which I will come to shortly—less than £6 million of local government funding will be ring fenced. That represents a 99 per cent reduction in ring fencing under the SNP Government in comparison with previous Administrations. The Tories laugh because they know how poor their record on local government is in comparison with the shining example of true subsidiarity and localism that we have seen under the SNP. The review of community planning is testimony to that. It involves our bringing all parts of the public sector together to deliver a focus on outcomes and real policy objectives that will make a difference. In partnership with the public sector and local government, we have agreed a statement of ambition for how we will work together. We have delivered joint policy development and public sector reform that will involve prevention and which will improve performance, integration and workforce development. That has all been done in partnership with local government, with a view to reaching the right decisions for local people. On police and fire reform, we will ensure that, rather than having remote regional boards, the flexibility is there for local empowerment, local decision making and local connection of a kind that we have not seen before. Through a single police service and a single fire service, we will ensure that there is local transparency and accountability. At the same time, we will protect the number of police officers on the street. We are incentivising local democracies to retain more of their local business rates to invest in their communities. What we got from the Conservatives was empty rhetoric. They whittled the issue down to being about planning; they did not mention finance.

As the member well knows, a range of funding streams go into the pot, which is then disbursed to local government in a fair way according to a regime that is agreed with COSLA and 32 out of 32 local authorities. I turn to planning and the nonsense that we are overturning applications across the country. Let us take telecommunications masts. Because of this Government’s action and the system that it has put in place, fewer applications or, indeed, appeals are coming to the reporters administration for determination than under previous Administrations. I suggest that, on matters such as telecommunications masts, the issue is less about localism and more about opportunism on the part of the Opposition parties. Why is it that telecommunications masts are safe and fine in the view of Conservatives who are in authority in England, whereas, for Conservatives in Scotland, they are not safe or fine and should not be located in particular areas? Only this morning a health report concluded that there was no evidence of such technology having a health impact, despite the perception that exists. When we discuss telecommunications masts, we should refer to the facts. I am somewhat surprised that the Conservatives now believe—

I will come back to that. Alex Johnstone is for the roll-out of broadband, but Jackson Carlaw is against it, as it requires telecommunications technology. We are considering fewer applications through the reporters, who are independent of the Scottish Government in their determinations, than were considered under previous Administrations. That applies not only to the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administrations, but to the most centralised state in western Europe, which was Scotland pre the Scottish Parliament, when we had a single secretary of state and his bureaucracy pretending to be a democracy. That shows that we have delivered on your localism agenda. You suggest that, across the country, we are overturning the views of local people on wind farms and turbines. However, for developments of more than 50MW, on which the Scottish Government makes the decisions through energy consents, local government agrees with us in two thirds of cases. On local determinations, in cases that are appealed by applicants, we agree with local government two thirds of the time. Therefore, it is patently inaccurate and untrue to say that we are overturning decisions across the country.

I have taken enough interventions. I will consider taking more in my summing-up speech. The Tory manifesto is an empty one that is hunting for a policy or cause to attach itself to. The best that you can do is localism in England, but we have already delivered.

Okay. On localism, the United Kingdom Government has adopted the big society, but we know that that really means cuts to public services. However, the Scottish Government believes in growing the third sector and social enterprises and in working in partnership with people. People will remember Michael Forsyth talking about “real devolution” in 1995. The Conservative concept of devolution is best exemplified through welfare reform. The Conservatives have not devolved the power on welfare to us so that we can create a more compassionate society; they have simply passed the burden to the weakest and most vulnerable in Scotland. The Scottish Government and I will make no apologies for protecting more than half a million of the most vulnerable people in Scotland from the Conservatives’ actions on council tax benefit and ensuring that they are protected from the consequences of Conservative decisions at Westminster. In the absence of the devolution of welfare, we have used every tool at our disposal to protect local people. We are investing in local communities through an increased share of funding, working in partnership in community planning and ensuring that we have a robust planning system and appeals process. The Scottish Government has delivered on the principle of subsidiarity while meeting the national commitments for which we received a mandate from the Scottish people in May 2011. I move amendment S4M-02687.1, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “recognises the transformation of relations with local government over the last five years from one of central government control to a successful partnership arrangement based on mutual respect, as demonstrated throughout the last five years by the historic concordat agreed in 2007, the reduction in ring-fenced funding empowering local government, the introduction of single outcome agreements and the joint development of policy, most recently in relation to the abolition of council tax benefit, and notes that this relationship was reaffirmed following the 2011 Scottish election, with local government maintaining its share of the Scottish Budget in 2011-12 and local government’s share of the Scottish Budget by the end of the current spending review period being higher than it was in 2007-08, a review of community planning and single outcome agreements, planning reforms and the ongoing development of the proposed Community Empowerment and Renewal Bill.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Like other colleagues, the member refers to an 89 per cent reduction in the block grant for local government, but does he not recognise that that excludes £2.3 billion that is raised through non-domestic rates, which is passed to local government? The figure to which he refers is only even remotely credible if we exclude that £2.3 billion for local government.

Will the member give way?

Does the member not welcome the Government direction that local accountability will be delivered through local partnerships with police? Local councils will be given flexibility on the arrangements that they reach with their local police forces and there will be a designated senior local officer.

Will Alex Johnstone give way?

Does Alex Johnstone recognise that the cost of fuel has an impact on the running of bus operations across the country and that the cost is not determined locally or in Scotland, but by the UK Government—which, of course, has access to our resources?

The member is making the argument that the SNP did not transfer to local government the resources that were ring fenced centrally. What does he make of the figures that show that, under the new financial settlement when the SNP came into office in 2007, not only did the overall share of the resource for local government increase, but what was de-ring-fenced was also transferred to local government in the main block? That blows apart his argument.

That is scaremongering.

Many people watching the debate might be slightly disappointed that we have not fully discussed the virtues of local democracy. Perhaps that is because we are only a matter of days away from the local government elections. If we were to rerun the debate at another time, it might have a slightly different style. I repeat that I believe that the SNP Government has a fantastic record on supporting local government and meeting the aspirations of local people. It is unfortunate that yesterday, when we were discussing community empowerment and community planning, we were literally trumped by other events that took the focus off the local government issues. In response to the point that she raised about centralisation, I refer Sarah Boyack to the increased share of funding for local government, which is greater than the share that it received under previous Administrations. Further, we are simplifying and streamlining Scottish society and public services by having fewer quangos and public bodies but greater democracy. That is best exemplified in my portfolio at the moment with the planning consultation, which has received support from across the board. Mike MacKenzie accurately raised the planning issues and the importance of local authorities having a sound local plan, because it can help to influence planning decisions. However, there will always be the right to appeal and ensure that there is adequate consideration of strategic issues. On local issues, why do I think that the historic concordant was so historic? I was in another place between 2007 and 2011. I was in local government and I can tell members that throughout the country local government and local people welcomed the concordant and the impact that it had on communities by removing ring fencing and micromanagement and ensuring that we delivered on outcomes—the things that really matter. People had that view right across the political spectrum. I was the leader of Renfrewshire Council for some time. The contribution of Neil Bibby in his speech was helpful, but he may want to correct the record because, contrary to what he said, the Labour opposition on the council did not put up alternative budgets year after year and it criticised public events that were supported by the people of Paisley. It criticised the spend on celebrities to bring 30,000 people to the town. What Neil Bibby did not tell members, of course, was that Labour cooncillors and their families were queueing up to get into those events. I have news for Mr Bibby: lifelong Labour Party member Moira Milton, who is still in the Labour Party but perhaps not for much longer, has said that she would encourage people to vote for the Scottish National Party because Labour has done so little in her area. I described to Tavish Scott how the Government will ensure that there will be local flexibility within the single police and fire service. In preparation for the debate, I had to read through the Conservative manifesto, and it really is a desperate attempt to try to find some policies to attach to. The only idea that was in any way interesting was the idea of having elected provosts. However, I do not hear much call for elected provosts in Edinburgh, Glasgow and other cities. Incidentally, whoever becomes provost has already been elected by the local community. We will, indeed, be judged by what we do. Jean Urquhart’s point about housing finance in Highland is absolutely correct. The members who were sniggering clearly do not understand the issue. The issue was that successive UK Governments, supported by Labour Executives in Scotland, said to local authorities, “Either transfer your housing stock or you will get no support from us.” [Interruption.] It is true. The Scottish Government’s innovation and imagination on that and many other issues, including prudential borrowing, ensure that local authorities can borrow and come up with their own financial packages, within reasonable parameters, to invest in local priorities. That is a step change in how the Scottish Government does business with local government. We offer more alternatives, more innovation and greater flexibility in how finances are used to deploy the best resources for local outcomes. Alex Johnstone mentioned the potential devolution of some powers. Let us take welfare support and the abolition of council tax benefit as an example. Only the resources were transferred—not, of course, the power to help the most vulnerable—minus a 10 per cent cut, £40 million, which would have affected the most vulnerable in our society. I return to the Government’s record on planning. We have taken decisions on fewer applications and appeals than previous Administrations and, in those that we have considered—say, in the renewables sector—we have agreed with local government more often than we have disagreed with it, which shoots the fox of our planning decisions. Let us consider the worst of all worlds: what is happening in England. We will take no lessons from what is happening there: deeper cuts in council services, compulsory redundancies and even council tax rises. That is the toxic mix in England, and we need to take no lessons on localism from David Cameron or anyone else. The Tories, of course, are late converts to it. They now believe in devolution having been dragged kicking and screaming to it. In Scotland, we have an opportunity to continue a positive dialogue with local government on what really matters. Perhaps that, our strong record in government and our fantastic team on the ground are the reasons why the SNP is fielding more candidates in the election, the Labour Party has already said that it will come second, the Tories have candidates but do not want to win where they are standing and the Liberals, as usual, are not present for the debate and have already given up on the local government elections as well.

That is not in my ministerial portfolio, but perhaps I should make it part of local government as well. I am more than happy to come back to Mary Scanlon with further details. How much further time do I have, Presiding Officer?

Liz Smith made a considered speech—

Liz Smith made a considered speech on education. There is a debate about how much more we can empower and devolve. The debate about where decisions are best taken can continue but, clearly, there is a difference between the curriculum for excellence and the management of schools. The Government has decentralised to education authorities, has supported local empowerment and supports the devolution of management within local authorities to headteachers and others to ensure that the education system is absolutely fit for purpose. I look forward to getting clarity from Margaret Mitchell on her proposals for the planning system—on how she would abolish reporters and change the system of appeals. Doing that along the lines that she may be proposing seems quite dangerous to me. The Conservatives asked about ring-fenced funding. The SNP Scottish Government is abolishing 99 per cent of the ring-fenced funds in local government as we reach the end of the comprehensive spending review, so what more would the Conservatives do? I know that they would not abolish 100 per cent of ring-fenced funds, because Margaret Mitchell asked about the discontinuation of the town centre regeneration fund, which is a ring-fenced budget that the Scottish Government set centrally. There are inconsistencies in what the Conservatives say. I am convinced that the Government’s record on local government and localism—as the Conservatives describe it—is fantastic.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

As independent corporate bodies, local authorities are responsible for the pay and conditions of their employees. There have been no specific discussions recently on those matters, although local authorities have been fully involved in discussions on the reform of local government pensions.

I thank John Wilson for that immediate promotion to the cabinet.

My promotion is supported by Jackie Baillie. It is entirely a matter for North Lanarkshire Council, as an independent corporate body, to justify its decisions. However, I can inform the chamber that no other local authority uses a similar performance pay system for its senior managers. For senior managers in the public sector for whom the Scottish Government has pay responsibility, we have suspended pay progression for 2012-13. All staff access to non-consolidated performance pay is also suspended. That seems like the right thing to do in these circumstances.

We continue to make progress on the living wage—we might return to the numbers later in this question time. More councils are delivering on the living wage, so progress is being made in the right direction. Political parties have also made commitments to that. In terms of procurement and public sector spend, the living wage will be a consideration in the forthcoming procurement bill, which will be introduced to the Parliament shortly.

The Scottish Government is committed to working with stakeholders to find new ways of adding value to, and improving the delivery of, public services. This includes exploring the potential of innovative approaches to social investment, including what might be learned from work around social impact bonds.

There is to be an evaluation of social impact bonds, and we will consider it closely in our efforts to match our aspirations on preventative spend in this outcome-focused Government. Of course, to create a better society, we will consider using resources from wherever they may come. That does not mean the privatisation of services; it means accessing innovative funding packages to make a difference in our country. I am sure that that is something on which we can all unite.

Yesterday I made a statement to Parliament outlining a package of proposals to support the continuing modernisation of the planning system.

As I said yesterday, the national planning framework 2 monitoring report has been launched, and I am sure that Mr Harvie will welcome the 115 environmental references in that document. Work will begin on NPF 3 this year, and I will take all matters under consideration. On democratising the system, I am sure that, having now read the consultation document, Mr Harvie will welcome the consultation on the proposal to enhance community participation through democratising the system with a plan-led approach in which local councils are empowered to make decisions through their local plan. That is important in a place and plan-led system. I hope that that will build confidence in the planning system and ensure that local communities’ voices are heard.

The Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 contained the most significant changes to the system in 60 years and has bedded down well. An Audit Scotland review at the end of last year confirmed that and acknowledged the Scottish Government’s leadership role, and progress that Government agencies and planning authorities had made on working together. However, it also raised concerns about performance and that the gap between planning authority income and expenditure would become unsustainable. Since my appointment in December as the minister responsible for planning, I have spoken to a wide variety of stakeholders about their experiences of the planning system. Three main themes have emerged. First, economic circumstances have changed and the planning system has a vital role to play in supporting economic recovery and growth. Secondly, leadership and culture change are the key areas on which we should focus in the next stage of planning reform. Thirdly, we should improve the system without having to go through another fundamental review of the legislative framework for planning. I will, however, pursue legislative options when and if they are required to secure the necessary improvements and outcomes. Today, I am announcing a package of measures that provide a clear road map for planning reform. Central to that is the statement on planning reform, the next steps, which builds on the 2006 act and focuses on four key areas: the promotion of a plan-led system; driving improved performance; simplifying and streamlining processes; and delivering development. I am not seeking to reopen earlier debates on the structure of the planning system; I am looking to challenge processes and practices that add little or no value. I am not proposing change for change’s sake. The proposals are about taking action, working with a range of stakeholders, to support an approach to planning that is based on place and pragmatism. The approach is not about dispensing with essential procedures or appraisals; it is about ensuring that those that are in place add value, are proportionate and are an aid, not a barrier, to better-informed discussions, including with individuals and communities, on the impact that development projects will have on each area. I firmly believe that quality of place should take precedence over purity of process, but our processes must be fit for purpose. The key to making them so is less about legislation and more about leadership that drives changes in culture and behaviour. The national planning framework set out our long-term spatial development strategy. Today, I am pleased to publish the monitoring report for the second national planning framework and to commit to starting work on the third national planning framework in the autumn. I share the aspirations for a plan-led system that promotes confidence and brings certainty for investors and communities. However, it is clear that we need to do more to realise what I believe are shared aspirations. We will take forward a series of initiatives to deliver better results in local development planning, including using the charrette approach to better involve communities and using informal gateway review processes to keep plan preparation on track. I have become increasingly aware of concerns about the local development plan examination process taking longer than expected and costing very substantial sums of money in addition to significant staff costs. Some local authorities have concerns about the impact on their ownership of the plan of the binding recommendations from reporters. Therefore, I am today launching a consultation on the options for those examinations. At present, planning performance is measured solely by speed of decision making. Although I am in no doubt that speed matters to investors and communities, certainty of timescales and predictability of outcomes are important. Last year’s Audit Scotland report recognised that, too. I am delighted that Heads of Planning Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities have been developing a new performance framework, which I am pleased to announce has been launched today. It embraces key issues such as speed, customer relationships and outcomes and is focused on driving a culture of continuous improvement across the planning service. The framework has the Scottish Government’s support, along with endorsements by several business groups and the Royal Town Planning Institute. I accept the case for better resourcing of the planning service. Audit Scotland made clear in its report that the current situation is unsustainable. Planning fees do not meet planning costs. We have been working with Heads of Planning Scotland on a new fee structure that will reflect more accurately the costs of handling planning applications, particularly complex or controversial ones, and which will ensure that applicants have to pay only one fee to cover all costs. A consultation on that is also launched today. The Government has consistently emphasised the inextricable link between higher fees and guarantees over improved performance. In discussions with stakeholders, many in the development industry have made the point to me that, if higher fees result in a guarantee of improved performance, they would support that. My intention is to consult on a proposition that, if an authority fails to deliver improved performance, steps can be taken to have the fees that are paid in that authority revert back to the current lower level. I am clear that increased fees and increased performance must go hand in hand. In my discussions with stakeholders, it is clear that there is a shared view of the need to streamline and simplify a range of procedures and practices. Over the next few months, we will work with HOPS, agencies, Planning Aid for Scotland and the development industry on a number of areas. Although the focus is on non-legislative change, I launch today a consultation on legislative changes that stakeholders anticipate. They include further changes to the arrangements for permitted developments that focus on identifying areas for non-householder developments where planning control adds little value and taking them out of the system. On pre-application discussion and consultation, we propose to remove the 12-week pre-application requirement when permission is sought to make minor or technical changes to a planning condition on a major development. Other changes include amending the management of consultations, increasing the scope of schemes of delegation and extending the types of cases with which local review bodies deal. I want to explore new approaches to appraisals and assessments, the costs of which can be excessive with no guarantee of a positive outcome. An essential part of the process is to consider the impact that a development would have, but we must ensure that the inputs to that process are fit for purpose, easily understood and do not result in abortive costs. I also want to promote a more joined-up approach to development consents. That will deliver improvements to the timeframes and the costs that planning authorities, agencies and developers face, as well as providing major benefits for individuals and communities in accessing, understanding and responding to planning applications. It is about promoting a more effective approach that maintains the quality of decision making. The current economic situation has resulted in fewer applications being submitted, and even projects with consent may have stalled. The reasons for that go far beyond the planning system, but I am determined that the system should not present unnecessary obstacles to delivery. That is why, today, I am taking a range of measures to consolidate and revise the circular on planning agreements and obligations, as well as launching a consultation on innovative approaches to delivering development. I am determined to maintain our focus on place making and building sustainable communities with the launch of our website highlighting good examples of housing design. We will be actively engaged in the follow-up to some of the more recent and successful charrettes. Future reform is not the sole responsibility of the planning authorities. We all need to play our part in delivering an effective planning system that meets our needs. Leadership and culture change are at the heart of that, and the Scottish Government will play its part in promoting the relevance of planning and the important role that it plays in shaping the future of Scotland’s cities, towns and rural areas. I publish today a comprehensive overview of how we are taking forward planning reform. Consultations will not come out piecemeal; we will take the same efficient and focused approach to planning reform that we expect others to take to planning itself. I intend to reach final views on the package later this year. Over the next few months, I hope to take part in a lively debate about planning reform—not to go over old arguments again or to air well-known issues, but to find solutions so that planning plays its full part in supporting sustainable economic growth.

The member raises a number of issues. First, on the point about the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, I point out that it is incredibly difficult to cover everything in a 10-minute ministerial statement on changes to the planning system. However, the NPF monitoring document contains a great amount of detail on the climate change agenda, the Government’s targets, its investment in infrastructure and how the debate has moved on from NPF1. Of course, we have also made a commitment to consult on NPF3 in the work that we have begun and which will progress over the autumn. The climate change agenda remains absolutely central to our considerations of how we achieve sustainable economic growth—with the emphasis on “sustainable”—and, at this point, we must do everything possible to ensure that, instead of acting as a barrier, the system contributes to such growth. On the subject of environmental concerns and community empowerment, as the consultations that are being launched today show, the Government’s considerations will impinge in no way on communities’ embedded engagement with the planning process. We front-load consultations and community engagement; indeed, our approach to place making, outcomes and charrettes demonstrates that communities will be at the heart of the planning system in a very proportionate way. Similarly, the environmental agenda is in no way affected by what we are considering in the consultations. However, there should be a more proportionate and streamlined approach to assessments to ensure that, instead of making applicants jump through a range of hoops, we combine assessments and make them more relevant to an application, thereby safeguarding environmental considerations. In such an agenda, key agencies will be important. Having met the leaders of those agencies and emphasised our message with regard to performance and engagement in this agenda, I know that they are very much up for that. They all have their specific tasks, but nevertheless they want to play their part in achieving sustainable economic growth and they will continue to have a role in that respect. As with local government through Heads of Planning Scotland, they are up for the task of delivering improved performance. With regard to fee levels, it is important to establish the link between the cost of an application to local authority planning departments and the application fee itself. Of course, the service remains subsidised but, as the consultation document makes clear, we are moving towards a maximum cap of £100,000 for larger, more complex applications. As the member is aware, that compares very favourably with the English cap of £250,000. That additional fee income should support planning departments further in their economic development and planning functions but, of course, it will be tied to performance. The thrust of all this is to ensure that we do not have to revisit the primary legislation, which is working fairly well—members should not take just my word for that; Audit Scotland and others have said so—but the 2006 act requires further streamlining to ensure that it is fit for purpose as we try to increase the pace of recovery in Scotland’s economy.

Once Opposition members have had a bit more time to read the documents, they will perhaps have a fuller understanding of what has been proposed. There is a great deal of information about the regulations that have been changed, and a range of actions will follow from today’s statement. We are trying to create a performance culture in partnership with all parts of the planning system and all those who are involved with it, including the key stakeholders. Legislative change may also be required, and there may be statutory instruments and regulation change. All that is outlined in the consultation documents and follows the theme of ensuring that we streamline and refine the process while accepting that the fundamental legislation is sound. None of the key partners that I have visited—including those in the private sector—has asked us to consider an overhaul of the planning system. They understand that, given the time, effort and energy that would be needed for that, we would lose the opportunity that we have now to refine the process and get the best out of it. I am struck by what Margaret Mitchell says about appeals and some decisions being taken centrally. Even local government has not argued that there should not be an appeals system in which some decisions can be reviewed by the reporters in determining whether the decisions are proportionate and fair. There is an issue around local development plans being determined more locally and not being binding—that debate is certainly alive—but I have never heard before from any member that there should not be an appeals structure in the planning system. The progress that we are making is perhaps the reason why, apart from in some of the language that is being used, Westminster is now following our lead on planning work, which was taken in the 2006 act—an act that predates my time in the Scottish Parliament. The principle of sustainable economic development already exists in Scottish planning law, and many of the best changes that are proposed by the Government south of the border emulate those that were made by the Scottish Parliament. The direction that we are taking is proportionate, will encourage improved performance and should result in improved statistics on the number of applications that are determined in an acceptable timeframe. That number has been disappointing, hence the Government’s action in taking steps to improve the planning system.

Yes.

I think that the consultation that we are launching today on the examination process will fairly bring out the concerns that Mark Griffin raised. We will consider them in due course and report back and take decisions. I hear the message that Mark Griffin is giving as part of that consultation.

Some difficulties with local development plans might be to do with legitimate differences of opinion about what sites can be developed, where and how. It is important that people have confidence in the development plan examinations, which is why we are consulting on how they should operate in future, to take the best practice, such as has been outlined in the context of Aberdeen. Timescales are an issue, and some authorities have been taking too long.

I think that I comprehensively covered the binding nature of reporters’ findings in examinations of local development plans. I encourage any member who has a strong view to submit their view to the consultation. We will consider submissions in due course and report back later in the parliamentary session.

Three charrettes have been undertaken by the Scottish Government, in partnership with communities. The approach is successful in putting place at the centre of the planning agenda and has been productive. I look forward to on-going work. Further charrettes will be planned and will put place at the heart of planning.

The issue is discussed in the consultation papers. I do not intend to ring fence resources, but there is a clear expectation on performance as it relates to fees. We expect better performance, and if that is not achieved the fees will be considered, in line with what is set out in the consultation. On the number of documents that have been produced, I am trying to unwind some of the unnecessary regulation and legislation that others have created. In some cases, the impact assessment is larger than the consultation document, which is just a virtue of the impact assessment. The Government and parliamentarians in previous sessions of the Parliament have helped to reduce planning guidance by about 80 per cent, so we are moving in the right direction.

The gap between the cost of applications and the fees is significant and is growing. In the words of Audit Scotland, the model “is becoming unsustainable”. Applicants will have the guarantee that there will be improved performance. The figures range from authority to authority, but there is a clear expectation of improvement as time goes on. If a planning authority does not perform, we will revisit the fees structure that operates in the area. Good work is being done, and Heads of Planning Scotland’s performance framework, which is launched today, begins the process of improving performance. Fees will lever in new investment to ensure that resources are adequate to enhance our planning and economic development system.

I believe that the current legislation on enforcement action is adequate and a matter for local authorities to enforce. There is a further issue around building standards that the Government is considering, but in essence planning enforcement is a matter for local enforcement.

Again, I refer Patrick Harvie to the range of consultation papers that we have produced. He is more than welcome to contribute to them. We have protected and completely support the community empowerment agenda and the environmental agenda that is enshrined in the 2006 act. We completely support local people in considering planning applications, but the current system is about contributing to sustainable economic growth and development. On the issue of third-party right of appeal, we believe in front-loading consultations so that there is proper consideration of applications before application and before determination. From that point of view, the community empowerment agenda is absolutely fine.

I have made a number of references to programmes such as the charrette approach, in which communities come together and help design their local community. Planning should be about place first and foremost. There is good community engagement within the planning system, and we believe in a plan-led system. That means that local, democratically elected councils develop their plans along the lines that some members have suggested. Such a plan is then endorsed and accepted. There is a debate about whether the reporter should be able to change the plan in a binding way. If, as the consultation document suggests, we hold to the principle that local communities can help to define their local plan, that should ensure that planning applications and decisions are in line with the wishes of local people through their development plan.

Can the member explain why it is that, under the SNP Government, the spending share that goes to local government is higher than the one we inherited from the previous Administration?

Proposals to amend council tax bands are considered by the assessor for each area, and any appeals are heard by a valuation appeals committee when there is disagreement on the outcome. Assessors and appeals committees are rightly independent of the Scottish Government and must interpret the law in a way that is correct, fair and consistent. I would be concerned if individuals were not being treated fairly. Ministers remain of the view that the council tax system as a whole is unfair and that the best way in which to resolve that is to bring forward a fairer tax that is based on the ability to pay.

Some boards are considering appeals that are outwith the time limit that Mr Lyle describes. I repeat that it is not for ministers to instruct local organisations. The issue would be for the courts and, if relevant, the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman. We expect the law to be interpreted appropriately and consistently throughout the country. Mr Lyle might want to direct further inquiries to the organisation that I have mentioned.

Unless it is otherwise agreed by the planning authority, the commencement of operations at a time that is outside that specified in a planning condition or agreement is likely to constitute a breach of planning control.

I say to the member, as she would expect, that it is a matter for Fife Council to pursue enforcement action, and I understand that it is doing that. It is making contact with the company to ensure that it abides by the conditions to the planning permission, and the council will continue to pursue that. Ministers have no role to intervene in such circumstances.

I am happy to receive further information and will consider what approach is most appropriate in the light of the information that I receive.

The average council tax saving for a household in Aberdeen over the five-year period of the council tax freeze up to and including 2012-13 is around £520.

Yes, I do. The Scottish Government’s policy compares very well with what is happening in England, where the council tax has increased. That will continue to be the case, even under the United Kingdom Government’s deal with local government there. In fact, around 45 per cent of households in England will face higher household bills. Again, that shows that the Scottish Government’s approach in supporting household budgets has been right. The Labour Party’s view is not consistent, of course, as it does not apply in Stirling, where the Labour Party supported a reduction in the council tax. That goes to show that the council tax freeze has been fully funded by the Scottish Government.

I regularly meet the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss a wide range of issues. My most recent discussion on youth employment was on 8 March, with Angela Constance, Minister for Youth Employment.

It is fair for the member to be parochial. After all, we have to consider various youth unemployment hotspots and how we target resources in that respect, and such issues form part of the discussions that we are having with local government and others. A range of actions focusing on youth employment are being taken, including the development of a variety of schemes in partnership with others, and we hope that our discussions with local government will soon reach a conclusion to the benefit of areas such as the one that Jamie Hepburn represents.

Since the commencement of the new development planning regime in February 2009, one local development plan has been adopted, three are going through the examination stage and will be adopted shortly, a further four are at the proposed plan stage and 15 are at the main issues report stage.

Yes, I do. I was delighted to visit Aberdeen City Council’s planning department to see the work that is going on, and I praise its effective approach in taking the plan forward, as it puts in place the foundations for development in a positive way. That good practice should be shared across the country so that all planning authorities ensure that their planning regime is fit for purpose in delivering the best possible performance to ensure that we contribute all that we can towards economic recovery.

Scottish ministers want to replace the unfair council tax with a fairer tax that is based on ability to pay.

The member should ask a supplementary. We have no immediate plans for wholesale changes to the system. However, we will bring forward proposals to exempt articulating students in the period between their studies. In our recent consultation of the treatment of unoccupied homes, we also considered changes to the discounts for long-term empty homes and the creation of new time-limited exemptions from any increase for certain homes. Those measures will be taken forward in the forthcoming local government finance (unoccupied properties etc) (Scotland) bill and subsequent regulations.

I provide the member with that assurance. Ministers of the Scottish Government want to extend, rather than scrap, such exemptions. It is a tale of two parties. The Scottish National Party in government has delivered free education while the Lib Dems have wrecked it where they are in power. The SNP Government freezes the council tax, whereas the Lib Dems have council tax increases.

Indeed. For the record, they are not in the chamber, but they are still responsible for those policies, which they are not willing to end. The continuation of that list of shame for the Liberal Democrats now includes the removal of the council tax exemption for students in England.

The Scottish Government will, in line with our manifesto commitment, consult on the replacement system and deliver it in good time. Just as we have an excellent record of delivering on manifesto commitments, I am sure that we will enjoy a great result in the referendum and the subsequent elections to an independent Scottish Parliament.

As minister, I am currently concluding the review of community planning. We have made particularly good progress. The review is co-chaired by Pat Watters, the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I can announce today that we have agreed a statement of ambition on how we can focus the community planning partners on a renewal of our ambitions. It will outline how we will integrate services in response to the Christie commission, and it will introduce a range of radical proposals that will ensure that mechanisms such as single outcome agreements are more effective.

Community development trusts play a key role in capacity building and in accessing public facilities for the benefit of the community, so they will be central to community planning and the forthcoming community empowerment and renewal bill.

On 9 February, Parliament approved the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2012, which enables Scotland’s local authorities to set their revenue budgets for 2012-13. At that time, local authorities were asked to provide formal assurance by 29 February that the approved budgets included provision to deliver certain specific commitments that were set out by the Scottish Government. Those commitments were to freeze council tax for a fifth consecutive year; to maintain the number of police officers to help to keep our communities safe; and to maintain teacher numbers in line with pupil numbers, while securing places for all probationer teachers who require one.

The budget that the Scottish Government has delivered includes money for diversionary measures in our communities, enhanced community safety, a more efficient service that is moving towards the single police and fire service, and more than 1,000 more police officers on our streets. That compares very well with what is happening in England, for example, where there has been a reduction—not a growth—of 16,000 in the number of police officers on the streets. The Scottish National Party’s record on community safety and the police service is first class. I am delighted to be able to inform members that all 32 local authority leaders have confirmed that their 2012-13 budgets contain the full provision to enable each of the commitments to be fulfilled. As a result of that confirmation, the order seeks approval for each local authority’s share of the £70 million that has been set aside to compensate councils for the council tax income that they have foregone as a result of their decision to freeze the council tax. The decision to freeze the council tax and maintain police and teacher numbers will benefit every household in Scotland. There are many other examples of how local authority budget decisions will impact on various groups of people, including the allocation of money for tackling youth unemployment and poverty, as well as providing a living wage for local authority staff, and improving infrastructure in local areas. Councils are clearly focusing on contributing to economic recovery. Those steps are very welcome and will help to deliver better outcomes for people who are living and working in our communities across Scotland. The Government’s commitment to continuing to support families in what is still a challenging financial environment is demonstrated by our on-going support for the council tax freeze. That support is vital, because it will ease the financial pressures that are being faced by households and communities, and it will stimulate our local economies, because household spending has the potential to provide a cost-effective stimulus as we work towards economic recovery. We have, of course, committed to working with local authorities to extend the council tax freeze over the lifetime of this parliamentary session. The agreement of all local authorities to extend the council tax freeze for 2012-13 means that our commitment will have saved households the length and breadth of Scotland more than £1 billion. In England between 2008 and 2011, council tax increased by almost 9 per cent, whereas in Scotland it remained unchanged. In addition, an annual study by the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy found that 43 per cent of homeowners in England will see a rise in their council tax bill next year. People in England appear to be having the worst of all worlds with deeper cuts in their council budgets and 45 per cent of all households facing higher council tax bills and other bills as a result of the United Kingdom Government’s policies. The average council tax bill for a band D property in England in 2011-12 was £1,439, which is more than £290 higher than it is in Scotland. Since the main order was approved in February, there has been one further change in relation to the distribution of the £37.6 million for the teachers induction scheme. That funding has traditionally been held back until the number of probationary teachers who are allocated to each local authority is known, when it is distributed accordingly. Following a request from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, it has been agreed to distribute £10 million of that funding up front, and I confirm that that sum is included in the amendment order for approval. The remaining £27.6 million will be allocated later in the year. I confirm that all 32 local authorities have now agreed to the 2013 targets of the business rates incentivisation scheme. That means that all local authorities will have the opportunity to directly benefit from maximising their existing business rate income and from growing their business tax base. Under the scheme, any council that exceeds its target will be able to retain half of the additional amount collected over and above the target figure. Equally, any council that does not reach its target will still be compensated by the Scottish Government up to the amount that is set out in the amendment order. The introduction of the business rates incentivisation scheme means, therefore, a winning, no-lose situation for councils and a potential gain for the Scottish Government and all the people of Scotland as a result of incentivising increased economic growth. In summary, approval of the amendment order will authorise the distribution of a further £80 million to local government, to support the essential services that local authorities deliver to our communities. If all the councils had not accepted the offer, that would have undermined the constructive relationship that we have developed with our local authorities. However, they have accepted it and they have constructed their budgets in a way that contributes to the Government’s priorities, such as the preventative spend agenda. To vote against the amendment order would be to go against the wishes of each and every local authority in Scotland and to deprive communities of £80 million of essential services, such as education, social work, police and fire services. During questions on finance, employment and sustainable growth earlier today, James Kelly suggested that the cuts to local government were disproportionate, but they are not. I have researched the figure of 88 per cent cuts to local government. It is only possible to arrive at such a figure if £2.5 billion of Scottish Government contribution is excluded from local government spend. If James Kelly wants to ignore the £2.5 billion that is going towards local government, the figure of 88 per cent would be absolutely correct, but the £2.5 billion contribution exists in reality. It is part of a fair and decent settlement for local government. He need not take my word for it, because the president of COSLA has said that our financial deal for local government is the best possible deal under the circumstances. On that note, I am happy to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2012 [draft] be approved.

Will the member take an intervention?

I think that I have wound up the debate on what I was told should be a fairly consensual amendment order. I have done my best, because the Scottish National Party Government has a very good story to tell. It appears that the Labour Party has buried a few things today. First, there is James Kelly’s assertion that we have reduced local government spending disproportionately, by 88 per cent. Yes, but only by ignoring £2.5 billion of funding to local government is that figure in any way accurate. Then there is the question of proportionate reductions in health spending and abandoning our commitment to health protection. Councillor Pentland refused to take an intervention. Do not take my word for the settlement being good. I return to the comments of COSLA’s president Pat Watters, who said that the financial packages are the best in the circumstances and represent a far better deal than England has experienced.

No, thank you. The Government will continue to spend more proportionately than the Labour Administration did when it was in office. We are protecting and growing police numbers as opposed to what is happening in England and Wales, where they are reducing by 16,000, and we are freezing the council tax. Bruce Crawford rose— I say to Mr Crawford that I know that so generous is the Scottish Government’s settlement to local government and so fully funded is the council tax freeze that the tax can be reduced in places such as Stirling. With the funding floor, issues have been recognised and things have been sorted for Aberdeen and Edinburgh. Members have referred to the strings that are attached. Strings are attached to the council tax freeze in England, too, but many English local authorities are turning them down, and they have the worst of all worlds. In England, there are deeper cuts in council budgets and council tax rises, contrary to what is happening in Scotland. For all that the Labour Party has said about disagreeing with our approach to local government finance, it will vote for the amendment order. If members ever hear the Labour Party say again that we favour the east or the west, they should remember that it is endorsing the mechanism that determines how local government funding is distributed. That exposes the Labour Party’s hypocrisy. The party conference, which I was happy to chair, was mentioned.

I am coming to Mr Kelly. Mr Kelly said that we rolled up to the party conference with good announcements for local government, and we did. Of course we did; we are entering the local government elections. When he said that we rolled up to the party conference, he was right; people were queuing up at it. Our conference was a sell-out, whereas the Labour Party has sold out on all its policies. There are United Kingdom cuts, of course, and we can play only the cards that we have been dealt. We now know that if the Labour Party had won the Westminster election, the cuts to the UK budget would have been deeper and tougher than even the Conservatives’ budget cuts, the consequences of which we are dealing with. We will put in place a budget that secures economic recovery, supports youth employment, freezes the council tax, invests in local infrastructure, rolls out broadband, supports the living wage and delivers much in many areas. That is why Labour, around the country, will shamelessly criticise it, although, when push comes to shove, it will vote for it today. As Pat Watters said, the deal is the best that local government could possibly secure in the circumstances. Perhaps that explains why 32 out of 32 council leaders are signing up to the Government’s deal on local government finance. This is a good budget. It is good for every community in Scotland, and it will be welcomed in every part of Scotland. [Applause.]

I congratulate John Park on securing the debate. In a sense, it is timely that it follows on from the living wage debate that we had last week. I can confirm that we have not yet had a response to the letter that the cabinet secretary sent to the European Commission regarding the legal issues around whether we could include provisions on the living wage in future procurement legislation, which is what John Park wants to happen, and which the Government will consider in relation to the sustainable procurement bill. In the space of seven days we are no further forward in getting a response from Europe, but we have checked with officials that they are seeking a response. The Government is being proactive in trying to secure a response rather than simply leaving it to the European authorities to get back to us.

I assure John Wilson that our officials have been proactive on that subject. They have been making contact with those authorities that have been pursuing the living wage as a policy objective, which has included looking at their procurement policies and the framework within which they operate. We have been testing our position with others and engaging in dialogue with other parts of the UK to see how the policy is being interpreted and potentially implemented. I have had information on how some of the London authorities have been applying their aspiration to deliver the living wage. Their approach is perhaps not as John Wilson suggests: those authorities, including the Olympic authorities, have been encouraging the living wage as a consideration, but it is not binding. We must be absolutely clear that they cannot make it a condition of contract in the way that some people believe that they can. Unfortunately, the issue—despite what Neil Findlay says—is at this stage a bit more convoluted. There is ambiguity around how procurement could be challenged if the living wage was made a condition in the tender process.

I am being absolutely clear with Parliament that—contrary to some of the views that have been expressed—we do not currently have the legal certainty to build the living wage into the procurement process. The Government will consider the matter, and the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment has said that we will take on board the comments on the living wage as we introduce the sustainable procurement bill. Government procurement involves a powerful spend: it is £9 billion-worth of spend in Scotland. It would be fair and reasonable for members to continue to pursue the inclusion of the living wage as a condition of procurement. However, we want to get the legalities right in view of the experience in the rest of the UK, and find out what guidance Europe can give us in that regard.

I am happy to supply Drew Smith with more information on what benefits we have been able to secure through Scottish Government spend. There have been social benefits from a range of contracts that the Government has secured, and local government is doing the same at a local level. That is to be welcomed, and it is in the spirit of what we want to achieve through the sustainable procurement bill. As I have said, we understand that there is an aspiration among almost all members in the chamber to include that issue in the bill. I may be taking my time to get to the point, but we want to have legal certainty before we make a decision. Otherwise, we would not only be taking a risk as a Government, but passing on that risk to other parts of the public sector in contracts that they may let. Neil Findlay rose— I have been quite fair in the interventions that I have taken and have not made much progress. However, I understand that there is no time limit, so we could keep going, as this is an important issue. I can tell by the expression on your face, Presiding Officer, that you want me to make progress. On the 95 per cent delivery of the living wage in the ODA contracts, the composition and design of contracts has a clear role to play in encouraging the living wage and making our aspirations possible.

I have taken four or five interventions.

Let me make a bit more progress and I will perhaps consider taking one later. It is important that our discussions lead us into debate about applying the living wage in the private sector, because we are talking about more than public sector employment. Given the compliance in the public sector, the application of the living wage in Scotland would benefit workers in the private sector even more than those in the public sector. The subject of the motion is using the living wage as a tool to tackle poverty, but it also recognises a range of other measures that we can take on child poverty and a range of other actions, which members have mentioned. Poverty in Scotland has fallen substantially since 2000. Of course, it is unacceptable that anybody should live in poverty, but that reduction is to be welcomed. Unfortunately, the pace of improvement has slowed and, because of the time lag, we do not fully understand the impact that the recession has had on the Scottish economy. The Government will shortly present its strategy on poverty. In line with previous commitments, we are delivering the various strategies on the achieving our potential, equally well and early years frameworks, which are part of the child poverty work. There has also been investment in the early years action fund, energy assistance and benefit maximisation. I welcome the support this week from the Labour Party for the public health supplement, which will contribute to preventative spending; that will also help to make a difference. I am genuinely not avoiding the question that Kezia Dugdale asked about uprating. I will check the facts and come back to her on it, but my understanding is that we arrived at the figure of £7.20 by a formula and that the figure has already been updated. I suspect that the formula means that, as that figure is reviewed and the universally accepted living wage figure is applied, other figures will fall into line. I am happy to get back to her with more information on that point. One of the briefings that we received on the living wage suggested that, going into April this year, only 17 of the 32 local authorities would pay the living wage. I will share with members the current information that I have, which demonstrates an improvement even on last week’s position. As I understand it, seven councils have introduced the living wage, five have agreed to implement it in 2012-13, four have indicated an intention to introduce it—that includes Stirling Council, which did not achieve its aspiration in its budget—and other councils are coming forward to indicate support for the living wage. That is an improvement on the position as we understood it at the time of last week’s debate, when, in response to a question, I listed councils that are delivering the living wage. I understand that the four councils that have indicated their intention to introduce the living wage are Dundee City Council, Fife Council, Highland Council and Inverclyde Council, which had not previously indicated such an intention. That represents even more progress on where we were last week. A majority of councils in Scotland are either delivering or have indicated that they will deliver the living wage. The Scottish Government has shown through its own pay policy that it supports the living wage. As the Minister for Local Government and Planning, I continue to evangelise for the living wage in my discussions with local authorities, to encourage as many authorities as possible to sign up to and deliver the living wage. We will consider procurement and any measures that we can take, because we acknowledge the importance of the issue and want to show that there is the political will to tackle child poverty. Meeting closed at 17:49.

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the Government. The bad news is that I will also close on behalf of the Government. I am pleased to see that the report of the committee’s inquiry into the living wage broadly supports the approach that the Government has been taking to implementation of the living wage in Scotland. Our approach is encapsulated by the Government’s purpose: to focus Government and public services on creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. We believe that levels of poverty and income inequality in Scotland are unacceptable and that a fairer distribution of wealth is key to tackling poverty and inequality. Addressing low pay and in-work poverty is an important part of the campaign to tackle poverty, but our powers are limited in this area, because the national minimum wage and employment issues are reserved to Westminster. The problems of in-work poverty have persisted over the past decade and, while work is still the best route out of poverty, we have to endeavour with the powers we have to ensure that work genuinely provides people with a route out of poverty.

I am sure that that could be part of our considerations for an independent Scotland. Access to this country’s full resources would give us many choices about how to invest in it. Our immense natural and other resources mean that, yes, that commitment could be considered by any Parliament in an independent Scotland. We are striving to ensure that the workforce in Scotland has the abilities and skills to get and retain good-quality, well-paid jobs. We are also doing all that we can with the powers available to us to ensure that Scotland is a place where companies can flourish and are able to choose to pay a living wage to their staff. It will come as no surprise to anyone in the chamber to hear that I believe that we could better serve the people of Scotland in eradicating poverty and reducing income inequalities if responsibilities in relation to wage rates and the tax and benefit system lay with this Parliament.

Such decision making is a matter for local government discretion. We do not have to create funds to achieve a policy objective, and I announced last week that a majority of Scotland’s councils are implementing the living wage. That is about good partnership and discussions, rather than the creation of a ring-fenced fund, in achieving a policy objective. We are moving in the right direction. There is an argument—based if not on fact, then certainly on perception—that some people who receive a pay rise, including part-time workers, may be adversely affected by the benefits system. We must take that into account in considering the living wage. I am not saying that the living wage should not be paid; I am saying that the benefits system should support people in work, rather than discriminate against them. Such powers should rest with this Parliament. We could have a range of powers and could do so much more if we had absolute control over the economic levers and the benefits system. We fully support the principle of the living wage, and by implementing it in our own pay policy—by paying our own employees the living wage—we are leading the way and setting an example. We encourage all employers in the public, private and third sectors in Scotland to do likewise, but they must take those decisions. I welcome the fact that a majority of local authorities are implementing the living wage. I welcome what Joe FitzPatrick has said about Dundee. The administration in Stirling proposed a living wage in its budget, but that budget motion did not succeed. Councils are autonomous, independent bodies that decide their own terms and conditions of employment and set their own rates of pay. Therefore, the question whether to adopt the living wage is one for them, not the Scottish Government. I have, however, been very proactive on the subject—I accept the view that Parliament and the Government should be proactive on the living wage. I was pleased that, in its report, the committee recognises the need for individual local authorities to consider their own circumstances when deciding whether to adopt the living wage.

Six councils have agreed to implement the living wage for the financial year 2012-13: Clackmannanshire, Falkirk, Moray, North Lanarkshire, Perth and Kinross, and Renfrewshire. Two councils have indicated their intention to introduce the living wage: Aberdeen and South Ayrshire. Four councils, in addition to those that I have just mentioned, deliver the living wage, in a de facto sense: East Dunbartonshire; Shetland; Orkney; and the Western Isles. I hope that that satisfies the member. Those authorities have signed up to the living wage and intend to deliver it. That puts us in a position in which the majority are delivering this policy commitment. To be clear, I want to work to ensure that all 32 councils deliver the living wage. The Scottish Government will continue to encourage everyone in the public sector, including local authorities, to adopt the living wage. We have led by example. Procurement is a key issue, which I am sure that members will raise and which is covered in the inquiry report. As part of its inquiry, the committee considered the issues that are associated with making payment of the living wage a criterion in the public procurement process. As was made clear in the evidence to the inquiry, European Union case law suggests that the extent to which public bodies can require contractors to pay their staff the living wage as part of the procurement process is limited. We have made inquiries on the matter to the European Commission, as it was suggested that we do, and we await a response. I can provide no further information on that yet. We require feedback from Europe before we can take the matter forward. The issue will be considered in relation to the sustainable procurement bill, and it would not be unreasonable for members to continue to pursue the inclusion of the living wage in the bill. I am conscious of time. I might cover more issues in my closing speech. It remains the Scottish Government’s view that the living wage should be rolled out. We have led by example and will include it in future work, so that we can achieve the aspiration that members have and will continue to express in relation to the living wage.

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that with regard to that which is in our control in terms of our legal competence, our finance and the areas about which there is clarity, we have acted to deliver a pay policy that, in a de facto sense, delivers the living wage?

I will begin with the final point that was made, on trying to get 32 of the 32 local authorities to deliver the living wage. I make no apology for trying to get 100 per cent compliance with the policy, and I will certainly continue to do that, although I will try to deliver it in a partnership process, of course. John Pentland is quite right to recognise that his administration back at the ranch is moving towards the living wage. I know that that was a matter of negotiation with the local trade unions. It would have been wrong of the Government to step in and ride a coach and horses right through negotiations with a local authority. That is why a nationally imposed approach is not relevant to the living wage. A partnership approach in which local democracy is recognised is far more important. I want to be generous. North Lanarkshire Council agreed to introduce the living wage only after my ministerial visit, of course, but who is more responsible for that agreement—Jim McCabe or me? In fairness, the answer is Jim McCabe, as the leader of the council, although perhaps not all SNP members appreciate that. That agreement was, of course, set against the backdrop of a very good financial deal for local government, which made the policy possible in North Lanarkshire and in many other parts of Scotland. I am happy that, as a parting gift, Renfrewshire Council, which I was a member of, has also implemented the living wage. I do not think that party politics is the reason why some parties are choosing to implement the living wage and others are not, as some people have suggested. Even the Conservatives in South Ayrshire are implementing it. That just goes to show that, while the forces of conservatism are alive in the chamber, there are more moderate forces out there on the ground. The debate has been constructive and helpful. I agree with Gavin Brown that this new process or journey is particularly welcome, because it allows the Government the time and the opportunity to reflect on what is said and to take the issue forward in future debates, such as the one that we will have next week. There is a clear relationship between the living wage and the minimum wage. More people in the private sector will benefit from the living wage through procurement than would benefit if it were simply implemented in the public sector, even where that is the aspiration. Many members contributed positively to the debate. I thank Bill Walker for the philosophical journey that we enjoyed; John Park for his consistency and challenging approach; Kezia Dugdale and Sarah Boyack for their suggestions—I am not sure that Kezia Dugdale’s approach to the debate brings closure to the subject, as I suspect that we have only just begun—and John Wilson for his work on low pay. I also thank Mark McDonald, Maureen Watt and John Mason for their valid and pertinent points on the need to recognise local democracy. That point is frequently made to me by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in discussions on achieving partnership principles. I welcome Margaret Mitchell’s speech. It reflects the forces of conservatism, but it is important that that voice is heard so that, having debated it, we can at least pretend that those views do not exist. However, I must say that we got a wee bit lost on some of the benefits of the living wage and increasing pay. Let us reflect on some of them again. Some of the evidence that we have discovered demonstrates that higher wages increase productivity because an increase in the cost of losing the job creates an incentive to work harder, and positive psychological benefits may arise if a greater proportion of an individual’s income is earned rather than coming from benefits. The evidence also indicates that the living wage helps to reduce staff turnover and increases incentives for firms to train low-paid workers. If the living wage lifts people out of poverty, there are also health benefits. That is surely good for the private sector as well as for the individuals themselves. I disagree with some of what Sarah Boyack said. She challenged us to lead by example. I say to her that the SNP Government has led by example in its public pay policy. I ask her to reflect on the fact that the Government has frozen ministerial pay and that, although there is a pay freeze to protect employment numbers, it has ensured that those who earn less than £21,000 received an annual minimum increase of £250.

I understand that there are some outstanding categories in which there are still legal issues to be resolved, but the Government’s clear pay policy is that its staff will achieve the living wage. The living wage under an SNP Government is £7.20 but the minimum wage under the Labour Party was £5.63. That shows that we have progressed the issue.

No, I need to make more progress to cover some of the questions that were raised about the proposed sustainable procurement bill. There will be an opportunity to consider social benefit clauses and the living wage in that bill. We cannot prejudge it, because there must be a consultation, but there is a clear aspiration pretty much across the parties to consider the living wage in the bill. That opportunity must be set within the context of having the legal comfort of clarity on EU procurement laws and directives. We cannot take the immense risk to us and all other parts of the public sector of legal challenge if we do not get the bill right.

The legal advice includes the position that, unless we have clarity about what Europe is saying—including the court ruling that was mentioned in the report—we cannot progress the policy properly because there will be a risk of legal challenge. We must have the position clarified before we progress the policy. We will have time to consider that through the bill process.

I am conscious that I am past my time, Presiding Officer. I am happy to raise John Wilson’s point with the cabinet secretary, who will lead on the sustainable procurement bill. The final point that I want to make is that the bill will influence the £9 billion-worth of public sector spend in Scotland. Surely we can use the bill to ensure that we maximise our contribution to the environment, with sustainable economic development, socially responsible policies, ethical policies and further innovation to meet many of the aspirations that have been expressed in today’s debate.

I have had several discussions recently with local authorities that have included the Scottish living wage. I welcome the fact that a number of local authorities have already introduced the living wage or are committed to doing so. The Government will continue to encourage all public sector employers to introduce the Scottish living wage. However, it is a matter for local authorities as independent corporate bodies to set their own rates of pay and to determine whether to implement the living wage.

I entirely agree with Margaret Burgess. It is welcome that many councils have moved towards implementing the living wage. I can announce to the Parliament that seven councils have already introduced the living wage; six have agreed to implement it in their budgets for 2012-13; two have indicated their intention to introduce it; and four councils, although they do not state the living wage as a policy, are de facto delivering it. That means that, for the first time, the majority of councils are implementing the living wage.

Yes. I reassure John Park that, in the individual local authority visits that I have undertaken, I raised the living wage and re-emphasised the Government’s position on rolling it out across all parts of the public sector. Also, at a recent meeting with Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leaders, we explained our position on the living wage. We will continue to do so and to work in partnership with local government to ensure that all 32 local authorities sign up to the policy.

I am aware of continuing debate in the Parliament about procurement and the living wage. One matter that will have to be addressed is the European position. We are questioning a court ruling, and the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment wrote to the European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services in early December seeking clarification of the European Commission’s view on conditions such as the living wage in procurement. We will consider the matter as part of the procurement bill, but we will have to be mindful of the position that the Commission outlines. We certainly intend to consider social benefit clauses in any procurement bill that the Parliament considers.

Is the member not aware that the budget that the Labour Party failed to support yesterday assures the financial package for housing and includes a new injection of funding for housing across Scotland?

I advise the member that the calculation excluded the island authorities, for clear reasons to do with comparing like with like. Is she aware that her colleague the MSP for Orkney Islands requested a specific mechanism to benefit Orkney? We looked at that, and there was a zero-sum outcome. It appears that there are two different positions from the five-member Liberal Democrat group.

Please do not. [Laughter.]

Is the member aware that the protection of health spending in the budget, which will ensure that there is real-terms growth in that area, results in the figures that he describes? Health is supposedly a priority for parties across the chamber. Is the member saying that we should not increase the health budget in real terms?

It is unfortunate that the Labour Party’s contribution to the debate has been so predictable; it has been negative, with a complete absence of ideas about how to approach the local government budget settlement. I note, too, the absence from the chamber of members who have made a number of commitments over a period of months. They have not been in attendance today to tell us how they would pay for such commitments, particularly in their local areas. I am satisfied with the budget settlement for local government in view of the resounding mandate that the Scottish Government received at the elections, when one issue was protection of the health budget, which had a resounding endorsement from the people of Scotland. If we exclude the health figures, with the clear mandate that the Government had for that, the share of spend on local government is actually growing, contrary to what the Labour Party has said this morning. Further, on Gavin Brown’s challenge, there is not a reduction in the cash settlement but a broad, consistent and moderate cash increase over a three-year period, so local government will experience a flat cash settlement. What the Labour Party says on the share of local government spend is completely different from what it did when it formed an Administration with the Liberal Democrats. Under that Administration, the share of spend for local government decreased; whereas under the SNP Administration it has increased. Members: Hear, hear. In the financial year 2011-12, the budget protection to local government was 2.5 per cent compared with a reduction of 6.4 per cent in unprotected budgets elsewhere. We have therefore practised a methodology that protects local government finance while maintaining the commitments that we have made to the people of Scotland. If it is such a bad deal, why is it that all 32 council leaders have written to Mr Swinney to sign up to the financial package that the Scottish Government has outlined? That is not the case in England, where one fifth of local authorities will turn down funding for a council tax freeze. They will therefore have the worst of both worlds in England, with tax rises at the same time as deep cuts. The cuts for local government in England are three times deeper under the Administration there than those that we have experienced in Scotland. So, when the Labour Party tells us to look to Westminster for the answers on local government finance, I think that we will politely decline that request, because it would mean much deeper cuts in local government and the redundancies and council tax rises that people in England will suffer. We can consider, too, what the Labour Party has done in Wales. Its broad settlement there for local government is very similar to that of the Scottish Government in Scotland. So, the different approach that the Labour Party suggests here is not what it is doing where it is in power. The real-terms reduction in England will be 18.6 per cent compared with 6 per cent in Scotland. They are doing there in one year what we will do over a three-year period, which shows that our settlement for local government is far more generous. The massive investment that we will provide through the new budget finance that was approved yesterday will be welcomed across the country. However, Labour did it again today: Anne McTaggart said that Glasgow is discriminated against in favour of Edinburgh, while sitting in front of her was the Labour spokesperson, who said the opposite.

Okay, perhaps Sarah Boyack did not say it, but the Labour Party in Edinburgh says it pretty clearly. Labour councillor Ricky Henderson said that the SNP is funnelling money out of Edinburgh, but of course the Labour Party in Glasgow says the opposite. That inconsistency and hypocrisy is completely unacceptable. It is not that the SNP Administration has given up on Glasgow; it is that the people of Scotland have given up on Labour. That includes one of their own councillors—the defector, ex-Labour Councillor Rabbani—who pointed out that it seems that his party would rather pick fights with the SNP Government than stand up for the city of Glasgow. He is exposing the myth that Glasgow does not get a fair deal from the Scottish Government. I will return to health. Glasgow will, of course, be one of the major beneficiaries of the real-terms increase in health spending, which will help to turn around the appalling levels of poor health in Glasgow.

It is clear that Jackie Baillie has not been informed that the Labour Party’s position this morning has been to abandon an increase in health spending and turn to increases in local government spending. On what the SNP has ever done for Glasgow, there is the new south Glasgow hospital, the Commonwealth games investment, Clyde fastlink, the City of Glasgow College, further rail improvements and the M8, M73 and M74 work. There has been massive investment in Glasgow, which I am sure the people of that city will continue to welcome.

No, thank you. If the Labour Party continues on the current track, I am sure that it will continue to lose members from its city group. Right across the country, the Labour Party has said that the budget is unfair and that money is going to some other part of the country. In reality, the review of local government finance distribution was led by a Labour president of COSLA and a Labour finance spokesperson, and Labour unanimously approved the review when it was presented to COSLA. In fairness, I say that only Aberdeen City Council dissented, but it is now very happy with the funding package that it will receive and the 85 per cent floor that has been presented. Even in the amendment, the Labour Party makes no reference to how it would change the distribution system. Let us talk about the realities on the ground. More budgets will be set today, this week and over next week. The doom-and-gloom world that Sarah Boyack described is not one that local government, through its local settlements and budgets, is approving. Rather, it is approving—I checked this morning—new projects for youth employment, investment in infrastructure and housing, agreements to freeze the council tax, and more support for programmes that make differences to people’s lives. That is the reality right across the country. I have checked a list of Labour’s spending commitments—I do not have time to turn to the Tories’ or Liberal Democrats’ spending commitments. There is a 20-page list of spending commitments from the Labour Party, which include Jackie Baillie’s on kinship care, Elaine Murray’s on bus services, Johann Lamont’s on job creation and Drew Smith’s on child care. That is just page 1. I could go on at great length and wax lyrical about the number of completely unfunded promises that the Labour Party has made. The Labour Party says that we are targeting resources at our geographical areas of support, but it is pretty hard to be in the SNP and be biased about targeting resources to areas of support, because we represent every part of the country, such was the mandate that the party was given at the previous election. The deal is a good one for local government in the circumstances, and I think that councils will continue to be positive about the arrangements and the consensual way in which we have approached the budget discussions.

Yes, I do. What is more, there is the commitment on housing investment to meet the 30,000 affordable homes target. Will that be met in this session? Yes, it will. So—yes and yes. In summary, we have before us a budget deal that will deliver for local government and enable much progress to be made across Scotland. The Labour Party carelessly voted against it yesterday—that also goes for the Conservatives, of course. They asked about town centre support. More than £0.5 billion of rates relief in the package, which the town centres will benefit from, has been opposed by the Conservatives. We are asking members to agree to a settlement that will take Scottish local government forward by working in partnership with others to deliver on our joint priorities: continuation of the council tax freeze, further investment in education and school building, record attainment levels, record primary 1 to P3 class sizes, maintaining police numbers, housing investment, substantial youth employment schemes across the country—before the Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance, makes further enhancements to the programme—a capital boost to encourage economic recovery, the tackling of the waste agenda and environment issues, investment in infrastructure, promotion of social care, and further implementation of the living wage across Scotland.

I have three seconds left. Further financial flexibility will allow local government to deliver on its priorities. In the circumstances of the drastic Westminster cuts, this is a good, fair and positive deal for local government.

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate and presenting it in such a constructive and informative way. Indeed, all members have contributed in a helpful way and covered the country in co-operatives and what they have given us in the way of produce, models and ethics.

That is a fair point about how diversification ensures the sustainability of such projects. Of course, we are talking not just about businesses in our own country but about compassion around the world, as is shown by the fair trade movement. That is where I have an interest, not just as minister but as former chair of the Renfrewshire fair trade steering group, which ensured that the county achieved fair trade status and increased the amount of work being done on that. The Government endorses the work of co-operatives for their collaboration and their ethical approach. There should be no embarrassment in name-checking all the products and projects from across Scotland that we have talked about, because they make an important contribution. We know that co-operatives go the extra mile to support their customers and communities with compassionate policies. Many people could take a leaf out of their book on ethical policies, investment and procurement. Co-operatives are not just about worthwhile projects. There are many in the high-tech sector, such as Clansman Dynamics, delivering top-level and innovative design, and there are others, such as the Heart of Argyll Tourism Alliance, operating successfully in the private sector. The Scottish Government pays tribute to all who are involved in the co-operative movement. Jim Hume talked about being at the celebration in my colleague Willie Coffey’s community of Fenwick; for a moment, I thought that he was going to suggest that Willie Coffey was at the inception of co-operatives 250 years ago, when 16 weavers gave birth to the charter and the co-operative movement. I would continue, as Willie Coffey has done, to assert the truth that Fenwick was the birthplace of the co-operative movement around the world, to which Scotland has contributed so much. We also have to learn from that success. As capitalism is under some pressure—and even David Cameron has discovered the true benefits of co-operatives in his Government statements—we can also learn from progress around the world. Who would have thought that a co-operative might be the business model of choice going forward to 2020? It is important for co-operatives to focus on growth areas, which they are doing. A healthy economy is encouraged by healthy business ethics, such as those from co-operatives and the collaboration that they enjoy. Scotland has 485 co-operative businesses, which employ 28,500 people and have an incredible turnover of £4 billion. That is very positive. Co-operatives will continue to grow as we continue to support the co-operative movement. I pay tribute to Co-operative Development Scotland, which has supported a number of businesses. I understand that it has supported 28 new employee-owned co-operative businesses in taking forward their cases to achieve sustainability. They include Design Collective Scotland and others such as Accord Energy Solutions, Galloway & MacLeod and Hebridean Jewellery, which have transferred to employee ownership to drive future growth and sustain their business in their community. For the avoidance of doubt, I say that Co-operative Development Scotland as a subsidiary of Scottish Enterprise will continue to carry out its function and the Scottish Government will continue to support it to do so. Co-operatives have made and will continue to make a big contribution to Scotland. As a relatively new minister, I am delighted to have participated in the debate. Helen Eadie said that ministers have “magic dust”. In my initiation to ministerial office—it has taken a few weeks to get an office, but I have one now—I have not yet found the magic dust. If any civil servant wants to point it out to me, I will be happy to spread some on all matters co-operative. We come to the penultimate moment of this occasion, which does not end with my closing remarks. We will proceed to a reception to meet people from co-operative societies and celebrate their contribution to Scotland and the world. We will be joined there by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, who has a close interest in the subject. Meeting closed at 18:02.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member explain why the Labour Party not only did not put up alternative budgets during my time on Renfrewshire Council but supported the SNP’s budget in the council this year, far from trying to undo the so-called damage to which the member referred?

Will the member reflect on the fact that Graham Allen, a Labour MP from England, came to Scotland to tell us how generous the Scottish Government was in allocating £500 million to the preventative spend agenda, when the equivalent sum in England was £5 million?

The Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism attended a round-table discussion on 19 January in the Scotland Office at which relevant stakeholders, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, discussed the possible role of post offices in delivering some local authority services.

A range of considerations can be taken forward to ensure the viability of local post offices. Actions that we can take include continuing the small business bonus scheme, which has been a safeguard for local post offices. Rural post offices have been a particular beneficiary of that, as they have greater rates relief. Local government continues to talk to the Scotland Office about opportunities. A convention will be organised to debate the integration of some services with post offices, to give them the sustainability that the member seeks. I understand from discussions with the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers that nine local authorities are considering working with Post Office Ltd, as well as having the convention discussion that I just mentioned. A range of discussions is on-going to try to integrate services locally. The matter is for local discretion and local support, but the Government encourages any measure that safeguards the future of our post office network.

This has been an informative debate on a specific project and on the importance of libraries in the modern world. I congratulate Colin Keir on bringing the topic to the Parliament and sharing his enthusiasm for the project. I also congratulate members on all the speeches in the debate. Colin Keir claims to have been 10 years old in the 1970s. I am a wee bit younger and was probably just a glint in my father’s eye then, so I am not aware of the intricacies of the campaign, but I am well versed in the time that projects take to reach fruition and completion, such is their nature. Therefore, I commend and congratulate everyone who was involved in the Drumbrae library hub project. It is a good model and a good example of the public sector working together to realise a project that had popular support. It is timely that Saturday is national libraries day. I wonder whether the opening event was targeted to be close to that day. As members commented, libraries are far more than places to borrow books. The Drumbrae library and community hub is also far more than a library, as important as that is. It is testimony to its popularity that, as Sarah Boyack mentioned, more than 1,000 people attended the opening. That is a clear indicator of support. It is also encouraging that 700 local residents participated in the consultation on the design of the project. It is important to note that, if local people are involved in designing their own future, the end product should be far better for that. The Drumbrae library and community hub was a £5.7 million project, which has been delivered through the Scottish Futures Trust hub scheme. There is much more to follow. Reassuringly, it was on time and on budget. The hub is a one-stop shop that brings together the public sector to provide services in a particular area. With its emphasis on place, it is delivering in a very physical way the policy and direction of the Government around the agenda on place and integration of public services. We often hear politicians talk about how we should move towards co-location; the hub represents the physical embodiment of the integration of services, and it will ensure that different parts of the public sector work together right across the sector. David McLetchie mentioned the evolving nature of public facilities and how libraries have adapted over time. That is true. Paul Wheelhouse covered PFI and PPP, which Malcolm Chisholm would not necessarily agree with him on, but there is a difference between the hub model and PPP as regards how the profit is distributed, how the projects are run and where ownership ultimately lies. Sarah Boyack and others commented on the fact that having a cafe in the library was a result of the adoption of best practice in the private sector. It is no surprise that some book shops were popular because, as well as having a welcoming atmosphere, they had some of the services that we are now seeing in public facilities. Alison Johnstone mentioned the impetus for using libraries in new ways, the inclusion of IT and the need to consider the equality impact of facilities in different parts of Scotland. Gordon MacDonald spoke about integration and told us a bit more about the other projects that are working their way through the hub model, which are welcome, particularly from the point of view of the further integration of health and social care, and practitioners working together. Community planning is an area in which I am leading the community plan review. We want to bind the public sector together to focus on outcomes. I am very reassured by the extent to which the Drumbrae project emphasises that agenda. I understand that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment and my predecessor visited the site during construction, so perhaps I will be invited to see the finished product, which I have heard so much about this evening. Over the next 10 years, £1.4 billion will be channelled through the Scottish Futures Trust to deliver projects such as the Drumbrae hub. Such hub initiatives are certainly the way forward in ensuring that there are synergies and that we maximise the benefits of working together. At today’s meeting of the national economic forum, there was a discussion about youth employment and the need to ensure that all elements are working together and accessing the public sector procurement contracts. On the issue of how the hubs are working, the way in which the contract for the Drumbrae project was designed meant that contractors and subcontractors in many parts of Scotland benefited. Subcontractors from Edinburgh, East Kilbride, West Lothian, Glasgow, Stirling, Ayrshire, Renfrewshire and other places were pulled together to provide the necessary trades to complete the construction. The Drumbrae project is an example of meeting community need, involving local people and using public funds efficiently to deliver a product that is heavily focused on outcomes and which has created employment and economic growth. It seems like a model and approach that we should all celebrate, and I again commend Colin Keir for securing the debate. Meeting closed at 17:44.

I assure the member that, contrary to what Jackie Baillie has been saying, in no sense has local government been told to ditch or drop any commitment with regard to kinship carers.

I hope to continue the consensus, but I must set the record straight on a number of issues. I begin by saying that I am dealing with a kinship care case as a constituency member, and I completely appreciate and value the contribution that kinship carers make. They save many children from the far worse circumstances that they would otherwise face. The Parliament is united in supporting kinship carers in every way we can. In that regard, I turn to Nanette Milne, who said that the issue is about more than money. It is about support services and the range of support that is given to kinship carers, and not just about how much is received through the kinship care payment. Anyone who suggests that that is the only issue that kinship carers are interested in is well wide of the mark. We have to consider the issue in the round and look at the expansion of services and support that the Government has supported, including the national advice line and support services and a number of other measures that have been taken locally to support kinship carers. On our approach to the UK Government, Nanette Milne said that we should give it more time. The regulations and legislation were put in place by the SNP Government, but it has taken five years for successive UK Governments to recognise that the SNP is putting an impressive case on carers. Carers have waited long enough for welfare change that ensures that the payments that local councils make to them are not simply taken away on the other side through benefits clawback. Some progress has been made on some benefits, but there will still be difficulties because some kinship care payments that are made in some family circumstances will continue to be clawed back by the UK state. We should ask ourselves why we would let that be so. Why should we contribute to carers to help them to do what they do, only for the Tory Government to benefit from that compassionate contribution, which this Parliament supports? That is why five years is too long. We want the powers in this Parliament to deliver in full our compassionate policies. This is not about constitutional wrangling; it is about delivering for carers in an integrated and holistic way in this country. Everyone has recognised that budgets for support to carers have not been slashed but have been increased, but demand for services for looked-after children—and for all children in need—has reached concerning levels, so we must continue to take an approach that ensures that we address the source of the problem. We can argue about the £10 million that was put into the local government settlement. It has not, at the request of local government, been for future years. Let us talk about the £270 million on preventative spend that this Administration is delivering in partnership with local government to address the agenda of early intervention.

Jackie Baillie denied me twice. I will reciprocate on this occasion. On appreciation of kinship carers, she misquoted—

I will not, thank you. Jackie Baillie misrepresented the views that were expressed to COSLA by the minister. She also misrepresented Joan McAlpine, who said about kinship carers that the Government had achieved progress, and that further devolution of welfare powers to Scotland would also make a difference—yet more misrepresentations and misquotation from the Opposition.

No, I will not. The Opposition either believes in local democracy—

I am happier to accept Joan McAlpine’s version of what she said than Jackie Baillie’s. Jackie Baillie said that the Labour Party is a party of its word and that it will do what it says. I checked the Labour Party manifesto for last year’s Scottish Parliament election for what it said about kinship carers. It said nothing of substance on the issue of kinship care and what the Labour Party would do. Jackie Baillie is probably right, therefore: Labour would be true to its word. Shadow minister Neil Bibby will sum up the debate. Will he remind Parliament that when he was in Renfrewshire Council he voted against the introduction of kinship care payments when it was proposed by the SNP, and continued to do so? Yesterday, in the budget debate, what did we hear from the Labour Party on such a serious issue? Not a word—not a penny towards kinship carers from the Labour Party and no amendments forthcoming to ensure that if payments were to be increased Labour would deliver. Labour either believes in local democracy or it does not. Mark McDonald is right. If Labour believes in local democracy and the importance of kinship care payments it would have to explain why the four worst authorities for kinship care payments are led by Labour.

Oh. I see. That would be the council tax freeze that the Labour Party said it would continue for two years if it won the Scottish Parliament election. Of course, local government has a greater share of Scottish Government funding than the share that was inherited from the Labour Party when we came into office. The Labour Party wants to face both ways on the issue. Where it is in control, it will not deliver. That has been the pattern. Elected members in the Labour group who are also councillors will say, quite happily, when they are back at their councils, “The Government shouldn’t tie the hands of local authorities in the financial settlement.” When Neil Bibby is in Renfrewshire Council, he says, “Don’t tie our hands. Don’t ring fence funds”, and when he is in Parliament he says, “Do tie councils’ hands. Do ring fence funds.” Such is the hypocrisy of the Labour Party’s contribution. This is a serious issue. We will continue to listen on carers’ interests—on their financial and social position and their position with regard to their welfare benefits—and we will continue to invest in front-line social work services to ensure that the children of Scotland are cared for. Labour indulges in petty party politicking; we are delivering, and we have made far more progress on kinship care payments than the Labour Party could have dreamed of delivering, which is why I have been happy to set the record straight today.

It is a privilege to lead my first debate as Minister for Local Government and Planning on the subject of local government elections. This is my first opportunity to welcome the Opposition spokespeople Sarah Boyack and Margaret Mitchell to their respective roles. The 2012 local government elections will be an opportunity to renew local democracy and refresh local government’s mandate. I am sure that we all share the aim of delivering a fair and transparent election in which the lessons of the 2007 difficulties have been learned. I pay tribute to my predecessors Bruce Crawford, Jim Mather and Aileen Campbell, who began the improvements that I would like to see through. In approaching the local government elections, we have pursued the recommendations of the Gould report, and I continue to seek consensus on matters relating to those elections. The overall conclusion of the Gould report was damning, stating that Scotland’s voters had been treated “as an afterthought” in the planning and organisation of the elections in 2007. A range of actions have therefore been taken to address the concerns that were raised about the previous election, which suffered from the effects of a combination of factors. Throughout the preparations for the 2012 local government elections, we have kept at the forefront of our minds the interests of the voter and the specific recommendations of Ron Gould, which were widely welcomed and supported by the Parliament in the previous session. The Gould report found that the fragmentation of roles and responsibilities was a critical barrier to the smooth administration of elections. The Parliament passed the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Act 2009, which decoupled Scottish local elections from elections to the Scottish Parliament and provided for two five-year terms for local government, with elections to be held in 2012 and 2017. After that, local government terms will revert to four years, with local elections being held at the mid-term point of the Scottish parliamentary session. The aim of decoupling the two sets of elections was to make things easier for the voter; to put the voter first; to avoid the voter having to consider two different voting systems; to reduce voter confusion; and, just as important, to give each election its due prominence. While talking of confusion, I should say that I have been struck by the number of pieces of legislation that govern elections and how they should be run. Addressing that will not be a short-term piece of work, but I would like to see moves towards the consolidation of electoral legislation. That work would, of course, be much easier and more effective if the Scottish Parliament had full legislative responsibility for all elections, but that is for the future. For now, local government deserves a stand-alone election, in which local matters can be discussed and local candidates can have their opportunity to campaign without being crowded out by parliamentary elections. Gould recommended the creation of a chief returning officer to co-ordinate the administration of local government elections. The Government consulted on that and, following consideration of the comments that it received, introduced a bill. The resulting Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Act 2011 created the electoral management board for Scotland. The board will assist local authorities and others to carry out their functions and promote best practice in the administration of elections. The convener, who must be a returning officer, is appointed by Scottish ministers and will have the power to give directions to returning officers and electoral registration officers. Those directions will relate primarily to administrative issues. The convener must consult board members and the Electoral Commission before giving a direction. Through the same legislation, we extended the Electoral Commission’s statutory functions in Scotland to include the local government elections. That extension reflects the need to remove fragmentation of responsibilities; in addition, it will provide consistent oversight of elections. The commission has already carried out some activity on an ad hoc basis, such as the provision of public awareness campaigns, and the bill formalises that work. Another key Gould recommendation was to ensure that the relevant legislation is in place six months before an election to give administrators confidence in developing their plans for it. I am pleased to remind the Parliament that, in accordance with that recommendation, we agreed the legislation that will govern the 2012 elections at the beginning of November last year. On 3 September 2010, we published “The Administration of Future Elections in Scotland: A consultation exercise to examine the recommendations of the Gould Report to improve administration of future elections in Scotland”. It covered a range of issues, from the election timetable and the design of the ballot paper to longer-term considerations such as the voting age. We were encouraged by the quality and support of the responses that we received, which helped to shape the Scottish Local Government Elections Order 2011, including the proposed ballot paper. As recommended by Gould and others, we have tested the ballot paper design with a cross-section of voters, using the principles in the Electoral Commission’s guidance “Making your mark”. The draft ballot paper was included for public consideration in the Scottish Government’s consultation on the administration of future elections in Scotland. The aim of the testing, which was carried out by external researchers, was to assess the clarity and usability of the draft ballot paper and to make improvements at each stage. The research identified that participants liked the overall design, describing it as being clean, simple and straightforward, but highlighted a continuing issue in that participants did not have sufficient knowledge of the single transferable vote system. The report therefore recommended an information campaign that focuses on STV in the run-up to the 2012 elections. The Scottish Government accepts that recommendation and will work with the Electoral Commission and the electoral management board for Scotland to take it forward. The revised ballot paper was used in the successful bulk testing of the e-counting system that took place during the summer last year. When voters go to the polls, it is important that the arrangements for casting their vote—and indeed the process that takes place behind the scenes before election day—are as simple as possible and are consistent with other elections. In considering the regulations for this year’s local elections, we therefore examined the contents of the regulations for voting in the 2010 Westminster elections. That allowed us to pick up a number of minor changes that have been made since 2007. By incorporating those changes into our regulations—for example, changes to the electoral timetable—we have been able to ensure a degree of consistency for the voter and the electoral administrator. We gave the electoral management board for Scotland and the Electoral Commission copies of the draft order so that they could provide detailed comments. The vast majority of the comments that we received have been incorporated into the order, and I thank the board and the commission for their contributions. However interesting we make the local government elections, we are unlikely to see USA or post-apartheid South Africa-style queues in May. However, I make the Parliament aware of a new provision that addresses an issue that was experienced in England in 2010. A person who has presented at a polling station in time and is held in a queue to cast their vote may still put their ballot paper in the box after 10 pm. The inclusion of that provision seeks to address any confusion that has arisen on the technical issue of close of poll. The Scottish Government is the first Administration to include such a provision in election rules and the move has been welcomed by the Electoral Commission. We have received a number of informal representations about that change of policy from electoral administrators who feel that it might be difficult to manage. While not discounting those views, we agree with the Electoral Commission, which describes the change as a “positive step to ensuring that every vote counts in the local government elections”. To give further reassurance, the Electoral Commission is working with the electoral management board for Scotland to produce effective guidance on how to manage the provision. We have recently introduced legislation to reduce the cost of obtaining copies of the marked register. That will bring costs into line with those for other elections in Scotland. I also take this opportunity to inform the Parliament that we will introduce legislation next week to increase the spending limits at local government elections by 17.5 per cent. That is a rate-of-inflation increase since the previous review in 2005, and it responds to a unanimous request from the political parties panel that the limits be increased. As it happens, representatives had differing views on the uplift. On this occasion, I have sided with the Labour Party representative’s view on the increase. Any future increase will be a matter for further consideration and consultation. The use of single transferable voting for local government elections means that e-counting is almost inevitable.

I will expand on the awareness campaign later in my speech, but it will be broken down into phases and will involve a partnership between the Electoral Commission and councils across Scotland. The testing regime for the new e-counting system is important. Improvements have been made to the system since the previous count. As we all know, a manual count would take many days to conduct. The new regime has been thoroughly considered. The system has been subjected to more rigorous testing, which should protect against the failures of the past. The testing started in January 2011 and culminated in the delivery of a bulk stress test of the system over two weeks, when more than 500,000 ballot papers were successfully scanned and counted. Councillors, the Electoral Commission, academics, the Open Rights Group, the former Local Government and Communities Committee and representatives from the press and the media have all attended tests of the system. The system provides greater transparency. Every part of the process is fully visible to candidates and agents. Large display monitors are used to inform observers of count progress, and adjudication staff and returning officers use dual-facing monitors in executing all decisions. All 32 local authorities have committed to using the new system and we are now preparing to deliver training to the staff who will operate the system during the count. The use of electronic counting has resulted in the capturing of a considerable amount of new data. In the 2012 election, we will publish more information than before, including detailed information on the number of preferences that were given to candidates at polling stations. Candidates’ confidence in the system is important. We seek to build greater transparency, while of course ensuring the secrecy of the ballot. The availability of more detailed information is paramount in providing reassurance that the system has produced a correct and accurate result and in instilling transparency in the process and confidence in the election’s overall outcome. We are therefore considering the practical and legal issues that are involved in publishing full preference tracking at ward level, with a view to introducing legislation that allows the retrospective release of that data from May’s elections. That matter is being raised with the political parties panel. Turnout might be an issue—the decoupling of elections might contribute to that. A strong and vibrant democracy relies on people from all walks of life using their vote. Councils will run their own campaigns and the Electoral Commission will run a public awareness campaign. For the first time, the commission will have a statutory responsibility to promote public awareness at local government elections. It will run its campaign in two phases—voter registration, which will be given a clear focus, and voter information. The registration campaign will be followed by voter information, in the media and in local information booklets, that is aimed at ensuring that electors have the necessary information to cast their votes under STV. As politicians and parties, we too have a duty to reinvigorate the electorate with positive campaigning and policies that capture the imagination of the public to participate in the democracy that we cherish. Once the votes have been cast, they will need to be counted. I know that the timing of the count has provoked a certain amount of discussion over the years. The electoral management board has issued a consultation document to seek views on when the votes in this May’s elections should be counted. I understand that the board’s convener is considering issuing a direction to local returning officers to ensure consistency in arrangements across Scotland. Regardless of the consultation’s outcome, the political parties panel considers that a consistent approach is important. Over the past five years, the Parliament has embraced the Gould recommendations with a high degree of consensus. We may legitimately disagree on political matters, but we have worked together to implement the largely administrative recommendations that fall within the Parliament’s powers. However, there is one key recommendation on which no action has been taken: the full devolution of the Scottish Parliament and local government elections. It is absurd that the Parliament is not responsible for the election of its members and that we are unable to give 16 and 17-year-olds their democratic right to vote, even when that is the will of the Parliament.

I was as surprised as Patrick Harvie was that the secretary of state did not know the legal competence that he has in that regard, which the Scottish Parliament does not have. We have made approaches on the issue, but the United Kingdom Government has remained silent. We will make further approaches. I hope that the Parliament can unite today behind a concerted effort to deliver a sound election for local government and that it will continue with a consensus-based approach, acknowledge the extensive and timely preparations that have been undertaken, and call on the last outstanding recommendation to be delivered by Westminster: the transfer to the Scottish Parliament of the legislative powers for local government elections. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of local democracy and in particular this year’s local elections; welcomes the response of the Scottish Government, local authorities and others to the Gould report and the improvements that have been made in electoral administration as a result; further notes that preparations for the local government elections in Scotland in May 2012 have been taken forward in a collaborative manner with electoral professionals and local authorities including work to procure, develop and test a system of electronic counting to be used in the elections; calls on all of those with an interest in these elections to work to further increase and improve voter engagement and participation, and supports the recommendation of the Scotland Bill Committee that the UK Government should amend the Scotland Bill to devolve responsibility and powers for all elections that take place in Scotland, except those to the UK and EU Parliaments.

Does the member welcome the fact that, before a ministerial view was taken on a pay freeze for councillors, councillors themselves, through our umbrella organisation, COSLA, had volunteered to introduce such a freeze because of the circumstances in which we all find ourselves?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, look forward to the local government elections, for a range of reasons. They will be the first local government elections for some time in which I have not been a candidate. In some respects, I will miss having the opportunity to stand in a council election. Many members remarked on the fact that my name will not appear on the local ballot paper. That might encourage people to go out and vote in Renfrew North and in Mark Griffin’s ward. I can exclusively reveal today that while I have departed my seat in Renfrew North, “Alex Salmond for Renfrew North” will not appear on the ballot paper at the local government elections. In my first week in office, when looking for somewhere to carry out my duties as a minister-designate while the First Minister was away in China, I occupied his office; I may have taken his seat for a week, but he will not be taking mine at the local government elections in May. The debate has focused mainly on the election process. That is because it is important that Parliament considers all the factors that were raised during the 2007 elections to ensure that we have fair, free and transparent elections in which we can be confident that the right process is in place to deliver a clear and sound result in which we can all have confidence. I appreciate the tone of the speeches that have been made from across the chamber in trying to ensure that that is the case. Sarah Boyack raised several pertinent points about the election process and asked some specific questions. I am disappointed that the Liberal Democrats—the so-called champions of proportional representation—have been absent from this very significant debate on the local government elections. Having checked the Official Report of the previous debate on Gould, I note that the Liberal Democrats said on that occasion that they were very good at winning elections, yet the chamber is empty of Liberal Democrats this morning. I make that point because those who are enthusiastic about proportional representation in local government should be here to continue to remind us that PR has made a positive difference in local government in Scotland regarding how coalitions have been composed and how local government has been taken forward. On the timing of the count, clarity is more important than curiosity, and that is why the consultation is taking place. Sarah Boyack mentioned the pick-and-choose approach that should be avoided in terms of the Gould recommendations, and she is absolutely right. We have studied closely every recommendation in the Gould report. I am left wondering, though, why the Labour Party is moving away from its position on votes for 16 and 17-year-olds. A number of Labour figures, including the party’s UK leader and Margaret Curran, have supported votes for 16 and 17-year-olds. I wonder why Labour members have not considered that issue fully in this debate and why, too, some of them have moved away from their position in the previous parliamentary debate.

I completely disagree. There is clearly an issue about timing in respect of the Gould recommendations. If the Labour Party’s position is that the franchise should be extended to 16 and 17-year-olds, I welcome that and hope that it is consistent with other decisions that this Parliament might take. On the proportional representation campaign, there are questions about the voter education and information process that several members have mentioned. In addition to the council-led campaigns that will be delivered locally, the Government will commit £1.5 million towards the information campaign to meet the aspirations that have been outlined by members from across the chamber. There is, too, the issue of people being missing from the electoral register. Valuation joint boards take that very seriously and are already proactive in addressing it. I entirely take the point that that may also have a social and economic element, in that poorer people appear to be less likely to vote, and specific actions could be considered to deal with that. However, that legislative duty remains at Westminster, further making the Government’s point that all powers should be transferred to Scotland in relation to legislation and the administration of local government elections, in order to ensure that we can tackle issues in a holistic way. It is not good enough for the UK Government simply to say that we should be in charge of the administration of elections—that is, the donkey work and, incidentally, paying for them—but not be in control of the franchise, the electoral system and all the legislation that relates to how we deliver any such campaign and registration process. There must be a greater focus on registration, so for the first time there will be a dedicated campaign on registering to vote. Many councils already do that through a no vote, no voice campaign. This Government has delivered a local government agenda and localism. We have not gone into the details of budget, but I remind the Opposition that the share of local government spend coming from the Scottish Government is greater than that which we inherited from the previous Administration. That said, I return to the election process. It is important that we have come to such consensus on this issue. Margaret Mitchell made a fair point about the complexity of multiple systems being presented on one day. However, with regard to concerns about the interplay between future UK elections and local government elections, I hope that we will not have to have future Westminster elections in Scotland and that, as a result, they will not interfere with the polling day for Scottish Parliament or local government elections. On the question whether STV is an electoral system or a television channel, it is of course an electoral system. Although the amount of spoiled ballot papers might be low—and was in fact lower in 2007 than the amount of spoiled ballot papers for the Scottish Parliament elections—many people might still not fully understand the system or what they have actually done on their ballot paper. That is the reason for the huge voter education and information phase that comes after the registration phase. As for the point about council cuts and letting local people decide, I absolutely agree. If the UK Westminster Government had not made these cuts to Scotland, they would not have been followed through at a local level. Nevertheless, I point out that 32 of the 32 local authorities have signed up to the Scottish Government’s funding package. As for 16 and 17-year-olds, if they are good enough to die for their country, they should be able to elect their country’s Government. That is why we support giving them the vote. I was a wee bit disconcerted by Margaret Mitchell’s argument that, if we give 16 or 17-year-olds the vote, they might well not use it. I am sure that the very same argument was levelled at the suffragettes when they campaigned early in the last century to give women the vote. George Adam, who, as he reminded us, is an elected member, said that he looked forward to the council elections. Of course, he is not standing as a candidate; indeed, many of us have been freed from those elections. Nevertheless, there will be a huge debate about what local government should look like over the next five years. For example, people have considered whether it is right to have three or four candidates in a multimember ward but again, in the spirit of Gould, we would not want to change that at this time. Although the issue of party rankings and where candidates feature on a ballot paper was also considered, it turned out that the public were indifferent on the matter and, in any case, any change in that respect serves party interests rather than voter interests. As a result, we have not amended the legislation to that effect. On postal voting, there will, of course, be campaigns to encourage turnout. We have encouraged that approach and, indeed, more people have signed up to it. As colleagues have pointed out, a black belt in origami was needed to complete the postal vote form in a previous election, and we have tried to simplify that process. Although John Pentland veered off the issue of process to talk about the budget, I absolutely agree with his points about voter turnout and the Government certainly wants to encourage local people to take an interest in their council. Dennis Robertson asked about bulk stress testing of the ballot paper. I confirm to the member that the stress relates to the system, not to my emotional state come polling day. We have tested the ballot paper and the system itself to ensure that there is no repeat of the electronic debacle that some people encountered in the previous elections. Motivating people to vote should not come down solely to systems or processes. After all, political parties and candidates have a duty to do the same in their manifestos, their campaigns and what they choose to do at election time. Hanzala Malik made very important points about ensuring that every part of society is encouraged to take part in our democracy—which, as Helen Eadie reminded us, is free and peaceful. We do not face the same difficulties that other parts of the world face, which is why I am reassured by the consensus and confidence that members have expressed in the Government’s approach. I must address Anne McTaggart’s inaccurate comment that we are not making changes in the spirit of Gould. Everything that we are doing is being done in that very spirit and there have been no changes outwith the six-month approach that we have been asked to take. I am not sure that we will pick up Chic Brodie’s suggestion that our campaign slogan be “the fray in May”—campaigns will consider their own slogans. Finally, Jamie Hepburn made very helpful comments on the importance of empowering this Parliament. This debate has not been about who will run Scottish local government. That is for the electorate to decide. Instead, the debate has been about how we run the election and, given all the recommendations that have been made, I think that it has been very constructive and positive.

The UK Government is abolishing council tax benefit and removing altogether from the social security system support to help individuals to meet their local taxation liabilities. We have been working with local government colleagues to explore future means of providing relief to individuals in meeting their council tax liabilities and will consult in due course.

No decisions have been taken on how the measure will be applied in Scotland. It is wrong to assume that we will simply accept the UK Government’s decision. The Scottish Government continues to challenge the UK Government on the decision about, and direction of, the policy and we also challenge the timescale for the 10 per cent cut, the logic of and rationale behind such a move, the impact on people, and the baseline figures. I ask Jackie Baillie to join me and others in putting maximum pressure on the UK Government to steer away from what is a very reckless decision for Scotland.

I welcome the debate and commend the Labour Party for securing it. It is a wise choice of debate to have on a critical issue at this time. Although the financial climate in which we operate has changed, our ambitions for this nation and our young people have not. Undoubtedly, young people are hit hardest in a time of recession, as they are often last in the door and are denied the job opportunities that would really give them a step change in opportunities in their lives. We know that from the number of applications that are received for posts that become available. Youth employment is a key issue that the Parliament and Government should address, and I welcome the words of support from the First Minister today and the action plan that the Government will carry out. I fully endorse the cabinet secretary’s drive for sustainable economic growth as a way to drive forward opportunities for young people. I was brought up in Kirklandneuk in Renfrew, an area defined as at risk because of multiple deprivation. I was one of the lucky ones who had a chance in life, so I am only too aware of the lack of opportunities that many of my fellow young people have had. That is why a range of actions have to be taken forward in a holistic approach to give young people opportunities. Many young people are staying in education because they know that the jobs market may not offer the opportunities that they want. That is an issue to bear in mind. I am mindful of the SNP’s party-political broadcast—“What has the Scottish Government ever done for us?” Let me tell the chamber a wee bit about what the Government has done and a scheme in the area where I was raised. The school is being refurbished to be reopened in January and the scheme is getting its fair share of the £149 million that is being invested in housing across Renfrewshire. There is a new health centre, new police station and investment in roads. By the way, in all of that procurement, there were social benefit clauses to ensure that local apprentices were employed as part of the work that was commissioned by the SNP-led council and the SNP-led Government. The public sector does not need a directive to tell it to use procurement to ensure that there is local benefit in the delivery of procurement contracts, but we will welcome a procurement bill being brought forward in the Government’s legislative programme that can further strengthen the system for those that require to be told to do more, such as Labour-led authorities. If the Labour Party does not think that we are going fast enough in procurement, why did it not propose an amendment in the legislative programme to accelerate the procurement bill? It knows fine well that there is clear Government direction on social benefit in public expenditure. I will quote a line from the Smith group report that is very important and which has perhaps been missed in the debate: “We ... take the view that the pre-school years represent perhaps the greatest opportunity in determining future destinations for” our young people. What is the Government doing about that? It is investing half a billion pounds in preventative spending to give young people a better start in life. There is a fantastic difference between what this Administration proposes and what we have heard from the Opposition. Let us look at what Iain Gray has said. He said that he had a detailed jobs plan. Well, it involves 10,000 work placements and some apprenticeships from 2013 onwards. That is hardly a detailed action plan compared with what the Government is doing to provide opportunities for every 16 to 19-year-old—100 per cent delivery. I remember when that policy announcement was made in the chamber, and the Labour Party said, “You need to do better than that.” I do not know how much better we can do than 100 per cent. Of course, the Government has delivered free education and a huge increase in the number of modern apprenticeships—60 per cent higher than the number we inherited from the Labour Party when the SNP took office. We need to deliver in growth areas, such as the renewables sector. The First Minister visited the scheme that I was talking about earlier to announce hundreds of new apprenticeships in the area to give young people a chance of employment as well. I welcome one thing that the Tory-Liberal coalition has done: the UK youth contract scheme, under which 40,000 places may be created in this country to support young people back into work. However, if the Tories and Liberals had not mishandled the economy so badly, we would perhaps not need the 40,000 places to support young people into work. I listened to Iain Gray talk about the Scottish problem and the Scottish crisis and how youth employment has to be a top priority but, when it came to the recession under the Labour Government, we heard that it was an international crisis, not a Scottish crisis. We also have the Tory-Liberal alliance in Westminster trying to talk companies out of coming to Scotland, denying young people the opportunity to work in their own country. The Scottish Government is about bringing jobs to Scotland, using the wealth and immense talents of this nation to have a country that is dynamic and forward looking. If the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats think that trying to scare businesses away from Scotland is helping their constitutional argument, they are very wrong indeed. We need the economic powers and opportunities to be in one place—this Parliament—so that young people can get a proper service from a one-stop shop to support their opportunities, education and apprenticeships. The system is far too fractured. We need all employment and welfare powers to be transferred to the Parliament so that we can tackle youth unemployment in a holistic, targeted and strategic way.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member aware that in 2014, spending on further education will be around £91 per head of population in Scotland, whereas in England it will be £62 per head? Perhaps that is why the member wants independence.

The member talked about his colleagues in London. Does he agree with his Prime Minister, who said in the Parliament today that the trade unions’ strike is a “damp squib”? Will that help constructive discussion to find a resolution to the issue?

I will refer to a body that is as esteemed as the President of America: Renfrewshire Council—[Laughter.]—has been leading the way on St Andrew’s day, despite the strikes and bad weather. Does the member welcome the fact that the SNP-led administration of Renfrewshire Council has already made St Andrew’s day a school holiday?

I, too, thank Christina McKelvie for securing this timely debate. Although I want to follow the Parliament’s etiquette, I cannot help but mention that, at the start of the debate, there were 17 Scottish National Party MSPs and Labour representation, but a lack of representation from the parties of the coalition Government. I mention that because, previously, there was cross-party support on this issue. I find it unfortunate that some now seem to wish to procrastinate in supporting the nuclear veterans; as Hugh Henry pointed out, they are a diminishing band. Of course, I would not like to suggest that it is a deliberate move by the MOD or British Government to see a diminishing band of those entitled to pursue compensation. I also want to follow the etiquette that the Presiding Officer has outlined on not compromising the veterans’ legal challenge or, indeed, ourselves. I do not know what parliamentary jail looks like and I do not want to find out. The last time that I was in a police cell was related to campaigning against nuclear weapons at Faslane because of their immorality. The concept that we would unleash nuclear weapons on our so-called enemies is bad enough, but the fact that we were willing to use our own people as guinea pigs in testing nuclear weapons is even worse. Irrespective of what members think were the health consequences of doing that, using our servicemen to try out those weapons and that technology was immoral. We do not need a court of law to tell us that that was wrong. I pay homage to Ken McGinley and his association for their work. Ken in particular has also helped people with welfare issues, to ensure that widows and others have had financial support to see them through very difficult times. He has championed that cause through ill health and has not let the flame or the cause of justice die. I know about the issue because of my Renfrewshire connections—we debated it in the Renfrewshire Council chamber and all the parties agreed. It is frustrating, however, that although some people have very strong views in opposition, a lack of action is forthcoming when they make it into government in Westminster. In opposition, those people said that support—not necessarily for compensation—should be given to the test veterans, but that support has not been forthcoming and there is absolutely no sign of it being forthcoming. Why can the UK spend £100 billion on new weapons of mass destruction, but not a fraction of that amount on supporting our veterans and servicemen? That is immoral, too, and absurd with the resources that the UK has at its disposal. The work that has been carried out has been very encouraging, but the diminishing band of nuclear test veterans deserves the support of the Parliament and all members. We have constituents throughout the country who require our support. There is a degree of disappointment about how some of the cases have been handled. Files have gone missing and medical records have not been accessed, and that has disadvantaged those who have sought justice. Irrespective of the live legal case, the MOD must do better. There is a David and Goliath battle, and the Parliament should commend those who have served their fellow servicemen so well. If people think that the issue will go away because—to be frank—the servicemen are going to die, I say to them that the children of those servicemen will live on with the effects and with the battle for justice to ensure that the veterans are not forgotten and that they are given the support that they rightly deserve.

Once again, we hear not positive contributions but yet another whinge from the Labour Party. I look forward to seeing exactly what their priorities are, if Labour members ever produce an alternative budget.

Labour members have not managed to produce anything in their 20 or so minutes. At least the Conservatives offer a position on housing for members to consider. Mr Johnstone is a reasonable man—I am disappointed that I will no longer sit beside him in the Finance Committee—so I gave his speech, and particularly his comments on the right to buy, some thought. I know that a film will come out shortly that reminisces about and romanticises Margaret Thatcher, but the Conservatives have shown that they are ahead of the curve—for the first time in a while—because they want to romanticise some of her greatest policies. The right to buy may have had some attributes. Arguably, it transferred some resource.

I would like to make more progress. The right to buy involved an asset transfer to people who might not otherwise have had access to capital. The problem is that the asset transfer was not from the rich to the poor but was, in many ways, from the poor to the poor. The right-to-buy discounts that were offered have been paid for through debt that was left with the remaining tenants, who have paid through their rent and, arguably, through a lack of investment. The right to buy was not a useful tool for targeting housing investment and resource either. We know that it was taken up more in popular areas, or areas of higher demand. Rather than housing that is fit for heroes, which was the original concept of council housing, we are left with housing for the poor—in particular, the working poor. The argument that if we were to extend the discounts many people would take up the right to buy—because they can afford it and are just waiting for the moment—is ill informed, because two thirds of people who are currently in council housing rely on housing benefit, which is also under threat, thanks to the UK Government’s Welfare Reform Bill. We would end up with a further mismatch between housing provision and what people aspire to and require. As Jamie Hepburn said, a number of people have taken up their right to buy—I am aware of some former militant MSPs who took up their right to buy, despite their principled opposition to it. I am not, for pragmatic reasons, happy about the right to buy because it has not helped the housing situation in Scotland. The discounts were such that the debt burden increased and the impact on housing departments has been significant. I am glad that John Lamont touched on the local connection issue. There might be more of an issue in rural areas, but there is something quite sinister about a housing policy that starts with, “You’re not from round these parts, are you?” The Conservatives have to consider carefully what they mean by local connection, because more than 50 per cent of housing applications come from homeless people. How do we establish what their local connection is? There could be just a parochial analysis of who should be allocated housing. Surely we should allocate it on the basis of need, which must be the over-riding concern when it comes to housing.

Yes.

Further emphasis has to be placed on investing in the innovative package that the Government has created around mixed use, mixed tenure and a range of funding packages to ensure that new homes are built. Crucially, we must invest in the houses that currently exist so that they are sustainable. The Liberal Democrats mentioned the number of people on waiting lists. What they said is true, but we must ensure that the homeless are accommodated first. A large proportion of the 140,000 on the lists do not want to move; they are looking for a step up—it is aspirational. For some, that might be about improved housing and for others it might be about larger housing. A step backwards to enhance discounts for the right to buy, which would be disingenuous, misdirected and not affordable, would be the wrong step to take.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what further action will be taken to reduce litter. (S4O-00382)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response. Does he agree that the time has come for a national zero tolerance approach to litter to ensure that we address this continual problem?

Hear, hear.

The Labour Party has failed say that, where the Government overspends in sectoral budgets, it should transfer money into areas with underspends, so let us try geography. I have heard a number of Labour members say that their areas are underfunded; indeed, it appears to me that Labour members say that throughout the country. Is there any area in Scotland that Patricia Ferguson thinks is overfunded from which we should transfer resources to Labour areas that are believed to be underfunded?

The point about vacancy management and the lack of new professionals coming into the system was raised earlier. Part of the reason for that is arguably the Government’s no compulsory redundancies policy. Does Nanette Milne suggest that that policy should be abandoned?

If those areas are underfunded, what are the overfunded areas from which the member suggests we should transfer funds?

Dennis Robertson has very helpfully outlined a human perspective on the issue, which is very welcome. We have spoken today, as we have before, about the pressure on budgets and services. Others—not in this chamber—have described the changing demography as a burden. Of course, it is not a burden. We are talking about human lives—about people who are reaching a different stage in their lives—and we must recognise that in the language that we use. Dennis Robertson may have satisfied his wife, but I know that his closest assistant is Mr Q, the dog, who makes sure that he gets where he wants to go. This is a serious issue, of which I have experience, through my community health partnership and council roles. It is clear that the teamwork agenda is crucial here, that reablement and recovery are not just a catchphrase but a state of mind and that, whatever strategies are in place, they can be delivered only where public sector leaders are delivering them. Physiotherapy is a great example of where teams can work together. I was very conscious of the plethora of different physio teams in Renfrewshire—the acute sector physio team, the community health partnership physio team, project physio teams and council physio teams. Without necessarily having to spend more money, we could through greater integration achieve shorter waiting times, shorting waiting lists and a more effective and upskilled service. Within the immense resources that exist, we can ensure that there is greater and closer working, rather than the silo mentality that we experience. The cost of unnecessary hospitalisation is not just financial but human, because we are well aware that there are cases where, if someone is hospitalised, they may not get back out; their life may be shortened because of that experience. Therefore, a presumption to support people in their own home is critical. When the paramedics attend someone who has had a fall, the presumption should not be, “Let us take them into hospital, where there is adequate support”; the presumption should be that there can be an adequate response from community infrastructure services to support them, even at the earliest stage, rather than an unnecessary hospitalisation. The huge investment that is required in community infrastructure will make a difference here. I was involved in a Convention of Scottish Local Authorities negotiating team when the change fund was created, at £70 million. I remember advisers saying to us—if this is not a breach of confidence—“You will not get a penny more than £50 million, if you are lucky.” I was delighted that the end agreement was £70 million, although I note that, in my absence from the COSLA negotiating team, the fund is now £80 million. Members can draw their own conclusions from that.

I certainly could not comment on any leaked document but, if £140 million was the figure, it was very aspirational. That change fund went from zero pence under the Labour-Liberal Executives to £70 million under an SNP Administration, and has since increased to £80 million.

I want to make more progress, as I am more than halfway through my time and I think that I have made my point. Of course, that £80 million is captured within the total of £500 million for preventative spending. Some of the community infrastructure that should be developed is good practice, but it should be made core work, such as the programmes on reaching older adults and encouraging healthy lives within the community—I am sure that George Adam will cover that, shortly, from a local perspective. Fuel poverty is also an issue—the choices that many pensioners and older citizens have to make if they are to heat their homes. It is absurd that a country as rich in resources as Scotland still has fuel poverty. We would address that if we had access to all our own resources. Travel, telecare and winter preparedness are all issues worthy of consideration as well. I welcome what the minister said about taking a holistic approach, because sometimes there will be financial issues too, to do with self-directed care and direct payments. Indeed, if someone is hospitalised, they should have an immediate benefit analysis to see what financial support they can have once they go back to the community—the sooner, the better in many cases. I welcome some of the comments that have been made by the Opposition. I know that Jackie Baillie said that she may be absent from the end of the debate, but what has also been absent is any serious policy contribution from the Labour Party, particularly on its abandonment of its policy on a national care service. I welcome the abandonment of that policy.

I am in my final minute. I have learned that, if you take an intervention, you get cut off very abruptly at six minutes. I will not make that mistake again. It will cheer Jackie Baillie up to hear that I agree that the pace of change must be greater. An area that the Finance Committee is studying closely is the joint ownership agenda on issues such as delayed discharges, which social work may not see as being a core responsibility, but which health boards do. There is a HEAT target on that, which has to be delivered in partnership with social work. I hope that Jackie Baillie and her colleagues will support the new onus that we are putting on community planning partnerships to ensure that partners work more closely together.

Will the member take an intervention?

I suppose that I belong to the same generation as Neil Bibby, as well as being from the same area. I have found the cross-party nature of the debate and the contributions that have been made in it quite inspiring, and I do not feel worthy to take part in it, in the same way that I do not feel worthy on remembrance Sunday, when I lay a wreath on behalf of civic society. I do not feel worthy because I have not had to serve; I have not gone through what must be the hell of conflict. When I lay that wreath, I do it with a great burden on my shoulders, thinking about the sacrifice that other people have made. Although we must remember the dead, we must respect the living and deliver for those who come back and their families, because it is clear that conflict has a much wider impact than we realise. Many would say that my generation has had it easy. Tell that to a soldier who has come back from Afghanistan, Iraq, the Falklands or wherever. We have it easy in one respect—we are not called to serve in the way that people were in the first and second world wars. The term veteran conjures up a vision of an old man, but I checked the dictionary and it can simply mean someone who has served. They can be 21 and be a veteran. The reason I checked the definition of veteran was that I was described as a Scottish National Party veteran. I thought, “I’ve aged awfy quickly,” but of course it is about service and not necessarily age. I had a disappointing experience recently. Four years ago, a young chap came into the campaign offices during the election. He was looking for a form to register to vote, and he wanted to do his civic duty: to vote and then to join the Army. He did both. I saw him recently and he has left the Army. I asked him whether he was going to vote in the next election. He said, “I’m not sure if I’m registered because I’m homeless.” I made sure that he was housed, but I wondered why he was in that situation. Why was the discharge not good enough to ensure that he had a roof over his head? I do not know exactly what was wrong but we fixed the problem. It goes back to the point made by the minister and others about awareness of eligibility and entitlements. We need to ensure that that awareness is good enough and that our service personnel get access to what they are entitled to. I look forward to the Scottish Government’s new strategy in spring 2012. It would do well to address the gaps that have been mentioned as part of the debate. The UK Government would also do well to learn from the debate, leave aside the knockabout politics and take up the genuine issues. I compliment the work of all the charities involved. It is a poor reflection on society that we leave support for our veterans to charitable contributions. A councillor from Paisley once said to me, “We should turn it on its head. We’ll run the charity shops to pay for Trident and we’ll pay for the service personnel.” Although I say that in jest, I wonder why we sometimes allow our charities to pick up the pieces. The charities are competing with each other more than they have to. I would like more joint working, because it would be a tragedy if some services were discontinued because one charity was outbid or outmarketed by another charity. There are many charities for veterans, all doing great work, including Help for Heroes, the Royal British Legion, Poppyscotland and Erskine. Erskine, which does fantastic work, is in my constituency in Renfrewshire North and West. It is a humbling experience to visit it. I went there with the minister and the First Minister. We could not get the First Minister away, not just because of the incredible stories that we were being told but because he had a microphone and was calling the numbers at the bingo. I say that in all seriousness because when we hear the stories of sacrifices that have been made and of people’s life experiences, we cannot be anything other than humbled. We have a policy duty as well as a civic duty to ensure that we give 100 per cent support. In recognising the contribution of service personnel, I shall be parochial for a moment. Renfrewshire has more recipients of the Victoria cross—the highest medal of honour in the Commonwealth—than any other part of the Commonwealth. There are six recipients from Renfrewshire. One of them was Hugh McIver, who died at the age of 21. I went to a ceremony in France to recognise Hugh McIver’s efforts. There was no monument in Scotland for him but the French recognise him. It is typical that we sometimes do not recognise the contribution of our own in the way that others do.

That illustrates my point. We need to do more to recognise the sacrifice not just of the dead but of the living. In Renfrewshire, the veterans’ champion is the provost of Renfrewshire. I know that every local authority has a veterans’ champion. It is not just about platitudes. It has to be about recognition, delivery and support. It is important that the most senior civic figure in Renfrewshire was made veterans’ champion. We have many modern-day heroes. Some of the soldiers I know have come back from conflict having done their duty and the first thing they do is organise fundraisers for local projects and charities. They serve and they are pleased to serve, then they come back and continue in their civic duty. We in the Parliament need to live up to our duty to ensure that they get all the support that they deserve.

Does the member welcome the group that has been established by the Scottish Government and which brings together health, local authorities, MOD and other partners to ensure a top-level strategic approach to support for veterans?

Will the member give way?

The member seems to be developing an argument that some parts of Scottish society are not protected. If he thinks that the law is not yet good enough, what changes to the bill does he propose that would make an impact on sectarianism in this country?

The member makes some interesting points. In a spirit of consensus, Mary Fee, George Adam and others have complimented Renfrewshire Council on its leadership, which resulted in its achieving the best child protection report in Scotland. It is to be welcomed that the council’s director of social work, Peter MacLeod, will soon become a senior figure in the Association of Directors of Social Work. Does the member agree that it would be helpful in addressing the points that he makes about bureaucracy and having organisations that are willing and able to assist if all social work’s functions were kept together? Should we not listen to the social work body on the importance of not fracturing those functions?

I welcome the speeches of Kezia Dugdale and Liz Smith, who have brought to the chamber some issues and policy choices that are worthy of consideration—an approach that has been sadly lacking from the speeches of a number of other Opposition members in this and previous debates—so I welcome their thought-provoking comments. The issue has been close to my heart throughout my time in politics, first as a councillor, then as the leader of a council and now as a parliamentarian. Attainment among our young people is of the utmost importance, and the SNP has a strong record on the subject. The Government’s actions in its previous term included increasing free nursery provision and taking early years action, which is, under the present ministerial team, being accelerated at a welcome pace. However, it does not matter what we did in the previous term; we will be judged on what we do now, and I have enthusiasm for the Government’s programme. For example, the family-nurse partnerships initiative that is being piloted and rolled out is a welcome evidence-based programme. I will work hard to ensure that Renfrewshire is included in the next stage of that programme. In fact, I will not accept no for an answer, because we have such a good record on expanding on programmes such as triple P, which is not the public-private partnership, but promoting positive parenting. Triple P takes a whole-population approach, while the family-nurse partnership targets young mothers. That is essential to give young people the support that they require and to give their children the best possible start in life. I welcome the inclusion in the Government’s legislative programme of a new rights of children and young people bill that will be compatible with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. I also welcome the new integrated children’s services inspection to target the most excluded and the most vulnerable children. I support, too, the development of a parenting strategy. In the past, some people may have argued that that was a namby-pamby social work idea, but we know that it is absolutely necessary for many of our population. I am a member of the Finance Committee; our utmost priority at the moment is preventative spending, around which there is a great deal of political consensus. I do not like Nike as a company, but I like its slogan: “Just do it.” Let us just do it on early intervention and early action on preventative spending. I am disappointed that Ken Macintosh described the sums involved as “paltry”. I do not think that £500 million over three years is a paltry sum at all.

Mr Macintosh, I am looking at trying to change lives with £500 million of preventative spend. That will have not only cost-saving impacts, but life-changing impacts and it should be welcomed. The Labour MP who is progressing early intervention projects in England and who is doing great work has been told that if he raises £10 million, David Cameron might match it. That would mean £20 million for early intervention in the whole of England. The Scottish Government is allocating £500 million. Does that not put into perspective the priority that the Administration attaches to early intervention? That sum is absolutely incredible in a time of financial reductions that are a consequence of UK Government decisions. As I said, preventative spending is about not only cost-saving policies but about life-saving and life-changing policies. I know Ken Macintosh because, before I was elected to the Parliament, I appeared as a witness. He interrogated me in my role as leader of Renfrewshire Council and said that our record on class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 was not good enough. You were right and I told you that we would take action. I am delighted to tell you that, due to that early action on class sizes, Renfrewshire Council now has the best P1 to P3 class sizes—18 or fewer—in urban Scotland. We have a record of delivery and have risen to the challenge.

I have only one minute left, Mr Macintosh. Class sizes matter. I hear people describing teacher numbers as a barometer of success, but they are not. They are an issue, but success must be defined by outcomes: the educational attainment of our young people and their preparedness for work and for real life. That involves a whole-population approach that targets those who are most in need of support while recognising that we all have a duty to work together. The health service, councils, the third sector and even the private sector have roles to play in partnership working to ensure that we make the best policy choices for our country. The school environment in which our children are educated also matters greatly. That is why the announcement at the SNP conference that a further 30 schools will be built or refurbished—adding to the incredible record over the past number of years—is welcome. As politicians, we have a duty to the next generation. We should not only keep an eye on the next election and the knockabout that goes on in politics, but make the right policy choices so that the next generation has a fair chance and the best possible start in life. That is a commitment to which the Government will live up.

Does the targeting of smaller class sizes in areas of deprivation not have the same outcome as pupil premiums would have, in that resources are de facto directed to those who need them most?

On that point, does the member think that there is scope for more innovation? Not all places in post-16 education are in colleges, so perhaps the third sector could help by providing places in rural areas such as those that she mentions to ensure that the 100 per cent commitment on 16 to 19-year-olds is achieved.

Does the member not think that he, like many Labour Party members, is becoming victim to thinking that the debate is about the rhetoric rather than the substance of the issue, which is the independence of Scots law?

Given that the member has returned to the issue of the cabinet secretary’s style, can she suggest which Labour leadership candidate Kenny MacAskill should style himself on? Should he style himself on, for example, Ian Davidson, who threatens to give people who disagree with him a doing—allegedly?

I refer members to my declaration of interests. Like Hugh Henry, I was leader of Renfrewshire Council, but I fear that we might both fail the Mike MacKenzie test. Have we ever physically built a house? I have not and I do not think that Hugh Henry has either, but I did manage to achieve something as leader of the council. We have both worn hard hats and high-visibility jackets and attended high-profile events in Renfrewshire, but the difference is that I built houses and Hugh Henry demolished them. That is the difference between the SNP and the Labour Party when in control locally. New build is important, but we must also sustain our current housing supply. If we lost sight of that, it would be an extreme misdirection, so I want to focus on how we can sustain what we already have. In that respect, I was delighted as leader of Renfrewshire Council to lead a £149 million investment programme for the 13,000 tenants in Renfrewshire with the support of the Scottish Government. It was not easy. It required innovation, new ideas and partnership working, and we had no support from the UK Government, even though it could at the stroke of a pen have written off the housing debt—debt saddled on the tenants of Scotland—and released hundreds of millions of pounds for housing supply in this country. We also have a serious threat in the Welfare Reform Bill, as rents will become a pressure. In many areas, rent increases have been matched to inflation or perhaps slightly higher, but they are fair if the money from those increases, as in Renfrewshire, is levered in to deliver investment in housing to meet or surpass the Scottish housing quality standard that I commend the Parliament for passing. Our citizens should not be living in inadequate housing. The issue is about not just supply, but the environment that our people live in. I speak from the personal experience of living in a council house that was not the best. It had no central heating or double glazing and it was riddled with damp. I am not alone, as many people have lived in council housing, but I resolved at an early age to do something about it. When we delivered the investment programme for Renfrewshire, in incredibly difficult circumstances, I asked the director of housing, “If we see this plan through, will any of our tenants continue to live in inadequate, damp housing?” The answer was no. What a great achievement. What a wonderful thing to achieve for my community, but it was only done in partnership with a Government that was willing to innovate. We can compare that with the blackmail that we had from previous Labour and Liberal Executives and UK Governments. We have to innovate with less resource. In these challenging times, what is happening in my constituency and in constituencies across Renfrewshire, from where Hugh Henry hails? There are new council houses for the first time in 30 years, despite the difficult financial environment. There are housing association partnership homes to address gaps in supply and need. There is innovation, even though we have less resource. There is less resource not because the Scottish Government has decided on that but because the UK Government has reduced capital spend to this country and this Government. Of course, it could help further. Alex Johnstone joined in with the “Just gie’s more money” gang. The UK Government could do that, expanding the borrowing capacity to ensure that we invest in council housing and other forms of housing. We will not meet the homelessness targets if we do not ensure the sustainability of our current housing stock and develop new stock as well. We also require imaginative service reform. We should not just make a plea for more money, although more money absolutely would be nice. The current toxic mix of UK policies will certainly not help housing. I have some sympathy with what Labour members said, but they would have much more credibility in the Parliament if they named the SNP policy choices that they think are wrong and should not be progressed. Labour is not facing an election; if its members said that their priority was housing and set out where money should be transferred from, I would believe what they are saying. However, we just have crocodile tears from Labour. John Mason asked Lewis Macdonald which capital project he would not proceed with, so that we could fund more housing investment. There was silence. I make the offer to any Labour member to intervene and tell us what capital project they would not proceed with, so that they could invest in housing— Malcolm Chisholm rose—

There is silence again. Very telling, is it not? There is no credibility whatever— Members: No! Malcolm Chisholm wants to intervene.

I will take the intervention.

That was as disappointing as Lewis Macdonald’s answer to John Mason. The member answered my question with a question rather than an answer. The Labour MP who came up from England to tell the Finance Committee how wonderfully the Scottish Government was doing on preventative spend—

Can I say, Presiding Officer—

Well, I am—

Is the member not concerned that the remaining housing debt that was incurred in building those houses has been left with the remaining tenants, ever fewer in number and with an ever-increasing debt burden?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Strathclyde partnership for transport regarding fastlink. (S4O-00174)

The project is good for Glasgow and potentially good for the surrounding areas. Can the minister tell us more about the next key stage?

I suppose that I should declare an interest, given that Jackie Baillie described councils as providers. As a local authority councillor, I am a member of such a provider. It is right that we do not talk about the specifics of the Quarriers situation. All that I will say on that is that I believe that continuity of care is paramount, regardless of the outcome of the discussions between the trade unions and management in that dispute. Jackie Baillie said that she would not allocate blame but then spent a few minutes doing so. Furthermore, the allocation of blame is there in black and white in the motion, which says that the Scottish Government is responsible and sets out what it should do. There is some legitimacy to that but, although I was interested in what both Opposition parties had to say, it was what they did not say that was telling. Mary Scanlon pointed out the pressures that exist with regard to delayed discharges, but she did not indicate that the level of delayed discharges is lower under the Scottish National Party Government than it was under previous Labour-Liberal Executives. Mary Fee commented on the dispute at Quarriers and expressed her support for the workforce, but she did not mention that, back at Renfrewshire Council, she voted to close a newly built care home, which has been described since as a mistake. It was a mistake at more than one level. Jackie Baillie described quite eloquently some of the pressures on local government and care provision, but she failed miserably to tell us about the national care service that the Labour Party proposed at the election.

I am amazed that the Opposition spokesperson does not see the relevance of the Labour Party policy of a national care service to the procurement of social care. It is important that, if Labour or the Conservatives have any ideas about how to reduce the pressures, they bring forward their proposals. All that we have had is crocodile tears and empty rhetoric. Despite the doom-mongering that we have had from the Labour Party, the world that I am aware of is not as bad as Jackie Baillie makes out, and the inspection agencies would agree. It is an insult to the professionals in this country to say that they put cost before quality, human lives and the support of our most vulnerable. It is an insult to social work, to managers and to many organisations to suggest that it is only cost that matters.

I have taken one intervention and I am three quarters of the way through my time. Great work is being done by the Scottish Government on increased integration and collaboration, and shared services. Sir John Arbuthnott’s work on the Labour policy of the national care service was pretty weak, but at least it has led, in the west of Scotland, to good work on social collaboration, which will ensure that we can address the demands on services and the pressures that we face. Why say, when we involve the third sector, that it is social care on the cheap? Sometimes third sector organisations address need that would not otherwise be met, in partnership with the health service, local government and others. That is an extremely constructive way forward. How dare you describe the third sector’s support as policy delivery on the cheap. The UK cuts of the UK Government are difficult to manage, but we are weathering the financial storm and are innovating every day of the week to ensure that people get the services that they require. You have no credibility when it comes to Glasgow City Council, for instance. If it wants to improve working people’s working conditions, why has the Labour Party not increased the minimum wage or implemented the living wage where it is in administration?

Finally. I know that the Labour Party does not like accurate facts on social care, but I will give you another. There may be 32 variations in charging policy but, unless we have a unitary charging system, there will be variations. That is what local democracy is about. You either let the councils decide or you set a national charging policy. If that is the Opposition’s position, so be it, but so far it has not said anything concrete about what it believes.

Will the member give way?

13. To ask the Scottish Government how it encourages further education establishments to collaborate on course choices across the country. (S4O-00166)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is time for colleges to collaborate more and compete with one another less to ensure that student places are protected and that the quality of courses and institutions is enhanced?

Will the member take an intervention?

It will be very quick—and I thank the member for taking the intervention. Is the member aware that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities discussed the distribution of local government finance and that all parties agreed that stability was required more than radical change? That included the Conservative group.

Will the member give way?

Was the member not paying attention to the First Minister when, during the election campaign, he said that he would bring the referendum on independence forward in the second half of the term?

I am very excited by the Government’s programme for Scotland and I am excited to know that I am in a Parliament that will bring forward the referendum on independence. When the bill on that is introduced, I look forward to all the unionists voting for it to give the people of Scotland their chance, given what I have heard over the past two days. The programme for Government is positive and ambitious for Scotland, but I have heard a great deal of contradictory comment about it over the past two days. However, the programme will deliver a fairer, greener, safer and stronger Scotland. The Government will introduce 16 bills. I have heard the Opposition’s contradictory comments about that. They say that there are too many bills, then they say that there are too few. They said that they were the wrong bills, then Iain Gray apologised for saying that they were the wrong bills. We heard that we talk too much about independence, then that we talk too little about independence. The Opposition must make up its mind. The Labour Party’s slogan is “Just do more”; whatever the subject is, just do more. It was most eloquently put by Richard Baker, who said that we should do more for 16 to 19-year-olds. So, a guarantee that 100 per cent of 16 to 19-year-olds will have an opportunity to learn is apparently not good enough. However, what was the big omission according to the unionist parties? There was a grand coalition, as Liam McArthur said, between the Labour Party and the Conservative Party that it was the omission of legislation on high hedges, because hedges are growing too high. Incidentally, the hedges were growing under the Labour Party as well as under this Administration.

There we go: another manifesto commitment being delivered by this Administration. So, now we have cross-party consensus that the Government’s programme is going in the right direction. How we behave with a majority in the Parliament is important. I listened closely to Iain Gray, who said that we should not be unfettered and that we are no longer constrained by being in a minority. The way in which this Administration is behaving is completely different from how I have seen the Labour Party behave when it has had a majority in chambers throughout Scotland. Our behaviour will reflect positive ambition for the country. I have heard Michael McMahon and Jackie Baillie say that we need more legislation—rafts of new local government legislation. Surely at this time, with the tough spending commitments that we have, we should focus our energies on working together on outcomes. In many respects, new local government legislation is not necessary. Our energies should be focused on outcomes, working together, sharing services and integration. New legislation is not necessarily required to progress that agenda.

I am sure that that matter will be considered through the parliamentary process. My point is that, with the regulations, budgets and spending commitments in place, quality can be improved. New legislation is not necessarily required. If the member thinks that there is legislation that is not required in the Government’s programme, she should address that. We will do what is right and necessary, and I am enthused by the attention and focus on preventative spend and the work on early years. It was Lord George Foulkes who said that the SNP Government was doing popular things, and he was probably right. It turns out that the Administration was very popular, but the Administration also has a track record of doing what is right. Young people do not have a vote, and those in the earliest years will not have a vote for some time to come, but the focus on early intervention and the early years is necessary and right. As I said, I am enthused by what the Government has proposed in that area. We have a First Minister who is talking up Scotland and building the nation’s confidence. What do we have from the UK Government? Our Lib Dem ministers Moore and Alexander—Scotland’s answer to the Chuckle Brothers—whom we are supposed to take seriously on the economic strategy for Scotland. I am excited and enthused because we have a programme that will deliver jobs and capital investment, opportunities for all, new housing, free education and minimum pricing. It will tackle bigotry and that will deliver public sector reform, self-directed support, rights for children and young people, freedom of information and a renewed police service and fire service. That is, indeed, ambitious and exciting.

I have heard Labour members say that health should be protected and others say that education or police numbers should be protected. Will the member say exactly which budget should be reduced to vire towards education or health?

Does John Lamont agree that fewer prisoners might be in jail partly because Scotland’s crime rate is at a record 35-year low under the SNP?

Will the member give way?

4. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had with the United Kingdom Government on the issue of borrowing powers. (S4F-00091)

I look forward to those proposals being considered by the UK Government. It is clear that there is now consensus in the Parliament for the urgent transfer of borrowing powers. Does the First Minister share my belief that Scotland must have access to more economic levers to boost economic activity and support jobs? Does he welcome the comments by Lord Foulkes that the time has now come for Scotland to have full fiscal responsibility?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether procedures are in place to ensure that national health service medical staff seek a full employment history for all new mesothelioma cases.

He would, Presiding Officer.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether procedures are in place to ensure that national health service medical staff seek a full employment history for all new mesothelioma cases. (S4O-00097)

Recent reports have highlighted a 20 per cent increase in the number of women who have contracted mesothelioma, which is cancer caused by asbestos. However, the fact is that, all too often, women are not asked about their full employment history to find out where the exposure to asbestos took place. Asking all new cases specifically about their employment history not only ensures better outcomes for compensation cases but provides a better picture of asbestos exposure across Scotland. Is the minister able to comment on the legislation that the Supreme Court is considering in relation to compensation cases?

There is no doubt that the incidents that we have seen have been escalating. If the member thinks that we are going too quickly in passing legislation before the start of the new season, what kind of incident would make him think again?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government on possible changes to the Security Industry Authority and the potential impact that these may have on the regulation of the private security industry in Scotland. (S4O-00068)

The UK Government has said that it feels that the SIA is unnecessary. If the cabinet secretary agrees that moves to deregulate the SIA are wrong and simply give serious organised crime hope of muscling back into business that we have tackled, what scope does the Scottish Government have to re-regulate in a devolved Scottish context?

I congratulate Mr Malik on his thought-provoking maiden speech. In preparing my speech, I was a wee bit worried that it might feel slightly parochial. However, having heard some of the other speeches, I think that it will be equally parochial, but positively and for an important reason. I ask members to take that in the spirit in which it is offered. I hail from Renfrewshire North and West, which includes the community of north Renfrewshire and part of Paisley. My colleague George Adam represents Paisley and will jealously guard the title of MSP for Paisley, but I co-represent the town of Paisley, particularly the community of Gallowhill and the Glasgow airport part of the constituency. Every member could have come to the chamber today and spoken about why their constituency or region is wonderful and has great cultural positives. I will take great pleasure in doing that for Renfrewshire North and West. Paisley is, of course, Scotland’s largest town and it has a wonderful history of weaving, including the story of sma’ shot and the radical workers who rebelled to get the payment that they were due, thereby creating new law on workers’ rights. Paisley’s contribution to lawmaking also extends into the law of negligence in Scotland, which was established in Paisley with the famous “snail in the bottle” case. The 80th anniversary of that case will be next year, and a conference will be convened to commemorate it. Another thought-provoking event in Paisley was the Scottish national holocaust memorial day service, which took place in 2009. The event reminded me of the line that those who do not learn from the mistakes of our human history are bound to repeat them. It is important that we know our history and our culture. From a European perspective, Paisley is well established, right down to papal interests. The Cluniac monastic order visited Paisley last year, looking for a venue in Europe to take their order for a conference. The cabinet secretary, who was then a minister, supported that and Paisley has won the bid to host that conference. In addition, in 2013, Paisley abbey will celebrate its 850th anniversary. It has just launched a campaign for a new visitor centre, and it is a fantastic cultural asset to Renfrewshire. The British Library has helped to showcase the “Arbuthnott Missal”, which in my opinion is equivalent to the “Book of Kells”. Paisley is also home to Paisley shawls, which are known the world over. Perhaps our finest achievement, which I shared in as the then leader of Renfrewshire Council and the chair of Paisley vision board, in respect of which I declare an interest, was in attracting the Royal National Mod to Paisley in 2013. It was maybe not the venue that some people were expecting, but it was a fantastic achievement for both the mod and for the town of Paisley. The Renfrewshire renaissance extends beyond Paisley. Renfrew town hall is being reinvigorated as we speak, with the town’s common-good fund contributing to that. External support has also been secured from Historic Scotland and the Heritage Lottery Fund. We have Braehead, which has not just a retail centre but Scotland’s only indoor snow slope. I see Gil Paterson in the chamber; I understand that he is a keen skier and perhaps an unlikely snowboarder—I know that he enjoys that sport. We are talking about not just buildings and artefacts but people—Paisley boasts John Byrne, Paolo Nutini and David Tennant. A bit further back, John Witherspoon was a Paisley minister who signed the American declaration of independence. We are also home to one of Scotland’s largest regional parks. We have made an immense international contribution, partly because Glasgow airport is located in Renfrewshire. We have become one of Scotland’s newest fair-trade counties, which shows that we are not just nationalists but internationalists, with a deep sense of civic pride in support for those who are beyond our borders. Sandy Stoddart, who is the Queen’s sculptor in Scotland, lives in Paisley. He has a vision for a fantastic equestrian monument to Sir William Wallace. I would like to stick with the cultural consensus, but I gently point out to Labour Party members that the Paisley vision board—a partnership board—is supporting examination of the feasibility of that monument, which would be paid for from private subscriptions and not necessarily from public funds.

Indeed. I confirm that there are no proposals for a monument to Andrew Neil, but Scotland’s patriot William Wallace should be remembered. It is slightly disappointing that the Labour group in Renfrewshire seems to prefer to have 26 dog bins in Renfrewshire and has called for us to spend money on that instead of funding the sculpture’s feasibility study. I am not convinced that tourists from around the world will come to Paisley to visit dog bins, although they might come to see a new equestrian monument to Sir William Wallace. Our cultural contribution has been immense. As a Renfrewshire councillor, I have often seen members of the Parliament criticise Renfrewshire on education and culture policies. However, the administration in Renfrewshire is spending more than £100 million on schools, leisure and culture. What a fantastic achievement that is, without the requirement for public-private partnerships. The financial climate in which we operate might have changed, but our ambitions and our cultural aspirations for Renfrewshire have not. I hope that members have not found my speech to be too parochial. I wanted to make the point that every part of our country—whether it is urban or rural—can have the ability and the ambition to go forward to boost our cultural economy and capitalise on Scotland’s immense cultural wealth.

Christina McKelvie eloquently expresses the SNP’s compassion and international outlook in the world. Would she concur with me and welcome something else that the Labour Party has done, which is to distance itself from the repugnant views of Ian Davidson MP, who called the SNP neo-fascists?

I am a member who is not from the north-east, although many of my constituents share an interest in what happens with the industry because they travel to the north-east to work. I do not think that the member is at risk of undermining the industry, but does she share the concern that the tax, if it is not reconsidered, may well affect a huge number of jobs? It may not necessarily be the case that jobs are lost, but that jobs are not developed in the industry as a consequence of the policy.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving me my first successful intervention in my time in the Parliament. Does he think that it would be better overall if Scotland had access to all the resources that it raises, especially given that, according to Government reports, we raise more in public expenditure than we spend?

Presiding Officer, I congratulate you on your election and the ministers on their appointments. On the subject of appointments, in order to stand for the Scottish Parliament, I had to resign from some posts. One was appointed by the cabinet secretary—I was a non-executive health board member of Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board. I was also chair of Renfrewshire community health partnership. When the Audit Scotland report entitled “Review of Community Health Partnerships” was published, I think that I was at the front of the queue to see what it said about Renfrewshire. I suppose that I was delighted that there was not a case study of Renfrewshire, as the report was not great reading for some of the CHPs that were visited. It would be wrong to say that the system is broken. There is much good work and positivity going on with CHPs and community health and care partnerships that is perhaps not reflected in the report. For example, Renfrewshire CHP, with partners, achieved the best child protection inspection in Scotland. Such joint partnership working should be held up as a good example of joint working in the public sector. I commend the SNP Government for the incredible progress that has been made on hospital-acquired infections, a number of medical conditions and waiting times. My constituents in Renfrew and other parts of my constituency will have a great choice between the newly refurbished Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley and, of course, the new Southern general hospital—an £800 million project close to our community. I make one request of the cabinet secretary and ministers: that we consider further the transport links to the Southern general. I know that fastlink and such projects were part of the early planning conditions. I believe that the Labour-led SPT is playing games with such transport infrastructure in the west of Scotland and that the Government should continue to pursue it with the package that is brought forward to ensure that fastlink goes to the Southern general and, indeed, beyond, into Renfrew, which is the largest town in Scotland without a link to the rail network. That can be done at very little expense to the taxpayer. There are huge challenges in the health sector, such as the obesity epidemic and our relationship with alcohol. I agree with the Labour Party on issues around inequality and poverty, but it would be wrong to say that Labour made great progress. In fact, the gap between the rich and poor under the Labour Administration got wider, not smaller. On demand, public expectations may well be beyond what can be delivered in future. That is why it is important that we have a process of engagement with the public on what can be expected and delivered with the demographic changes and financial pressure that the Parliament and the Government will face. It is widely recognised that the health service has enjoyed budget protection that other parts of the public sector cannot be afforded because of the Westminster reductions to this country’s budget. When I hear Labour politicians complain about budget reductions, I wonder why they and fellow unionists allow our resources to fund things such as nuclear weapons, rather than public services in Scotland. The Parliament’s poor settlement from Westminster might be a consequence of the financial powers that are retained in London. To return to health, an alarming number of children are looked after by local authorities and have chaotic lifestyles. Unless we break the cycle of deprivation, we will never truly be able to make progress with our health improvement strategy. That is why I whole-heartedly support the Government’s approach on early intervention and early years work. In areas such as Glasgow and the west of Scotland, we have the triple-P strategy, which does not involve the privatisation of public services—it means promoting positive parenting. That is society-changing work that will make a fantastic difference to the most vulnerable families in that part of Scotland, because it is a whole-population approach. I do not agree with Conservative members that simply increasing the number of health visitors and having a universal system is a positive way forward. However, a whole-population approach based on the proven and evidence-based triple-P programme will be welcome. Linda de Caestecker, a director of public health in the west of Scotland, has said that we must tackle poverty and inequality. However, the Government’s approach is absolutely right. Previous Administrations determined people’s eligibility for services based on where they lived and what their postcode was and not on whether they were poor or in need. That is why I whole-heartedly support the Government’s approach in which eligibility depends on a person’s circumstances and not their postcode. Great work on active lifestyles has been carried out by my local community health partnership on issues such as breastfeeding. There is only so much a man can do to support breastfeeding, but we absolutely should support those who encourage it. However, it was alarming that a survey of young people in Renfrewshire showed that they felt that breastfeeding should be discouraged and not encouraged. There is a need to tackle culture. On the issue of culture, we must break down the barriers between local government and community health partnerships to ensure that the public sector works together and that we get the culture right. That does not necessarily mean radical structural change, with local government at war with the health service. There is absolutely a better way forward on the integration of services. I look forward to the Christie commission opening the door to that reformation to ensure that we change what matters most. The role of politicians is important. I enjoyed the intertwined role of council leader, CHP chair and health board member. We were able to make decisions to support public health in our area and to tackle alcohol. For example, we banned chip vans from our school gates. I am left wondering what Labour members are waiting for to convince them that minimum alcohol pricing is right or wrong. The Liberal Democrats have been convinced, so I hope that they will share their wise counsel with the Labour Party to convince it that the measure will make a difference to the people of Scotland and will tackle the costs that go along with alcohol. I encourage the Liberal Democrats to share their wisdom with the Labour Party.

Presiding Officer, I am honoured to be standing before you as the member for Renfrewshire North and West. This new constituency brings together much of what were previously the Paisley North and the West Renfrewshire seats, so I would like to say a few words about Wendy Alexander and Trish Godman. Wendy Alexander had considerable political clout and profile. She is probably a workaholic, which is a common trait in many politicians, but I know that she has a deep affection for her children and has chosen to spend more time with her family. I wish her well. Trish Godman was, of course, a respected Deputy Presiding Officer and carried out her duties with great dignity. I am sure that I speak for everyone when I say that efforts to intimidate members of this Parliament are repugnant and will serve only to unite us, not divide us. It would be remiss of me not to mention my Conservative opponent in the election, Annabel Goldie. Annabel is a formidable force and is widely respected. I recall that, at the count, Annabel declared that she would be keeping an eye on me. Little did I know that she would have more time to do so over the next few years. I would like to mention a special constituent of mine from Kilmacolm, whom I was honoured to visit as her constituency MSP. My constituent is none other than the minister’s mother, Madame Ecosse, Winnie Ewing, who reconvened the Parliament in 1999 and is an inspiration to all in the SNP. On the final day of the previous parliamentary session, the First Minister was in Renfrew, my home town, to welcome the news of a massive investment in the renewables sector, with a renewables centre of excellence at the Westway site, coupled with Steel Engineering creating a further jobs and apprenticeships boost. My grandfather, John Tierney, worked in the Babcock site in Renfrew, as did thousands of other men. It is part of our industrial past, so it is with great pride that we give a future to this site as a dynamo in the renewables economy. The rivers Cart and Clyde, a proud part of Scotland’s industrial revolution, will be brought back into use by such companies to transport products in specially designed vessels. The manufacturing of systems and structures, such as the Pelamis wave power machine, have created much excitement in the industry and I look forward to the outcome of the pilot scheme. This industry is all about potential, and we have the opportunity to turn potential into reality, plugging Scotland into a sustainable future, creating jobs, making Scotland greener and revitalising our economy—a true public-private partnership, encouraging Scotland’s entrepreneurial spirit. The SNP Government has outlined challenging plans, and it was this Parliament that set the most ambitious climate change targets in the world. It is, therefore, hardly unreasonable that the Parliament that set the most ambitious targets in the world should have the same powers and the same economic levers as other places in order to ensure that we can access our immense wealth. In these early days of the session, I have heard Opposition members ask why we want new powers, which is a fair question. For the renewables industry—particularly offshore renewables—to flourish, unnecessary barriers must be removed. We want the fossil fuel levy, as our share will allow us to invest £200 million in the renewables industry now. We want the administration of the Crown estate to be transferred, because as quickly as we develop ways to unleash our clean energy potential, the Crown Estate Commissioners find a way to tax them. For the record, despite being titled the Crown estate, the coastline and seas of Scotland belong to the people, not to a monarch. While the SNP Government strengthens ports and manufacturing facilities, the UK Government levies taxes on progress. While the SNP Government offers incentives for innovation, the UK withholds investment. We cannot be the greenest country in the world with one hand tied behind our back. We have an abundance of natural wealth: it is not just another cash cow for the London chancellor. Scotland. We have all the energy, now give us the power. One does not need to be a nationalist to believe in equipping this Parliament with the means of delivery. Those who say that our targets are too ambitious or unnecessary often have an interest in seeing the renewables sector fail. Scotland does not need or want nuclear, and we will not let it become the UK’s nuclear waste dump. The UK’s obsession with nuclear has stunted its thinking on renewables, which has resulted in an appalling performance. A UK Government may well decide that it desires or requires nuclear, but we have no need for that in Scotland. As our sites are gradually decommissioned and replaced with safer alternatives, talk of the lights going off is simplistic and misguided. Expert opinion shows that we have the potential to meet—and indeed to exceed—the 100 per cent target for 2020. That will allow us to export energy that is derived from renewables and ensure that we are always able to meet our needs, even at times of lower output. The Parliament has set a radical course: it should be about not just growth, but conservation and the reduction of energy waste. Scotland is sometimes regarded as the periphery of Europe, but when it comes to renewables, we are ideally located. North, south, east and west, it is truly a national industry. From Orkney to Castle Douglas and Islay to Edinburgh, the industry can touch every part of the country, not least my constituency. In putting the heart back into manufacturing, locating world-leading research and design in Scotland, boosting our economic performance and transforming our environmental record, the Government deserves our whole-hearted support.