I am very pleased that we are having what I believe is the first debate on Tibet in the Scottish Parliament. Many thanks go to Maureen Watt for bringing this important issue to the chamber and to all those who campaign on these issues. The cross-party group on Tibet has published an extremely detailed and helpful briefing. The difficulties of obtaining much of the information must have been vast, both logistically, in the face of a communications blackout, and emotionally, in the face of this distressing topic. What I was most struck by in the briefing was the fact that these self-immolations are not an irrational or spontaneous form of protest. People might have felt desperate, but they have thought long and hard about their options; they are people who have planned their self-immolation, often in great detail, and who feel that it is the best option available to change the appalling situation that they and their friends and family find themselves in. The self-immolations have been in response to the huge human and environmental costs of large-scale mining operations, the replacement of the Tibetan language with Mandarin in schools and severe restrictions on Buddhist religious life. The briefing for the debate describes the lack of religious freedom as the “linchpin of Tibetan protest, and the central focus of Tibetan self-immolators’ grievances.” The spike in self-immolations at the time of the national party congress when power was handed over to the new generation of leaders demonstrates how politically aware the protests are. Twenty-seven people self-immolated almost on the same day. It is very difficult for us to imagine what it is like to decide that self-immolation is the best course available; it demonstrates the extreme stress and the repressive conditions that Tibetans are living under. The other striking thing about these protests has been the state response—the attempted information blackout and the attempt to portray protesters as manipulated victims or mentally ill. Protests have been followed by a police crackdown and mobile phone networks have been shut down, internet cafes have been closed and satellite dishes have been destroyed, all to prevent communication. Garte Jigme, a monk and author, was sentenced to five years in prison for drafting a book about the self-immolations. Laws have been passed to criminalise self-immolators’ friends and families in an attempt to brand the protesters as victims of coercion. The charge of “intentional homicide”, to which Maureen Watt referred in the motion, has been used against monks who are said to have encouraged self-immolation and people who have uploaded pictures after the event. How should we react to this? What should we in Scotland do? China is a major, growing trade partner. The Scottish Government celebrated Chinese new year by announcing Scottish exports to China worth £560 million in 2013. We should ensure that we use these important trade links to promote human rights. Scotland is rightly proud of its internationalist outlook and we should make use of that to create a positive impact on people’s lives. I know that respect for human rights and the rule of law is seen as a guiding principle in the Government’s China strategy. I ask the cabinet secretary to elaborate, as far as she can, on how that principle is embedded in the Scottish Government’s relationship with China. I also hope that the Government will be open to receiving any Tibetan political leaders who visit Scotland in the future. We are a small country but an internationalist one. We should be supporting human rights at every turn, in Tibet today, and in the rest of China, too, where many people face similar problems, not least the Uyghurs in north-west China.

I agree with Liz Smith’s comments regarding competitive sport. In that vein, I suggest to Mr Mason that my swimming pool is bigger than his. I say to Mr Malik that Edinburgh will give those visiting the Commonwealth games a welcome every bit as warm as Glasgow. A review published in 2010 by the British Medical Journal of the health and socioeconomic impacts of major multisport events between 1978 and 2008 found insufficient evidence “to confirm or refute expectations about the health or socioeconomic benefits” for the host populations. The review does not suggest that there are no benefits, only that the outcomes are not well researched and that, as other colleagues have highlighted, the evidence on outcomes consists of a relatively small number of poor-quality studies. The review states that benefits from future events such as the London Olympics and Paralympics or the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow cannot be expected to occur automatically. I agree—and I am absolutely certain that that point has been recognised and that there is a genuine desire on behalf of the Government, the games organisers, Glasgow City Council, other local authorities and the governing bodies of all sports involved in these games, and even those that do not feature specifically in them, to ensure that they provide a positive and long-lasting legacy. The dictionary defines legacy as “something handed down or received from an ancestor or predecessor”, and it is important that the games pass on the legacy that we would wish them to pass on. Major sporting events have the potential to generate a wide range of benefits for the population of the host city or nation, including transport improvements; housing provision, as demonstrated by the games village; environmental improvements; and associated increases in employment. The fact that there are already numerous legacy publications, a legacy website and, indeed, legacy badges so far in advance of the opening of these global games demonstrates an understanding of the need for the games to deliver benefits beyond that of the sheer joy of being involved as a participant, spectator, official or volunteer. I feel certain that these games will focus on legacy in the way that London 2012 did. That will be important; after all, investment in the games has the potential to improve health at a time when Scotland itself faces significant health challenges. Diabetes and obesity are stretching an increasingly tight health budget; health inequality continues to plague us; and the difference in people’s life expectancy depending on their postcode is staggering in this small country and must be addressed. In fact, that is recognised in my own party’s proposal for a healthy challenge fund. There are many reasons why people do not get involved in sport. They might think that it is not for them or that it is too expensive, or they might have been scunnered at school by one too many freezing winter afternoons on an exposed blaes hockey pitch without the luxury of today’s base layers. However, a positive legacy will involve encouraging Scots to give sport a second chance. The fact that access to sport and physical activity is recognised in many international conventions as a fundamental human right tells us that it is important. Sport is well recognised as a low-cost and high-impact tool for development and a powerful agent for bringing about social change. It is a culturally accepted activity that brings people together and can unite families, communities and nations. For example, the success of the homeless world cup in increasing awareness of the issues surrounding homelessness while increasing the self-respect, life skills and dignity of those involved is well evidenced and documented. Sport delivers many non-sporting outcomes. It could and should be more widely used as a development programme both here at home and overseas, as it can be tailored to the context in which it sits. The Spartans Football Club in my region is an example of sport helping to transform a neighbourhood. The staff understand the community they work in and the challenges the young people face. Spartans is not only about football; it is about so much more, and it stands as an example of sport being accessible and open to all, welcoming to the community and developing people at grassroots level as well as real talent. Sport keeps us occupied. It provides an opportunity to socialise and make friends; it teaches discipline; it can increase fitness and strength, attributes that help to keep us out of the general practitioner’s waiting room; and it helps us to enjoy a healthy, independent life. It can also encourage young and old to travel and broaden their horizons, and it can provide a means—or, indeed, the need—to do so for young people who might never have gone beyond their town boundary. Sport clearly demonstrates the connection between effort and outcome. What better legacy can there be? I have previously raised the issue of sponsorship of the games, and I support Citizens Advice Scotland in its call to keep the games free from payday lending sponsorship.

I certainly welcome that—I am very pleased to hear it. Although those promoting the games market a wide variety of products, it is clearly more appropriate to advertise the healthiest and most ethical products on the international stage that the games will provide. A commitment to locally produced, healthy food is also an important part of a positive legacy. We have an opportunity to showcase the tolerance and respect that Scotland has for all peoples and our commitment to human rights. These games can be a beacon for such rights. I welcome the fact that the minister’s remit includes both sport and equality, and I look forward to hearing about initiatives to highlight and promote equality during the games. I am aware that the minister has discussed pride house initiatives with my colleague, Patrick Harvie, and I would be grateful if the minister could advise us on progress on those initiatives in her closing speech. The Government has shown its commitment by investing in community sport hubs and school facilities. The proposed community empowerment and renewal bill will bring another opportunity to look at facilities anew, as assets for communities. It is no secret that the Greens would like to see that ambition extended to enable local fans and supporters to secure ownership of their clubs. As a practising athletics coach, I am in no doubt at all that young people want to compete; those who do not can set themselves personal targets—they can achieve so much. Again, I support Liz Smith’s earlier comments in that regard. Elite athletes do not simply appear. They are nurtured, by and large, by volunteer coaches on windswept tracks and pitches across the country, in church halls and in school halls. It is important that we do all that we can to ensure that those facilities are maintained and that we explore the best models to make that possible, involving and enabling those who use the facilities to contribute to solutions. The provision of facilities from grassroots to elite level is essential to a meaningful legacy. It is vital to provide support for governing bodies as they seek to ensure that they have coaches in place to welcome new entrants to our sports clubs. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm’s comments regarding Meadowbank sports centre. Whenever new facilities are developed, let us make sure that we have the maintenance budgets in place. If we achieve all the goals—and it is clear that there is much support to do so—Scotland’s 2014 games will be in a position to provide clear, robust evidence that a major multisport event can and should provide a wide range of socioeconomic benefits to the host city, the nation and beyond. I am confident that the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow will leave a legacy that we can all be proud of.

The subject of my amendments has formed a substantial part of the debate around the bill. The phrase “sustainable economic growth” has never previously appeared in primary legislation so I hope that the Government welcomes the scrutiny here. The amendments in this group are in two sets. My preferred set of amendments—16, 17 and 20—would remove from the bill the section 4 duty on regulators and references to sustainable economic growth in the regulators’ code of practice and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency’s purpose. Amendments 19 and 22 are related to those changes but consequential. Why do I believe that the section 4 duty should be removed and the references to sustainable economic growth deleted? Sustainable economic growth is the Government’s stated purpose and it has every right to promote its policy priorities, but I fail to see the link that the minister claims exists between the proposed duty and delivering the policy intention of regulatory consistency. No one denies that Scotland is a good place in which to do business. The Scottish Trades Union Congress made the point in its evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that we are not living in an overly regulated world. Scottish regulators are willingly engaged with the regulatory review group and good progress is being made on consistency in non-legislative ways. We have heard no practical examples from the Government of how the duty will work. In fact, many of the regulators told us that they had no objection to the duty because they were already contributing to the Government’s purpose. If that is the case, why must we add unnecessary complications, with legislation that is not needed, and new duties, when collaborative initiatives are already working? The other set of amendments—15, 18 and 21—do not delete sections or paragraphs but replace the bill’s references to “sustainable economic growth” in the regulators’ duty, the code of practice and SEPA’s purpose with the phrase “sustainable development”. Those are not my preferred amendments but I have lodged them in the hope that, should members wish to retain the section 4 duty, they will be able to support referring to a concept in law that explicitly balances social, environmental and economic considerations. The concept of sustainable development is well recognised, which addresses the concerns of many bodies—including the Law Society of Scotland—that any new concept in law will be open to the courts to define and may cause confusion about what should and should not be considered in any decision making. Additional concerns were raised at stage 2 that sustainable development does not, in practice, balance its three pillars, but rather focuses on the environmental aspect. However, I suggest that that is more a result of the concept being applied in areas in which the environment has previously been overlooked. No one wants regulators to act inefficiently or in overly complicated ways, but they are generally doing a very good job, and the regulatory review group reports that it is making good progress on consistency in non-legislative ways. Of course, there are always improvements to be made, especially in supporting small businesses, but the rest of the bill will provide the Government with other powers in relation to national standards and consistency, and I fail to see how the section 4 duty and other references to contributing to “sustainable economic growth” will connect with a policy objective of regulatory consistency. I move amendment 15.

Gavin Brown stated that the Government’s proposal would highlight economic growth. It is fair to say that economic growth already has a very high profile and regulators currently contribute to sustainable economic growth. There is no need to include it in the bill. I disagree with Gavin Brown that the bill will clarify matters in cases of conflict. It is my view and that of others—including Scottish Environment LINK, the STUC and Consumer Focus Scotland—that the bill introduces a conflict that does not currently exist. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee believes that the duty would confuse regulators, and Scottish Environment LINK has said: “We fear the greatest risk remains the unintended consequences of this move on our legal system, amounting to a ‘lawyers’ charter’ instead of assisting with practical decision making and streamlining regulation.” I welcome the fact that ministers have already removed the duty from the planning system. It is fair to say that there are well-documented instances in which the economy has trumped the environment when it comes to planning, and I am concerned that the duty will make it more difficult to implement truly balanced regulation. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, the Scottish Government’s proposal has united some incredibly diverse groups in concern and opposition. Those include Oxfam, the Law Society of Scotland, the STUC, Scottish Environment LINK and the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards to name but a few. The fundamental question is not about definitions, because we understand the general thrust of what is meant by sustainable economic growth, but whether it is right to place such an economic duty on regulators in the first place. Regulators help to stop the tiny minority of people who cheat or deceive and who thereby gain economic advantage over businesses that play by the rules. That is how they help our economy to operate smoothly. They enable a fair, competitive environment in which business can develop, and they should be allowed to focus entirely on that main purpose. I will press amendment 15.

The town centre first principle—to put the health of town centres at the heart of a thriving local economy—is very welcome. I find it strange that we thought differently in the past and strange that we thought that making anything other than the town centre the most important place for people to shop, meet, socialise and enjoy was a good idea. I am pleased that we have recognised that the town centres cannot be only about retail, important as that may be. I will come back to retail later. The world has changed and we should not strive to have the town centres of the past. A good mix of places to live, eat, work and shop makes the town centre attractive. Housing is a key part of the future but a change in the attitude of public bodies is needed. In my region, the old town of Edinburgh community council recently folded after years and years of feeling that the development of the city centre was not about the people who live there, despite the council’s strenuous efforts to try to make it so. Private rented housing is prevalent in city centres and on high streets. If we want to attract people back there, it is important that tenants’ rights are strengthened and that privately renting tenants get a good deal in the new Housing (Scotland) Bill. Convenience is essential—the convenience of online retail offers an opportunity for town centre retailers. We could try to support local retailers to get online to enable them to compete with the big retailers offering click and collect. We could make it the norm for people to order some food from the local butcher and greengrocer online during the office lunch break and collect it on their way home from work. Walking and cycling access to town centres should be given more priority and I have written to the minister about that on behalf of the cross-party group on cycling. As Sarah Boyack said, walking and cycling access is the only action that the Government deems to be long term when it should be designed in from the start of any improvements. Our train and bus stations need to be welcoming—they need to encourage people into the town centres with clear walking routes to the shops and cafes. Existing out-of-town shopping centres could be seen as park-and-ride facilities to help connect more people with the town centre. Micro-businesses could be supported in town centres through hubs with advice and hot desks. The amendment that I lodged for the debate talked about local taxation. Devolution is important but not just from Westminster to Holyrood—the real value in devolution of power is from Holyrood to our local councils, which can decide on local solutions. Local authorities should be able to decide the right balance of different taxes to meet their social, environmental and economic needs, in line with the priorities of local voters. Local councillors may decide that their local economies would be bolstered by local sourcing, extension of the living wage or increased employee participation and they should have the ability to promote those options. The business rates incentivisation scheme exists but it is the poor cousin of true local taxation, which creates genuine economic incentives for local investment in new high-quality employment. As Sarah Boyack and Margaret McCulloch noted, one size does not fit all. The needs of the high street in Edinburgh are different from those of the high street in Bathgate, Livingston or Linlithgow. Councils are better placed to understand that and should be able to design a business rates regime that works for them. We need to have the confidence to let them do so.

I declare an interest as a City of Edinburgh councillor from 2007 to 2012; a current Lothian MSP; and a board member of Fields in Trust. The controversy over Portobello park goes back many years and has been deeply divisive for the community. During my time as a councillor, I was very critical of the way in which the council had handled the decision on whether a replacement high school should be built on the common good land that is the park. I visited the school at that time and shared with parents and young people a real desire to replace the 1960s Portobello high school, which was poorly designed in the first place and has not stood the test of time or been adequately maintained. However, I believe that the council has been too dismissive and, at times, disrespectful of those in the community who did not want the school built on the park. Regardless of where anyone stands on this debate, it is important that they are able to state a position without fear of ridicule or demonisation, otherwise the process of moving on after a conclusion is reached becomes so much harder. Hindsight is a great thing but it is clear that, had we all known in 2005 what we know now, a different set of options and potential paths would have been followed, and a new school would now be up and running and delivering the quality secondary education that our young people need and deserve. However, we are now in 2014. The need for a new high school has grown, not diminished. The condition of the school has worsened. I am no longer a councillor but, as an MSP, I have to take a position on this private bill, which is the council’s way of dealing with the common good status of the park that would otherwise prevent a school from being built there. It is no longer 2005. Nine years have passed since the council first made its decision. The choices that we face now, with so much water having flowed under the bridge, are different. The school has planning permission to be built in the park and a contractor is in place to do that. Community consultation a year ago had a massive response and a fairly hefty majority in favour of building in the park. However many criticisms one can level at the community consultation, it is difficult to argue that the will of the community is other than that which emerged from the consultation. In the unique circumstances in which we now find ourselves and having weighed up all the issues over a long period, I will support the bill today but seek strengthening of assurances and protections concerning the future of the site itself and the compensatory green space. The issue now is the conditions that are attached to the school being built at one end of the park. What assurances can be secured that new playing fields will always be accessible to the community at large? What certainty is there that, once the new St John’s school is built, the old high school site will be transformed into high-quality green and open space to be enjoyed for generations to come? The council has moved some distance on those matters, but they must now be secured for the long term. More generally, I want to be sure that, even with a school in place, the land on which the school sits remains common good land and, crucially, that the decision made by MSPs in this case does not establish a precedent for other common good land in Scotland. I lodged an amendment to today’s motion to see whether Parliament would be prepared to take a view at this stage on some of those concerns. My amendment has not been selected for debate, but I welcome the committee’s recommendation that the bill should be amended to strengthen protection of the site’s common good status and I urge committee members to pursue the issues raised as the bill moves forward. High-quality schooling is essential to Edinburgh’s future success, as with any city, but so is an appreciation of the need to preserve and enhance Edinburgh’s green recreational spaces. There is an opportunity here to build a positive future in both regards and I trust that, in time, the city village of Portobello will regain all the cohesion that makes it such a special part of the city.

Satisfying jobs, good affordable homes to live in, clean thriving neighbourhoods to be part of, security and a chance to prosper in life: those are some of the reasons why a vibrant Scottish economy is important. Some people enjoy those things—we are lucky to live in a rich, developed nation that has much potential—but many people are left by the wayside. Poverty and inequality still plague us, despite those riches. My colleague Patrick Harvie said yesterday that none of us has a monopoly on wisdom or concern when it comes to creating a fairer economy and society. That is true. He also argued that independence will give us a chance to imagine a vision and to create a reality for people that differs from successive years in which the ultrarich have become even richer even as the western economy has hit crisis and in which Governments have punished the poorest people in society through their vision of austerity. We want something that is different from George Osborne’s “austerity forever” speech on Monday; we want something that is different from David Cameron’s preaching about restraint while surrounded by gold at the lord mayor’s banquet. The genuine alternative to austerity is equality. Scotland is one of the richest countries in the world, but we must tackle the huge inequalities in our wealth, health, gender opportunities and life chances. We have enough wealth, but it must be distributed more evenly in order to give those who wish it the opportunity to get a better job and more skills and education, and to have a settled family life and the ability to contribute fully to our neighbourhoods. Football is an important part of many of those neighbourhoods, and Greens would like new powers in the proposed community empowerment bill that would give fans the chance to take ownership of their local football clubs and sports clubs. The economic and social benefits of ownership should be made widely available to our communities. Closing the inequality gap will require action in all the social policy areas that are already devolved, but that is not enough. The Green amendment sets out our reasons for why taxation, industry and employment powers should sit in Scotland. That would give us the chance to create a new approach to the economy—one that provides for everyone to live well. What could that look like? A resilient sustainable economy would be based on Scottish businesses and small enterprises—not on multinational companies that jump ship for a new tax break. It is based on a diverse network of smaller banks including mutuals, municipal banks, co-operatives and credit unions which exist to serve small businesses and ordinary citizens—not just speculators. Publicly owned renewable energy companies, co-operatively owned supermarkets, regeneration and development that values people’s participation, renationalised railways, and successful small businesses are all ways of building a robust economy that is controlled democratically, and not by multinational corporate interests. Greens would like the Scottish Government to negotiate to turn the Royal Bank of Scotland’s retail operation in Scotland into a network of local banks, thereby boosting lending to small businesses in every region. We have to measure what matters. Gross domestic product is not the be all and end all, but too many politicians remain addicted to the impossible goal of everlasting GDP growth at all costs. It is the type of economic activity that matters—not the amount and speed of growth. Oxfam’s humankind index shows that Scottish people prioritise their health, safe and affordable homes, a pleasant local environment and satisfying work. It also shows that although they think that money is important, they do not covet vast wealth; they just value having enough money to participate properly in society. Some employment figures are improving, which is incredibly welcome for the thousands who are out of work, but underemployment and poverty pay still burden our economy and impact very badly on women and young people, in particular. We must reverse our slide into a low-wage, low-skill economy, as too many people continue to be trapped in poverty despite working very hard. The Resolution Foundation estimates that the UK would save more than £2 billion a year in welfare payments if the living wage was paid across the private sector. That is because most benefits for people of working age are paid not to the unemployed but to people on low wages. We are, in effect, subsidising corporations that pay poverty wages. An economy that paid fair and decent wages would mean that thousands of people in Scotland could escape the in-work poverty trap and it would increase demand in the economy. Even with existing powers, the Scottish Government could begin to change direction. For example, the £10 million grant that is spent on subsidising the tax-dodging Amazon would be better spent on growing jobs in Scottish businesses that contribute to our society, no matter how difficult they may find that at times. Yesterday’s announcement on the extension of free school meals was very welcome, but we must ensure that local food producers benefit from that extra public spending. Bold action in the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill could ensure that children in Scottish schools always eat—as far as possible—locally produced beef, pork and chicken from just up the road. Recent freedom of information requests have revealed that some Scottish school kitchens have been serving chicken from Brazil and Thailand. By producing and buying local, we will benefit growers, processes, our environment, our children and our economy here in Scotland. We need a new economic model that is “resilient and ... provides for everyone to live well.” I move amendment S4M-08714.2, to leave out from “stronger” to end and insert: “a new sustainable and democratically accountable economic model for Scotland that delivers an equal, resilient and locally-based economy and provides for everyone to live well.”

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the Living Streets campaign, give us time to cross. (S4O-02727)

I thank the minister for his response and for the 20mph pilots that he announced this week. I look forward to the publication of the Government’s walking strategy next year. Research has shown that three quarters of people over the age of 65 have trouble crossing the road in the time allotted. Scotland’s record on pedestrian safety is poor and we urgently need new research into why that is the case and how best to improve the situation. Will the minister commit to bring forward such research, and will he work with Living Streets and other organisations to do everything in his power to put people, not motorised traffic, at the heart of street design? What actions will he take in the short term to bring about that much-needed culture change?

I, too, thank the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s dedicated team of clerks, our adviser and the witnesses who contributed evidence. I welcome the fact that the Government and Parliament have given attention to bankruptcy law. Bankruptcy is one of those things in life that we hope we will never experience or need, but it is important to get it right for those who do end up needing help to get back on their feet and to sort out fairly who can and should be paid. A quick search of bankruptcy history reveals that it was not always that way. The practice of debt slaves in ancient Greece saw wives, children and servants forced into debt slavery to pay for the husband’s debts, and Genghis Khan’s laws apparently included the death penalty if people went bankrupt three times. I am therefore glad that we now see bankruptcy as a financial health service and a way to reform and reorder people’s finances to allow individuals, businesses and the economy to move on without unnecessary punishment. That said, there are some things in this bill that I would like to see changed, and I will come on to them in a moment. Debt, including consumer debt, has become a larger part of our lives, which the bill’s policy memorandum recognises. For example, payday lenders, which were largely on the periphery of most people’s lives until the financial crisis, have seen massive growth and now offer eye-watering rates on the high street and on television. If we do not tackle that issue, I fear that our new bankruptcy legislation will be accessed by more and more people in Scotland. People’s access to bank accounts while they are undischarged from bankruptcy was an issue raised in evidence. There is no point in having a financial health service if people cannot hold a bank account to help them carry out normal everyday chores such as paying bills. The minister has indicated that he is working on what can be done on that, so I look forward to revisiting the bank account issue at stage 2. I raised the issue of the proposed increase in the debtor contribution period from 36 to 48 months with the minister after we heard evidence in committee that a broad spectrum of organisations was against the move. The minister said that he would continue to “look closely at all those issues during the bill process.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 6 November 2013; c 3543]. I hope that, following this debate on the issue, we can continue to do that and that we find a position in which the risk of payment breakages is reduced. Citizens Advice Scotland made it clear in its briefing for today’s debate that it thinks that the current balance of three years is the right one for creditors and debtors. Payment failure helps no one, and I hope that the minister will comment in his closing speech on Citizens Advice Scotland’s view and other advice organisations’ position that the three-year period should stay. Their expert comment should not be lightly dismissed. I am also concerned about the proposals to remove automatic discharge. The minister suggested that he will look further at that issue. The Law Society told us in committee that the introduction of automatic discharge by the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 “was seen as a huge step forward that would stop people ending up in bankruptcy in perpetuity”.—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 30 October 2013; c 3489.] ICAS believed that automatic discharge should be retained to minimise the bureaucracy involved. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee shared those concerns: we accepted the principle that “discharge should be linked to the debtor’s co-operation” but we were “not persuaded by the case for the ending of automatic discharge as proposed in the Bill.” We heard that measures already exist to deal with unco-operative debtors. Debtors can be retained under restrictions of bankruptcy for two to 15 years by a court bankruptcy restriction order, and discharge can also be deferred past the normal sequestration period if that will benefit the creditor. Those appear to be sensible existing measures to address unco-operative debtors. I would need to hear arguments about how they were not working before I could be convinced about the current proposals. The Law Society made it clear that the existing system is effective and that the proposals as they stand are unnecessarily complicated. Citizens Advice Scotland raised concerns in committee and in briefings for today’s debate that requiring a six-point declaration from the trustee before discharge is unnecessary bureaucracy that will add to trustee fees. As we have heard, there is also concern over how the co-operation of debtors will be interpreted; insufficient detail on that is available, as far as I can see, and the committee has requested some clarity from the Government. The minister addressed that in his opening speech, but I would be grateful if he could confirm that he agrees that the case for removing automatic discharge, as proposed in the bill, has not been made. I look forward to his addressing the concerns raised by members in the chamber this afternoon. I am minded to support the bill’s policy aims at stage 1, but I certainly believe that amendments are required for stage 2.

As members said, men’s violence kills or incapacitates more women each year than cancer, malaria, road traffic accidents and war combined. That statement is in Zero Tolerance’s briefing, and I had to read it several times. UN secretary general Ban Ki-Moon is right to insist that we “take this issue with the deadly seriousness that it deserves.” Violence against women affects us here in Scotland and affects women across the globe. We see it at its most extreme in countries where femicide occurs, and the resulting imbalance in the gender ratio is threatening women’s lives in sinister ways and making it ever harder to attain the equality that is required if such practices are to be addressed. When she was 14, Tarcila Rivera Zea was told that, as an Indian servant, she was not considered worthy of further education. Nearly 50 years later, she is the director of Chirapaq, which is a leading agency that campaigns for the rights of indigenous women in South America, and she has spoken out against women’s inability to access education or achieve economic autonomy. She recognises that women are often unaware of their rights, and she says: “We believe that this situation of complete vulnerability, in which we find ourselves submerged, is a form of violence.” Her powerful words are worthy of much consideration. Scottish Women’s Aid, in its briefing for today’s debate, said that 92 per cent of its services are working with a reduced or standstill budget, which represents a budget reduction, given inflation and increased energy costs—and that is at a time when almost 70 per cent of women’s aid groups report greater demand for their services. We are told that the bedroom tax has resulted in women remaining longer in refuge and that fewer women are able to access refuge when they are at crisis point. Our justice system appears to be unable to cope. Domestic abuse courts are under strain. In Glasgow, women need to wait longer for a domestic abuse case to be heard than they would wait for a generic case to be heard, even though the domestic abuse court is supposed to be much faster. As Malcolm Chisholm said, there is currently a 23-week waiting list, and access to courts is a postcode lottery, particularly in Edinburgh. The lack of dedicated resources must be addressed. As Jackie Baillie and other members said, violence against women is rooted in persistent gender inequality. We must engage with all the issues that make it a shameful and persistent feature of national and global life. We need to intervene, to monitor and to demand change. Last week I was made aware of a chain letter that is circulating among a group of 11 and 12-year-old girls. It is entitled, “Did U Know?” and it informs its young readers, “It’s true. Guys DO insult you if they like you.” That is not harmless and we must intervene. We need to ensure that our young boys and girls understand that abuse takes many forms and is never acceptable. As Margaret Mitchell said, the social and economic cost of violence against women is enormous. Women suffer isolation, inability to work and the loss of wages. They might quite simply become scared stiff and utterly disempowered. If a woman finds the inner resolve—perhaps after being encouraged by a poster or another woman’s testimony—to contact one of the organisations that do incredible work with women and children who have suffered violence in any or many of its forms, the least that we must do as a society is ensure that such organisations have the funding and resources that they need if they are to offer the support that their expertise and experience enables them to provide to those who need it.

I ask the minister to say whether she will meet local government colleagues and insist that they look at extending funding agreements with agencies, so that agencies can use their expertise to best effect.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what role local authorities have in determining appropriate housing land supply. (S4O-02712)

The minister will be well aware that, in Lothian, the Scottish Government has forced local authorities to release more land than they believe is needed or could even be realistically built on. Green belt land, which fulfils many important functions and defines many people’s sense of place and community, is being eroded in Lothian. When it comes to local development planning, do ministers prefer a desk-top study that guesstimates the future, or the local knowledge and decisions of the elected council?

I thank Kezia Dugdale for securing the debate on this important subject, and for her on-going work on the issue. I, too, welcome the opportunity to raise awareness of the impact of payday lending on individuals and families who felt that they had no option but to apply for a short-term loan when that next pay day was too far away, or when there was not enough food in the cupboard or money for the electricity meter or bus fares to get to work or college. It is not surprising that people turn to that form of credit, because the ubiquity of advertising for payday loans in our newspapers and on our televisions and radios is remarkable. Last year, that accounted for 1.2 per cent of all advertising on TV in the UK. Kezia Dugdale highlighted that, in 2008, payday lenders bought 17,000 ad spots; last year, that number had risen to 397,000. More than one in 100 ads was a payday loan ad. The non-stop barrage normalises payday lending in our culture. As Graeme Pearson noted, according to Ofcom research, children aged four to 15 saw millions of ads from payday lenders. We have heard that very young children are pestering their parents to apply for a payday loan. We know, too, that people turn to such loans as a last resort. In the past three years, 6 million Britons have been declined credit by their bank. Affordable alternative credit is part of the solution. The number of clients with arrears in priority areas such as gas, electricity and rent has increased significantly. Credit is being sought not for luxuries but for everyday living costs. In the face of inflation-busting price hikes by the big six energy companies, it is not surprising that energy arrears affect more than one in 10 people. Organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland and StepChange are working incredibly hard, hearing from and seeing a notable increase in the number of people seeking their expert help in the face of rising personal and household debt. When a person does not have £10, £10 of debt is a problem. However, a growing number of high-income clients are approaching those invaluable charities, too. In addition, although average unsecured debt has been falling in the UK for the past five years, more than 10 per cent of StepChange client debt in Scotland last year was due to payday loans; that was the largest share among the home nations. Many clients with payday loans have contractual payments that are worth more than 100 per cent of their income. Citizens Advice Scotland has reported cases in which payday loans were received by clients who were unable to repay that loan, so the vetting was inadequate. I was horrified to learn of the case of a client in a citizens advice bureau in the east of Scotland whose payday lender contacted his workplace and spoke to his colleagues about his outstanding debt and, even though he had set up an affordable repayment schedule, the agent was demanding full payment. When I first saw an advert for payday lending on television, I thought that there was a typo in it, because I simply could not accept that it could be possible or legal to advertise interest rates of almost 3,000 per cent or higher. Those of us on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee know that people do not purposely lead themselves into debt; they enter a credit agreement with the best of intentions, but sometimes employment and family circumstances change with little notice. Along with other members in the chamber, I am absolutely committed to do all that I can to mitigate the impacts of payday lending.

I apologise to the cabinet secretary for missing the beginning of his statement but thank him for early sight of it. I recognise that this is a deeply unfair settlement for Scotland. Can he comment on how much more difficult it will be to meet climate change and biodiversity targets? What steps will the Government take to ensure that we meet those targets?

Is Mike MacKenzie aware that, in its written evidence, the STUC said that Scotland is already “a good place to do business” and that it is “part of the second least regulated product market in the developed world and the third least regulated labour market”?

I can give Mike MacKenzie an example. The building of a golf course on a site of special scientific interest is an example of the environment taking second place to economic considerations.

I thank the witnesses, who have given valuable input into the bill, and the clerks for their sterling work. As always, they have enabled us to scrutinise the bill and bring it to stage 1. I dissented from the committee’s recommendation to the Parliament that the bill be passed and I will argue why I believe that changes should be made. Section 4 of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill introduces a new duty for regulators. If the bill is passed, the regulators that are named in schedule 1, such as local authorities and the Food Standards Agency, must, when carrying out their regulatory functions, “contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth, except to the extent that it would be inconsistent with the exercise of those functions to do so.” That provision hands regulators a conflicted remit. We are asking that, while regulators are doing their main job, they should focus on another job, unless that other job distracts them from their main job. As confusing duties go, that one is up there. In a world of limited resources, focusing on another outcome will inevitably reduce someone’s ability to deliver their primary purpose.

When the Minister for Energy, Economy and Tourism gave evidence to the committee, he suggested that that was not the case. It is okay for ministers to say one thing, but what is written in the bill is what becomes law. In Scotland, we should be passing legislation that is clear and focused and gives our public bodies and businesses clarity about what is expected of them. It is not good enough to argue that the courts can decide in cases of doubt. The FSB’s briefing for today says that 51 per cent of its members found that the most challenging aspect of regulation was interpreting which regulations applied to their business. The new duty will make the picture no clearer and it could make the role of the regulator less clear. Regulators help to stop the tiny minority of people who may cheat or deceive, thus gaining an economic advantage over businesses that are playing by the rules. This is how regulators help our economy to operate smoothly: they enable a fair, competitive environment for business to develop and they should be allowed to focus on their main purpose. Unison reported that many of its members were concerned that the duty “will leave their decisions open to a range of challenges when they give priority to ensuring public safety over that of the environment.” The Law Society of Scotland said that it would “make it less easy for the regulator to make a clear-cut decision.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 26 June 2013; c 3099.] It also questioned our ability to enforce such a duty, and suggested that that may just add a further complication to process. Andrew Fraser from North Ayrshire Council thought that “the duty will end up as a lawyers’ charter”.—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 5 June 2013; c 2955.] The bill will allow—and the Government plans to produce—guidance and a code of practice to help, among other things, regulators interpret what the economic duty means for them. I welcome the role that the committee will play in considering the code, but the primary problem remains: the duty in primary legislation risks diluting the main role of regulators and skewing decision making, instead of promoting a balanced consideration of economic, social and environmental priorities. Regulators such as SNH already have a challenging enough time protecting our environment. Let me be clear: nobody wants regulators to act in inefficient or overly complicated ways and unnecessarily interfere with business, but they must be able to focus on their job. I have yet to see convincing evidence that there is a major problem here that requires regulation. Regulators are willingly engaged with the regulatory review group and good progress is being made in non-legislative ways. Why add complications with unnecessary legislation and new duties when collaborative initiatives are working? The definition of sustainable economic growth, as we have heard, received a lot of attention from witnesses and the committee. That is quite right—the phrase has never appeared in primary legislation before. The bill is a first and it should be scrutinised closely. I do not have strong views on where or whether any definition is spelled out. The real question is whether that is the right duty to place on regulators in the first place. During scrutiny it became clear that the duty would play havoc with decisions made in the land use planning system. Under current legislation, as I have mentioned, a golf course took precedence over a site of such special scientific interest that an eminent scientist described it as “Scotland’s equivalent to the Amazon.” I welcome ministers’ intentions to lodge an amendment to exclude a local authority’s planning functions at stage 2, as I can only imagine what decisions could arise if a duty to promote sustainable economic growth impacted on planning decisions. To me, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the subject reads like a cogent argument against any economic duty, but the conclusions, agreed by majority vote, do not follow. There was significant witness concern, both during the bill’s consultation and stage 1 scrutiny, that the duty would skew decision making. Many suggested that the duty should refer to sustainable development. That term is understood well: it has international currency, it is embedded in Scots law and it explicitly balances economic, social and environmental issues. I hope that the Minister will explain why that concept in law was not used instead. It is the Government’s right to focus policy on a single purpose, even if some of us question the concept, but there is a difference between the Government’s policy and what the Parliament should write into law.

I thank Jackie Baillie for securing this important debate. Pictures of naked or half-naked women do not upset me in the slightest, nor do they upset any of the men or women whom I have met who share Lucy-Anne Holmes’s view that it is time that a popular national newspaper stopped printing pictures of half-naked young women on page 3. What upsets us is that those images condition readers to view women as objects; what is wrong with page 3 is the context. As campaigners have said, we would not expect to see a picture of a half-naked young woman appear during a national television news bulletin, accompanied by some sickly sweet description. There would be an outcry if that happened. I thank Lucy-Anne Holmes, whose no more page 3 campaign, which began last year, has galvanised this long overdue outcry. The debate is about what sort of society we want to be. How often does the Government minister in Westminster who naively suggests that it is for adults to choose what they read sit in a busy bus or train where The Sun and the daily drip-fed visual diet of women in passive and sexualised poses are increasingly hard to avoid? Why does that matter? Do those women not have a right to choose to do that? Of course they do, but we also have a right not to be exposed constantly by the mainstream media to a presented ideal of a topless young woman who is usually white, always very slim and frequently sharing print space with important-looking men who, it has to be said, are mostly wearing clothes. I went to the newspaper section of the Scottish Parliament information centre today hoping to disprove that theory but, frankly, I was very disappointed indeed. As colleagues have underlined, there is evidence linking the portrayal of women as sexual objects with attitudes that underpin discrimination and violence against women and girls. That has been demonstrated in the United Kingdom Government’s “Sexualisation of Young People Review” and by CEDAW: the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. On days when I catch the bus, I read a free newspaper in which I am far more likely, as Christian Allard has alluded to, to find a picture of a scantily dressed woman in the news and gossip pages than to find a woman in the sports pages. Indeed, I could not find one picture of a woman in the sports pages of The Sun or the Daily Star today. If we look at the average magazine shelf in an average supermarket, we would be forgiven for assuming that most women have massive breasts and are more than likely, despite the fact that we live in the northern hemisphere, to find it unnecessary to wear any clothes. Those are the supermarkets where we shop with our impressionable young sons and daughters. Those images were not at eye level when I was a child, but the blurring of the lines and the insidious objectification of women is relentless. I take this opportunity to thank Object and UK Feminista for their work to challenge the sale of so-called lads mags, and the everyday sexism project’s Twitter feed is well worth a read today, commenting as it does on Ryanair’s latest advertising campaign, which relies on two bikini-clad women to promote its flights. It really does belong in 1973.

Indeed. Object and UK Feminista have made it quite clear that there is the possibility of legal challenge. I do not have a great deal of time left, but—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The magazines that I am talking about are often found next to sport magazines, because sport is still seen by the media as something that women are not interested in. Many organisations are challenging that, including the Women’s Sport and Fitness Foundation. The titles in the women’s interest section of a magazine display might include articles on how to lose a stone in four weeks or how to never have a bad hair day again. We get the picture. The no more page 3 campaign is battling away, but it is difficult and we have a lot of issues to overcome. Let us look at the BBC. Who decides who is worthy of a place on a BBC panel show? I mean not just political panels, which have had more scrutiny lately than previously, but shows that discuss music, satirical shows, current affairs shows, shows such as “Mock the Week” and “QI”. A colleague in my office suggested that it should be called “QIB”—quite interesting blokes. Why are those programmes so entirely unrepresentative of the population? It seems far more difficult for women to entertain, never mind sustain, a career in television, sports journalism or many of the most public-facing media from which we get our news and views. We want our daughters, nieces and granddaughters to grow up in a world where there really are equal opportunities. It is time for women to be equally represented in the boardroom, on the sports pages and leading our schools and higher education institutes. However, while the blatant sexism that is page 3 is part of society, it is clear that we have a long way to go. If The Sun will not remove page 3, I say that we call for the removal of The Sun wherever and whenever we can.

I feel privileged to be able to raise the issue of strict liability in the chamber and to contribute to the debate on stricter liability for our roads. I thank the members who signed my motion to enable the debate to take place and those who are in the chamber this evening. Road safety is an important issue, because we all understand the benefits—indeed, the necessity—of more people, young and old, walking and cycling whenever possible. Cycling and walking are not niche activities—they are for all—and those who understand the positive impacts that active travel can have on the health of our population and our economy do not want Scotland to miss out. At 1 o’clock tomorrow, prompted by Stop Climate Chaos Scotland, hundreds of people will gather outside the Scottish Government offices at St Andrew’s house to call on the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, to double investment in walking and cycling from the current level of 1 per cent of the transport budget. They will do so because, although the benefits of increasing the number of folk who walk and cycle are numerous, current levels of investment keep us from realising them. I will be at St Andrew’s house tomorrow, because I believe that investment in such activities has many positive environmental, social and economic impacts. We have the cost benefit analyses to support that. I also believe that the concept of stricter liability in Scottish civil law, which we are debating this evening, has the potential to improve the safety of pedestrians and cyclists, and to get more people active. I am not alone: Spokes, CTC Scotland, Sustrans Scotland, pedal on Parliament, Scott and Jenny Hastings, the Andrew Cyclist Charitable Trust and Scottish Cycling, among many others, would like the law of liability on the road to be changed to mirror European legislation that places the onus of responsibility on the least vulnerable. We know that people do not cycle because they do not feel safe: 88 per cent of respondents to the cycle action plan for Scotland said that they would like to cycle more often, but many are deterred by traffic speed, proximity and volume. Those are real fears, because 12 cyclists have died on our roads already this year, despite a background of declining casualty figures for other modes of transport. Last week, following the release of Transport Scotland figures, a national newspaper headline proclaimed that Scotland is the deadliest place to go for a walk. There is a real need to make our roads safer for vulnerable groups and to ensure that they feel safe, too, within a culture of mutual respect. Stricter liability is not a magic remedy, but I believe that it is an important part of the jigsaw; infrastructure, cycle training and driver awareness raising are vitally important, too. Sharing road space with much larger vehicles is the norm for many pedestrians and cyclists, but stricter liability is an inexpensive change that we can make now to help make the transition to a cycle and walk-friendly nation; it is a tool to make behaviour change. Cycle Law Scotland is mentioned in my motion and I thank it for the briefing that it provided for the debate. What it and the 5,000-plus people who have signed its petition propose for most situations is presumed liability in road accidents. That concept simply shifts the onus of proof from the vulnerable to the powerful so that, if a cyclist is injured in a collision with a motor vehicle, the motorist will be liable for the cyclist’s injuries unless the motorist can prove that the injuries were caused or contributed to by fault on the part of the cyclist.

I accept the member’s points. The highway code must be adhered to by all road users. Cyclists are not immune from ensuring that their behaviour is as good as it should be in that regard. Stricter liability would not give cyclists immunity, because they would still have their obligation to ride in a safe and proper manner and in accordance with the rules of the highway code. If they did not follow the rules, it could easily be argued that they had contributed to their own injuries and therefore shared liability or, indeed, were wholly liable. Stricter liability would not affect the important concept of being innocent until proven guilty, which is central to our criminal law but not civil law. In fact, stricter liability already exists in Scotland in consumer product regulations, dangerous animal laws and workplace regulations. Cycle Law Scotland’s proposals would simplify and speed up the claims made when accidents happen and shift the burden of proof to the driver of the more powerful vehicle. As a city councillor in Edinburgh, I was contacted by an elderly man who was involved in a collision with a cyclist on Bruntsfield links. If stricter liability existed in civil law in Scotland, the cyclist would be liable for the injuries caused, whereas we currently have a situation whereby both parties seek to prove that the other is at fault. What happens elsewhere in the world? The situation here in Scotland is unusual. In Europe, only Malta, Ireland, Romania, Cyprus and the United Kingdom have no form of strict or presumed liability in road accidents involving vulnerable road users. Every other country does have that, which suggests that the proposed change is hardly a drastic or radical move.

It is fair to say that the Government has produced some statistics, but the desk-based research from Transport Scotland was fairly limited in scope. It did not involve speaking to anyone in a nation that has strict liability or seeking a comprehensive overview of the systems’ impact for pedestrians and cyclists. Perhaps the minister could address that in his closing speech. It is important to say that we will not change the world overnight with the stricter liability policy alone; it is part of a mix of measures and part of the safer roads culture jigsaw that we need to bring about for a walking and cycling nation in which vulnerable road users and pedestrians are protected and people feel safer on the roads. Changes to civil law to improve road safety must not be off the table at this early stage in the debate. I am interested to hear the minister’s response to the speeches. I urge the Government to reconsider its opposition to the idea and to take an approach of openness, so that the idea can continue to be debated. A step change in road safety will come from redesigning our roads and junctions so that they prioritise pedestrians and cyclists, from proper on-road cycle training and from a culture of mutual respect and tolerance on the shared space. Stricter liability would contribute to a better culture on our roads, in which vulnerable users are better protected.

The member is talking about presumed liability, but cyclists are not immune from the requirement to behave responsibly and properly on the road. If a cyclist is found to be at fault when a case is discussed, they will be found to be at fault.

Just to be clear, we are not talking about different sizes of motorised vehicle; we are talking about protecting the most vulnerable road user. To be absolutely clear, we are talking about a pedestrian who is in a collision with a cyclist or a cyclist who is in a collision with a motorist, not one car in a collision with a smaller vehicle.

Cycle Law Scotland is not talking about automatic liability; it is talking about presumed liability. There is no automatic assumption that the driver is at fault. The approach recognises the vulnerability of some road users. It is inherently dangerous for pedestrians and cyclists to share the road with motorised vehicles, which is why there should be a different approach.

I, too, thank Jim Hume for securing the debate. As he suggested, Citizens Advice Scotland is a national institution. Its work with people throughout our communities in Scotland has made it invaluable, and it is the first port of call for many people in crises. It is fair to say that its services, which are delivered by staff and well-trained volunteers, have rarely been more in demand. The challenges that are posed by navigating the ever-changing benefits system, and by stagnating wages and rising prices, mean that many more people need help from their local CAB. Among its many important aims, Citizens Advice Scotland seeks to help the whole community to bring money into the local economy and to increase knowledge and skills. Although it helps many people who find themselves in crises, it also works proactively to equip young and old alike to help themselves better. The innovative youth outreach projects that we are debating do just that, and I will mention some of the great initiatives that are taking place in Lothian thanks to Citizens Advice Scotland. In partnership with East Lothian Council housing service, more than 900 young people who are currently in secondary 4 and 5 in high school will take part in a course called money matters, in which they will discuss and learn about the financial implications of living independently and being responsible for managing their own budgets. When it comes to budgeting, the Musselburgh and District Citizens Advice Bureau application team—a group of young people—has come up with an app that helps clients to manage their money and keep on top of their personal finances. That incredibly useful device took them to the runners-up slot in the money for life challenge. It helps people to prioritise spending, to keep an eye on how much cash they have available and to better understand their own spending habits. It has been so well received that the team has been given a legacy grant from Citizens Advice Scotland and Lloyds Bank to develop the app further. I am also pleased to learn that young enterprise sessions will be delivered to disadvantaged young people in East Lothian. Recently, Citizens Advice Scotland worked with young parenting groups on substance misuse issues, but I really like the fact that the young enterprise project is empowering. It gives each group of young people £150 to develop an idea—a product, service or event—with the aim of making a profit. Last year, 35 learners completed the course and every group successfully made a profit. The project develops the skills that are essential to enterprise and helps young people to learn more about starting their own business. Young people know best what appeals to other young people, and they are given a chance to explore and develop exciting business proposals. At a time when household incomes have never been more stretched, it is essential that we equip our young people with the skills to use their money wisely. Citizens Advice Scotland wants all those who use it to feel that they have some control, and it strives to promote the experience and satisfaction of taking steps to help oneself. Those initiatives dovetail with the aims of the curriculum for excellence. Financially savvy, active and responsible citizens are in a better place to navigate the many challenges of student life, home life and working life, and to play an important role in their own families and societies in these challenging times. I am sure that we have all referred constituents to citizens advice bureaux or called them ourselves to benefit from their expertise and experience, and that we have been enlightened by them when they have been called to give evidence to our parliamentary committees. Their positive policy and social development work is a valuable contribution to many of the issues of the day. Investment in their invaluable services is money very well spent. I, too, congratulate Citizens Advice Scotland on all its work and on the innovative youth outreach projects.

Scotland gets a bad deal from the common agricultural policy. Many members have already expressed frustration at that and I share their concerns. It is patently unfair for Scotland to receive such low funds relative to others in Europe. Relative to others in the UK, we also receive less. Scotland’s high percentage of rough grazing is part of the reason. CAP subsidy is geared towards farms that already have the best chance of being profitable. If the CAP continues to reward those on the best land, Scotland will continue to lose out. Scotland, in contrast, is in an excellent position to argue that subsidies should be delivering profitable farms in tandem with the marginal and most biodiverse land. That is a big shift away from the argument for ever more direct payments and towards a CAP that delivers subsidy that is based on the public good. I am pleased to say that the Scottish Government follows much of that argument. Area-based payments and the eradication of slipper farming are clearly sensible moves. The continuing modulation from pillar 1 to pillar 2 allows more targeted support and will deliver more public good for the public subsidy. At the European level, the principle has finally been established that pillar 1 subsidy should depend on outcomes that benefit the public good. However, Green colleagues in Europe describe the reform as a massive missed opportunity that failed to deliver a fairer distribution of funds and does not deliver all that it might for the environment. Although 30 per cent of pillar 1 will be tied to greening, the measures are modest. They mean that most farms in Scotland will not have to do anything additional. It was important to ensure that a one-size-fits-all approach to greening did not hit Scotland’s diverse sector, but biodiversity is in critical decline and CAP greening measures should be one tool to help reverse the trend. Scotland will be allowed to use 8 per cent in coupled payments, but I agree with the Government that there should be scope to do more. Coupled payments could also be tied more closely to agri-environmental outcomes. The lack of a real cap on large payments means that funds will not be available to help smaller farms and new entrants. Despite receiving support, they will continue to find it hard to break through and make a success of new enterprises. I mentioned Scotland’s large percentage of rough grazing. I wanted to link back to that as I talk about crofting. There is no crofting in the region that I represent—Lothian—but colleagues in the Independent/Green group have asked me to speak on the issue. Crofting is extremely important to the Highlands, where it maintains the communities in our most remote areas. The crofters’ conference that was held in Stornoway last month highlighted the plight of common grazings—rough grazing land that extends to half a million hectares. Many people feel that common grazings are ignored by the CAP and that they are underused or are being abandoned in many areas because the support that is available to livestock producers is too small. It is important that more attention is paid to common grazings and to crofting in general. Managed grazing can promote biodiversity, maintain the peatlands and enhance the land’s high nature value, as well as provide profitable high-quality livestock. The move to area-based payments is an opportunity to ensure that rough grazing, high nature value farming and extensive livestock production are supported, because they are vulnerable but environmentally important. A significant pillar 1 move to supporting farms on more marginal land leaves open an opportunity to use funds that have been allocated to least favoured areas to support more spending on agri-environmental and organic measures. I urge the Government to look at that. I support Scottish Environment LINK in its calls for 50 per cent of the SRDP fund to be allocated to agri-environmental, organic and forestry schemes. A move in pillar 1 to more marginal land support would allow that happen. Scotland has great potential to produce more diverse, local and organic food. While we continue—rightly—to campaign for improvements in CAP, we must continue to do all that we can under the current arrangement to encourage and increase such production, as the benefits that it brings to local communities and local economies are significant. I thank Scottish Environment LINK for its briefing and its calls to ensure that the move to regionalised payments improves the level of basic payment support to high nature value farming and extensive livestock production, which are economically vulnerable but—as I have said—extremely environmentally important; and to improve the prioritisation and targeting of the SRDP, with increased funding being allocated to advice. The Parliament may not vote as one at decision time, but I am absolutely certain that we all recognise the need for a sustainable future to be provided for our rural communities, our world-renowned countryside and our environment.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member raised the issue of roads being the only way to access the proposed facility. RSPB Scotland said that, if the order is approved by the affirmative procedure, that approval could be in breach of European Union law. RSPB Scotland believes that the order should not be made until an environmental impact assessment has been completed and the results taken into account. Does the member share that view?

I thank Jim Eadie for bringing the debate to the chamber, and I thank and congratulate all those whose hard work is recognised in this ranking. I am very proud of the six higher education institutions that are headquartered in the Lothians. Each of them provides excellent education to thousands of students and carries out excellent research. There is, of course, some subjectivity in assessing the quality of teaching and research, but the rankings are made in a consistent way each year, so it is fantastic to see the University of Edinburgh achieving a ranking of 17th in the world in the QS rankings. The University of Edinburgh has always performed very well in the research assessment exercise. In the most recent RAE, in 2008, it had the largest amount of research judged to be of world-class quality—that is, four-star quality—out of all the Scottish universities. That is a reflection of the university’s long history of excellence in not just the kind of blue-sky research that led Peter Higgs to the discovery of the Higgs boson, but research that is designed to tackle immediate problems that affect people. A huge amount of world-class medical research takes place at the University of Edinburgh. I could go on for hours about it, but I will mention just one example that I am particularly impressed by—the Delbox, which was invented by Professor Alasdair MacLullich of the university’s college of medicine, uses a deceptively simple collection of flashing lights and buttons to improve diagnosis and treatment of patients with dementia by identifying whether they have delirium. I want to see more opportunities for women to contribute to excellent research in universities, particularly in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, which have chronically low numbers of women professors. The University of Edinburgh is leading the way forward. I applaud Professor Lesley Yellowlees, who is head of the University of Edinburgh’s college of science and engineering, for championing initiatives across the university, working with the Equality Challenge Unit under the banner of the Athena SWAN programme and taking a sophisticated and broad-ranging approach, raising awareness of unconscious bias and other forms of discrimination so that they can be eliminated. The university’s 17th place in the QS rankings is proof positive that taking an enlightened approach to equality and diversity is the best way to increase organisational effectiveness because it draws on the widest possible pool of talent and lets all staff know that their creativity and hard work will be recognised and rewarded fairly. We also need to see action to involve more women, more people with disabilities and more people from ethnic minorities in the university courts, which are the governing bodies of Scottish universities. That is why I have written to Professor Sir Timothy O’Shea, the principal of the University of Edinburgh, and the principals of the other five universities that are headquartered in my region, asking them to take up the recommendations of the Equality Challenge Unit to improve diversity on their governing bodies. I have had some fairly encouraging replies to date. I would like all the universities to rethink their use of zero-hours contracts, so I was delighted to hear the University of Edinburgh announce recently that it will review the use of zero-hours contracts. I call on all the universities in Scotland to follow the University of Edinburgh’s example on that issue. In recent years, the students of the university have worked with their elected green rectors—including my predecessor, Robin Harper MSP, Mark Ballard MSP and the current rector, Peter McColl—to influence the running of the institution in positive ways, as a result of which above-inflation rent increases in university accommodation have been ended, the number of access bursaries has been increased and it has been ensured that international students have fixed fees for their entire degree programme. They will go on campaigning for an end to zero-hours contracts, for the setting up of a student housing co-operative and for ethical investment of the university’s endowments. I am conscious of the time. I am sure that all members who are in the chamber are committed to helping the university to continue to deliver world-class education and research for another 431 years.

The Green amendment, in Patrick Harvie’s name, says at the outset that we can deliver prosperity, sustainability and equality in our society but not by returning to “business as usual”. Why is this so? I hope that it is clear. Scotland is one of the richest countries in the world but there are huge, humiliating inequalities in wealth and in the life chances that are available to people, there are dramatic inequalities in the health of our communities and there is the continuing exclusion of too many women from life’s opportunities. That is what business as usual and the continuing economic model have delivered, and that is what investing in a new economic renewal for Scotland can change. We have enough wealth, but it must be distributed more evenly to benefit the 99 per cent. The simplest answer to austerity is equality. There is so much more that we can do to give those who want to get a better job, gain more skills and education, have a family life or contribute to our neighbourhoods the opportunity to do so. What would an equal, jobs-rich, resilient economy for Scotland look like? How do we get there? The Scottish referendum has not, as some suggest, led to stagnation or put Scotland on hold. Instead, we have seen thousands of people discuss what could change and how Scotland can be better. Most of those creative thoughts are informal, between individuals. Some are captured in projects such as the Jimmy Reid Foundation’s common weal vision, Oxfam’s humankind index or the work of transition groups across the country. We have never had so much debate about how things are done currently and how they might be done differently. Last week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard evidence from the enterprise research centre, a university-based institute producing the evidence base for policy making. It finds that the majority of jobs in the UK are created by small firms of fewer than 50 employees. Small businesses’ share of employment has tripled since 1998, although many stop trading within their first few years. We also heard, astoundingly, that the rate of job creation by small firms was not affected by the crash. Small businesses have displayed incredible resilience throughout the downturn by continuing to create jobs—and lose them—at the same rate. In fact, the Federation of Small Businesses has shown, with UK labour force survey data, that between 2008 and 2011, 88 per cent of people moving from unemployment into private sector employment found work in small and medium-sized enterprises, compared to 12 per cent who found employment in large businesses. It is clear that employment in small firms is the most important route to employment for the unemployed and economically inactive. Economic renewal in Scotland should be founded on small businesses. Supporting them is a challenge because the sector has many different needs. The term SME is too broad—it includes microbusinesses of one or two and those with 250 employees. We need separate champions in Government for microbusinesses and medium-sized businesses, and for women, too. Women are a driving force in Scotland’s economy, yet Scotland’s rates of female business ownership are persistently low. The Enterprise Research Centre points to evidence suggesting that Scotland would have another 108,000-plus businesses if women’s business ownership rates equalled those of men. There is also considerable ambition and aspiration among women. The Scottish Trades Union Congress and the women in Scotland’s economy research centre have suggested that many women are economically inactive because there is little financial benefit from working when childcare costs, which are among the highest in Europe, eat up a massive proportion of any wage. The Government is proposing an extension of childcare, and I welcome that. However, a transformative approach to childcare would provide employment for many and enable many more women to pursue education and employment. Mothers will find it very difficult to set up businesses without being assured that they have first-class childcare support.

That is certainly something to look at. When I started work again, when my daughter was a bit older, I shared employment and found that very helpful. At First Minister’s question time two weeks ago, the First Minister hinted at a desire to look at a transformative childcare system based on models from Scandinavia. I urge him to take that forward. Economic powers for Scotland should mean a vision for enterprise, not inward investment from multinationals in search of the next tax break. Economic powers should mean a concerted effort to pay people fair wages. We know that the majority of benefits go not to the unemployed, but to people in work on poverty wages, through so-called corporate welfare. Some actions do not need to wait for independence. Evidence from around the globe points to the greater economic benefits of small-scale infrastructure projects. The Government’s motion talks about more than growth as the purpose of the economy, and that is why I will support it tonight. People and society should not be held to ransom by a casino economy designed to benefit big business. Scottish independence is a chance to change that, but it remains a battle to be won. What would be different if sustainable economic growth was not the Government’s sole purpose? If as much regard was given to wellbeing and health outcomes as to economic growth, cycling and walking would be given an appropriate slice of the budget and insulation projects would be warming people’s homes and reducing fuel costs now. Moreover, it is not a case of either/or. Such investment would do much more to strengthen the economy and make it more resilient. Investing in those areas provides jobs, cuts emissions and bills, and improves health. That is the kind of growth that we should encourage and it is the kind of economy that the Green amendment requires. I move amendment S4M-07734.3, in the name of Patrick Harvie, to insert at end: “, and believes that this society will not be achieved by a return to ‘business as usual’ economics but rather by the pursuit of a new economic model emphasising good quality, satisfying jobs, small businesses, entrepreneurs, affordable homes, closing the gap between rich and poor, and fairly balancing social, environmental and economic priorities, as consistently advocated by the Green New Deal Group over the last five years.”

Edinburgh’s air quality management areas were extended this year because pollution targets are not being met. The City of Edinburgh Council now has a plan to cut pollution on Leith Walk by investing in walking and cycling, and it has asked Transport Scotland for a £3 million contribution. Will the Government contribute an appropriate portion of the Forth road bridge underspend to tackle the air pollution that the new bridge will cause?

6. To ask the First Minister, in light of its report, “The Gender Impacts of Welfare Reform”, what impact the Scottish Government considers welfare reforms are having on women in Scotland. (S4F-01520)

Unfortunately, we do not control welfare in Holyrood, so we must mitigate the cuts in other ways. The Government has chosen to invest in construction to kick start the economy, but there is a massive gender divide, with only 2 per cent of construction apprenticeships going to women. The proposed extra hours of childcare are welcome, but investing in truly transformative, affordable childcare systems, such as the Nordic models, would provide hundreds of jobs and enable thousands of women to pursue work and education, boosting the economic recovery. What will the First Minister do to ensure that efforts to develop the economy are specifically designed to help women back into work?

I thank the Government for advance sight of the First Minister’s statement, much of which concentrated on the referendum next year. It is quite right that both sides continue to make arguments to further their case and Greens will continue to argue for the principle of decentralisation: that decisions should be made as close as possible to those whom they affect. I hope that we can all make our arguments with the mutual respect that best facilitates the debate among us and among all those in Scotland outside the Parliament who will really decide. It is important, however, that we spend time making the best use of the powers that we already have. The way in which we develop the economy is extremely important, and I am pleased to hear the First Minister make the argument that looking after the health and wellbeing of Scotland’s people and creating an inclusive society in which the maximum number of people can participate is key to making Scotland flourish. When Professor Stiglitz spoke to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee in February he emphasised the importance of using a dashboard of indicators to measure a society’s success. We must aim not to create growth in the economy purely for growth’s sake. People want high-quality, meaningful, secure and well-paid jobs with full employment rights; warm, secure homes with secure tenancies; first-class education and health services; and a clean environment in which to live—not an extra percentage point on GDP that benefits only a few. Scotland’s national performance framework gives us hope that we can lose the tunnel vision that GDP imposes and emphasise the things that make people’s lives better and more fulfilling. Measuring median household income is one practical change that we could easily make to help to ensure that our economic policy benefits more people. Government is expected to deliver across a wide spectrum of social, environmental and economic outcomes; public procurement accounts for £9 billion of spending a year and should be expected to do the same. We are constrained by European Union procurement rules, but we must not use that as an excuse for not making progress with the forthcoming procurement bill. It is our responsibility to make Scottish procurement work hard for Scottish society and for our environment and economy. It is very important that our small and microbusinesses are better able to access public procurement contracts and compete for work. Small, locally owned businesses create a resilient economy and they are more likely to hold on to and value staff and less likely to disappear off seeking the next big tax break or subsidy. Ministers might not get to stand in front of the latest new thing cutting the ribbon, but there is substantial evidence to support the wisdom of investing in smaller local-level infrastructure projects as the best way to help people to create jobs and to help the economy. I will be interested to look in more detail at today’s statement and at the impacts of the planned bills on women and children. We need to understand how a legislative programme or a policy change benefits different sections of society. We already know that the coalition Government is imposing a gendered austerity on Britain. The cuts affect men and women, but it is women who are chiefly being hit—hit through the loss of benefits, hit through the loss of public sector jobs and hit as they are expected to fill the gap left by underfunded care and community services. The Scottish Government published its own gender analysis of the UK cuts last week. I hope that that will be replicated for other areas of policy. A gender analysis of this year’s budget would be a welcome addition. Gender comes into play across almost all areas of society, including starkly in health and sport. Last month’s British Medical Journal reported that only 38 per cent of seven-year-old girls in Scotland engage in an hour’s worth of physical activity each day, compared with 63 per cent of boys. Significantly more men than women cycle, and only proper investment in safe junctions and segregated cycle lanes will convince more people that cycling will improve, not endanger, their health. The Government must increase spend on cycling and walking infrastructure or the target of 10 per cent of journeys to be made by bike by 2020 will remain a vague and unsupported vision. Many people in Scotland cannot afford to or do not want to have to rely on a private car. They want transport justice and they want investment in public transport to be increased to ensure that the Government does not continue to miss climate targets. The First Minister also talked of decentralisation and building strong local democracy. So far, the Government has failed to convince me and many others that it is really committed in this area. I find it deeply ironic that a Government that is campaigning for full independence has, in effect, removed local authorities’ ability to raise the revenue that they need to fund local services properly. We do not want a mini-Westminster here. Devolution must not stop here in Holyrood. The community empowerment and renewal bill should help clubs such as Musselburgh Windsor to take over the changing facilities that it needs. It should allow input from and engagement with those who want to contribute to improving and running local activities, to working with the NHS on hospital community gardens and to using vacant land for allotments, working alongside local authorities and others. However, we need to ensure that communities have sufficient capacity and support to make that a reality. Scottish Greens look forward to progress on equal marriage and on childcare, which is much needed. The proposed bills on welfare additions, food standards and housing are welcome, too. I do not have time to cover everything that I would like to, but I look forward to listening to the rest of the debate.

Earlier this year, KPMG was awarded £1.7 million of RSA grant, to move what has been dubbed a centre of excellence in tax avoidance to Glasgow. Is it the Government’s plan to support companies that avoid tax and the audit firms that help them to do so?

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. Upgraded policies are few and far between in the document. On transport, for example, there is not a single idea from the Scottish Government that has the status of a policy. Will the minister make clear what the Scottish Government will do to reduce road emissions that it is not required to do by the European Union? The Government’s own expert committee is urging expansion of the loan scheme to get district heating projects under way, so why does financing remain at only £5 million over several years?

I am glad that the threat of tradeable rights has been seen off. What are the Government’s intentions for allocating fishing opportunities in Scotland? Article 16 in the new regulation allows for those who fish in more sustainable ways and contribute to coastal communities to get priority access. Will the cabinet secretary take advantage of that new provision? Will rights be allocated to those who can fish most sustainably and best support the local economy, instead of just to those who have fished the most in the past?

I welcome the chance to contribute to this debate. It is important that we do all that we can to develop a passion for sport in our young people. It was an Austrian industrial manager, Johann Rosenzopf, who suggested that we should have a youth Olympics. That was a response to growing global concerns about childhood obesity and falling youth participation in sport. I will not repeat the many comments that colleagues have made about the health benefits of being active and about preventative spend. It is sheer common sense to invest in sport at this time. It is important that we encourage a passion for sport among our young people, so we have to do all that we can to ensure that they have opportunities to find the sport that is right for them. If someone is passionate about a sport, it is more likely that they will exercise. They will want to practise and play the games that will make them better at their sport. They will be moving rather than sitting. Some sports require more running than others, but all require some level of activity. Involvement in sport also encourages social interaction. Young people spend time developing relationships with team mates. They might meet people from different schools, different workplaces and different areas—people they might not come across otherwise. Young people learn to work together. Sport is fun, yet they have a goal. It stops our young people constantly telling us that they are bored. It gets them away from screens and gives them something positive to do. It teaches many life skills, too: time management; getting something such as their kit ready; and goal-oriented thinking. It lets them see that if they work and practise, they can achieve something. Those transferable skills can be applied to exams, learning skills in trades and so on. Sport helps young people to de-stress. They can forget about school and the pressure of exams and they become mindful of what they are doing in the moment. If someone is learning the high jump, for example, they cannot be thinking about their homework or the other pressures in their life. That is healthy for our young people. Their self-esteem develops, too, through encouragement of and praise for their efforts. Whether they are experts or not, they learn that, if they strive, they can improve. That empowers them and develops a positive, healthy attitude. As I have said before, it is important that we give children every opportunity to try out a wide variety of sports, whether that is free running, BMX or mountain biking—it might be something away from the main stream. I would like the Scottish Government to ask young people what they would like to see in the youth sport strategy and what the barriers and incentives are. Bob Doris spoke about the costs to families. Accessing an athletics track, buying some spikes and so on may be beyond some people’s incomes—although I know that my local club has a second-hand policy whereby people hand in gear, and we should encourage that. However, there are opportunities in our daily lives to encourage young people to be active. The bikeability scheme whereby every child in Scotland should learn to cycle is important, but we are still relying on volunteers to come forward; we are relying on parents. It is the same with coaching. Last week, Edinburgh hosted its traditional annual interscholastics, but not every school in the city had a team. I would like to know why, because young people are being deprived of an opportunity. If schools are relying on one teacher who is simply unavailable on that day, we have to ensure that there is a fall-back. I would like a basic commitment from local authorities that all schools will compete in the interschool competitions in their area, and if they do not, we should ask why. It is fair to say that we are a sports-mad country, but I would like to see more people move from spectator to participator. This year, we are sandwiched between the Olympics last year and the Commonwealth games next year. We have the world athletics championships in August, and I am sure that we will see some of our excellent young Scottish athletes, such as Eilidh Child, who has already won a gold and a silver medal at the European indoor championships earlier this year, and Lynsey Sharp, the European gold medallist. They will have a chance to develop and become household names before we all have an opportunity to see them in Glasgow next year. That will have an impact. Positive role models are part of the picture of encouraging more people to take part in sport. I welcome Glasgow’s bid for the youth Olympics. It has certainly been well received in the press, and rightly so. I state also my support for Edinburgh’s bid to become the site of the national performance centre. The bid has much to commend it: the site would be close to some of the less affluent city sights, which would be very welcome. I also support Bob Doris’s call for Glasgow to host the 2021 world masters games. If the bid is successful, I will ensure that I am fit to participate—no pressure there. The amendments have much to commend them. Two hours of PE in primary school is the bare minimum that we should be considering; and high school pupils need more than two periods. High school is the point at which PE traditionally loses young people, particularly young women. I would like there to be a focus on having much more time than that. I believe that the minister realises that two periods is not sufficient. I welcome the minister’s comments on play. If we encourage play, we encourage physical literacy and self-confidence and we make it more likely that our young people will go into sport. On the youth sports strategy, I would like us to ensure that Government bodies have funding for coaches. We are still too short of them. There should be a voucher system to enable young people to try different sports—I recommend that members consider the club golf model and the work that Triathlon Scotland is doing. I would like the Government to make a commitment to ensure that every child in Scotland learns to swim by a certain age—I am not an expert, so I will not suggest an age, but we should find out the optimal age by which a child should learn to swim. We would not want our children to leave school without being able to read and write; let us make it the same for swimming. I suggest that we organise a cross-sports coaching conference at which we can hear from the people—volunteers, largely—who support our athletes. Finally, there should also be a basic commitment from local authorities.

Presiding Officer, I apologise for missing the opening words of the debate. A new United Nations report entitled “Global Employment Trends for Youth 2013” tells us that 73 million young people will be out of work this year. Even in Scotland, the unemployment rate among 16 to 25-year-olds is twice as high as it is among other adults. Women and those who have disabilities are also hit particularly hard. Some commentators have expressed surprise that UK unemployment numbers are not even higher, but what has become apparent, as the STUC and others highlighted in evidence to the committee’s inquiry, is that a narrow focus on headline employment and unemployment levels does not tell the whole story. Unemployment figures hide the fact that many people across the country are struggling to make ends meet on a low income, as opposed to having no income at all. Underemployment is not just about a shortage of hours; as we have heard, it can also mean that many skilled and well qualified people cannot fully utilise their knowledge and abilities. That is a colossal waste of investment at personal and national levels. Underemployment is not a new phenomenon, but it is increasing and it affects young people and women particularly badly, especially those who work in the social care, retail and tourism sectors. Many people who previously held full-time posts have accepted reduced hours rather than lose their jobs entirely, and the need to supplement earnings with working tax credits is increasingly common. Evidence from Citizens Advice Scotland reported increased demands for its expertise for a growing number of individuals and families who are in crisis, as welfare reforms mean that eligibility criteria are harder to meet. When jobs are available, too often they are low skilled and low waged and have limited job security. There has been a worrying increase in the use of zero-hours contracts, under which employees do not have traditional rights and might have no idea how many, if any, hours an employer will be able to offer every week. Scotland must strive to deliver high-quality and high-value jobs for its workforce, with the best of training and prospects for all. During the committee’s inquiry, I questioned the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth on the use of zero-hours contracts. I welcomed his assurance that the Scottish Government does not use such contracts and I hope that the proposed public procurement reform bill will ensure that companies that receive public money do not improperly use zero-hours contracts. Margaret McDougall touched on the use of such contracts in the University of Edinburgh. For the college of humanities and social science, the number of people on zero-hours contracts rises to 47 per cent. Mark Porter, the chairman of the British Medical Association council, recently said: “An expansion of zero hours contracts in the NHS is of great concern. While they have a minor role in allowing recently retired doctors to continue to work, they are not conducive to planning coherent cohesive services which focus on the care of patients.” During the committee’s inquiry, I asked about the public subsidising of companies that do not pay an appropriate share of tax. The response that I received is in the Official Report. I have heard the debate among members today. My view is that the UK Government needs to sort out the loophole-ridden tax system but, in the meantime, the Scottish Government needs to work with Scottish Enterprise to tighten the criteria for those who receive regional selective assistance and other such funding. We must use the available business support to grow Scottish small businesses and microbusinesses, as they provide sustainable employment to many Scots and are more likely to add value to the local economy. Microbusinesses, which have fewer than 10 employees, make up nearly 94 per cent of Scottish businesses. We should support them as a priority. They provide 27 per cent of private sector jobs, and more than 40 per cent of unemployed people who find work in the private sector go to work in a microbusiness or become self-employed. In my remaining time, I will focus on the impact of underemployment on women and young people. The STUC suggested in evidence that, because of the many obstacles that women face, including caring and childcare duties, they might simply have no choice but to become economically inactive. As Kezia Dugdale noted, those women might not even be recorded statistically. The Government’s commitment to increase the legislative provision of childcare will help women into work and back into work, but it is important that we understand why Scotland has the second most expensive childcare in Europe, with 25 hours of nursery care costing more than half the average part-time wage, as highlighted by the women in Scotland’s economy research centre and Children in Scotland. Why are costs so high when those who work in childcare, who are predominantly women, are certainly not among the most highly salaried? Last year, the Trades Union Congress noted that policies to address the underemployment crisis must recognise that patterns of participation in the labour market are different for men and women and that women’s choices are often conditional on other factors that relate to their household roles and responsibilities. The committee is concerned by the higher underemployment levels among young people. A lack of hours and finance inhibits young people’s capacity to become truly independent and has an impact on their long-term prospects. We heard from a young underemployed graduate who held two casual jobs as he tried to find work in his field of study. He was underemployed in terms of hours and in that he was not utilising his skills and expertise. He could not secure an internship in his subject because graduates from previous years were still in unpaid internships, blocking his pathway. Research into the incidence of unpaid internships and their impact on opportunities to secure entry-level employment is urgently required. Ultimately, the least skilled and the young are most likely to experience barriers to accessing the labour market. Like unemployment, underemployment drives down income, wages and demand. There is cross-party support for job creation programmes, education and training, and there is increased awareness of the opportunities of properly supported entrepreneurship and the importance of labour rights in such a tight market. We should continue to focus on opportunities such as the third sector internship scheme and the community jobs Scotland scheme, which are well regarded and which provide high-quality work-based training. We must ensure that incentives are available for employers to hire disadvantaged young people. There are good examples of progress, such as the City of Edinburgh Council’s scheme to offer apprenticeships to the looked-after young people who are in its care. That practice should be adopted nationally. People who cannot find a decent job become demoralised and, denied of opportunity, they can become alienated. Joseph Stiglitz urges that we cannot waste human capital, which is “our most valuable asset”. In all that we do, let us keep it in mind that unemployment and underemployment blight the lives of women and men of all ages.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that public procurement contracts are open to small and micro businesses. (S4O-02188)

I am pleased to hear the cabinet secretary’s enthusiasm on the issue and I welcome that progress, but it is important to focus on the value, rather than the number, of contracts that are going to small companies. I am concerned that recent answers to my parliamentary questions suggest that, although the number may have increased, the value of public contracts going to small and micro companies fell from 26 per cent to 18 per cent between 2010 and 2012. What action is the cabinet secretary taking to ensure that that decrease does not become a trend? Can she advise whether, within European Union rules, the Scottish Government can set an aspirational target for small-business procurement?

I, too, congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate. I am pleased to support the still waiting campaign in calling for the inclusion of all demand-responsive community transport services in the national concessionary travel scheme. Local community transport providers play an important role in our communities, keeping people who might otherwise be very isolated connected to their friends and the services that they need. Most important, they enable many people to maintain their independence. However, as Alison McInnes’s motion recognises, the concessionary scheme is not benefiting as many people as it could or should. The flexibility of the community transport model means that it fills the gap in rural areas, where the public transport system cannot reach every person who needs a lift into town, to the doctor’s surgery or into the village to attend a social event. It is timely that Age Scotland, Leonard Cheshire Disability and others are working harder than ever to raise awareness of the need for greater support of and investment in a sometimes overlooked service. The Community Transport Association’s state of the sector report highlights the growth in demand as a result of our changing demographic. The number of people aged over 75 is projected to rise by 23 per cent by 2020 and by 84 per cent by 2033. We know that commercial bus operators are withdrawing from routes on grounds of cost, isolating even more older and disabled people. We have also heard, in earlier debates on the subject, that the number of Scottish Ambulance Service lifts to non-emergency appointments has been reduced. Leonard Cheshire Disability notes that 43 per cent of respondents to its disability review had to miss a hospital appointment, and 18 per cent were forced to turn down a job, due to a lack of accessible transport. Access to community transport is essential because it gives us the opportunity to tackle problems before they become a crisis. Therefore, investment in community transport is commonsense preventative spend. Substantial savings will be delivered through improved health and wellbeing, and many people’s quality of life will be increased. We all know elderly and less mobile friends and family members who do not want to depend on us to get out and about and who may decline offers of lifts, and many families do not have access to private transport. Many community transport initiatives are delivered by volunteers, and the state of the sector report demonstrated that volunteer time of some 278,000 hours annually is worth almost £107 million a year, if valued at the minimum wage rate. Community transport is invaluable to those who use it. If someone is over 60 and able to reach a bus stop, they can use their concessionary pass. If, however, they are physically unable to reach a bus stop or live too far away from one, they cannot take advantage of that potentially life-changing entitlement. Local people, communities and high streets will all benefit from an extension of the concessionary scheme. It is important that we do all that we can to make it possible for everyone in Scotland to live a fulfilling and engaged life. The still waiting campaign is actively seeking to engage in discussions about how the increased cost of providing the service will be met. It is not acceptable that, in one of the wealthiest countries in the world, people are excluded from opportunities due to a lack of affordable and accessible transport. We can and should address that. Jim Eadie spoke of challenges, but I believe that, in this day and age, community transport vehicles are able to read passes. All older people in Scotland are entitled to concessionary travel, and I look forward to the day when all those who want to use their concessionary bus pass can do so.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what proportion of its transport budget is spent on infrastructure to increase walking and cycling rates. (S4O-02164)

The 4,000 or so people who pedalled on Parliament on Sunday to call for increased investment in cycling were disappointed that the minister was unable to attend. Can he reassure those people, and all those who want cycling to be safe for all from eight to 80 years, that his Government is committed to increasing investment to the levels that will enable it to deliver its own commitment to 10 per cent of all journeys being made by bike by 2020?

I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing time to debate this issue. I am very pleased to debate it in the year of natural Scotland, and I support any initiative to make Scotland greener and any commitment to our woodlands. We have heard from many members why it is so important, and from many organisations including the Woodland Trust, the Scottish Wildlife Trust, Scottish Environment LINK and the John Muir Trust. Mike MacKenzie mentioned that Sitka spruce does not support indigenous wildlife, and I think that this is a very important step that we can take to ensure that our wildlife has every chance to thrive. I hope that a national tree will be more than symbolic. Too-recent history has seen the trampling of a site of special scientific interest—one of the most protective of all designations. I believe that designations and titles should stand for something and should really mean something. If having a national tree brings increased determination to protect our natural spaces and places for their inherent value, it is right that we should have one. It is right that we should celebrate a national tree, but while we focus on one tree we should also dwell on the interconnectedness of all our native species. Scotland was once a forest land until human activities stripped it of almost all its ancient woodland. Of course, climatic change and environmental degradation has not helped. However, we will be far richer ecologically, culturally and financially if we increase our commitment to our native woodlands and forests. I welcome the growing interest in community woodland and in community ownership of woodland, and in the sustainable harvesting of our forests. We produce timber for some of the most beautiful and sustainable furniture that one could possibly imagine—Mike MacKenzie alluded to that, too. Some of the furniture, houses and objects that are made by our most talented craftspeople are priceless objects without compare. In recent times we have had outbreaks of ash dieback and dothistroma needle blight, which have raised awareness of the fragility and importance of our trees and forests, and of the need for safe, sustainable and sensible management and commercial practice. As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I would like to highlight concerns that have been raised with me about threats to our forests and woodlands from large-scale biomass energy. With a growing human population, tensions over land use will continue, so it is important that we put down markers and state our commitment to our woodland. The state of the world’s natural forests is a matter of grave concern. Our native woodlands may be small in global terms, but they are distinctive and unique. Our old pinewoods are home to a distinctive range of native species. The “State of Nature” report that has just been published highlights the perilous state of many species, but there is hope. Awareness is increasing, and if we can increase awareness of the importance of our trees at garden level and at street level, and if we can have a renewed focus on and discussion of our trees, we can truly transform our neighbourhoods. Tourists flock to visit the Birnam oak and the Fortingall yew, as we have heard, and Commonwealth Orchard seeks to have fruit trees in all our streets. Today, I have not focused on one tree—I am content to let the consultation take its course. However, if proclaiming a native tree as the national tree helps to protect and enhance interest in, and land devoted to, preserving and promoting biodiversity, I am more than happy to support the initiative.

The public would be forgiven for thinking that energy policy is entirely devolved to the Parliament, given that we discuss and debate it at length, and rightly so because it is extremely important. All members believe that Scotland’s energy supply must be affordable, secure and decarbonised, but it is important to remember that we will achieve those three things only with a reduction in overall demand, which is a point that I will come back to. The debate reminds us that energy is largely a reserved issue and that important decisions that will set the terms of energy investment in the UK for the coming decades will soon be made in Westminster. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has ensured that it is at the table in setting the contracts for difference and the EMR delivery plan. The Government has done a good job of promoting renewables with the powers that it has, and I urge it to continue efforts to ensure that renewables and low-carbon technologies are supported. The current UK renewables obligation support mechanism works, and many renewables projects and innovations have been made possible because of it. The CFD, too, must deliver for renewables and give investment certainty. I hope that the job has been made slightly easier. During the previous EMR debate, the minister lamented the departure of Charles Hendry. I for one am less sad to see John Hayes go—many have said that his anti-renewables stance was spooking investors and he has been quietly moved on. Getting support for renewables right is vital and seems possible, but EMR also seems likely to hand out vast subsidies to new nuclear power stations. That will divert investment away from faster, less costly, more job-rich and more secure means of meeting our energy needs, such as interconnection, energy efficiency and renewables. The nuclear industry has been telling us for years that nuclear is the cheapest form of energy. Caroline Lucas, my Green colleague at Westminster, has tabled an amendment to the Energy Bill to ensure that nuclear does not receive payments that exceed the lowest payments to renewables. If the nuclear industry’s claims are correct, it should have no qualms about supporting the Greens on that. The Scottish Government in its negotiations with the UK Government needs to ensure that renewables are placed as a priority above the nuclear industry. It is clear that, in the integrated UK energy market that the motion welcomes, the cost of nuclear subsidies will be borne by consumers in Scotland, too. I have argued for continued support for renewables and against the same for nuclear. It is important that the Energy Bill does not enable the dash for gas that many commentators fear. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the achievability of Scotland’s renewables targets concluded that the targets are achievable, but only if a number of issues are addressed. One of the priorities that was highlighted for the Scottish Government’s engagement with the UK over the Energy Bill was for “A revision of the Emissions Performance Standard that does not create incentives which will lead to investment being unduly diverted from renewables to gas”. The emissions performance standard is one of the few tools that the Government has to tackle the most polluting power stations and encourage the almost complete decarbonisation of the power sector that the UK Committee on Climate Change says is necessary by 2030. As Rhoda Grant has highlighted, the Government seems to be in no mood to try to reduce the UK’s pointlessly high EPS or set a Scottish one to lead the way. The committee’s report on the legislative consent memorandum for the Energy Bill details the amendments that Labour and I lodged and our dissent from the recommendation to Parliament. Finally, I want to talk about alternatives. The UK Energy Bill entrenches the dominance of the big six energy companies, which have not delivered affordable energy. In Scotland last year, 26,000 people were added to the fuel poor, largely as a result of fuel price increases. There would have been many more were it not for Government-led energy efficiency measures, which can of course always be improved on. For an alternative, we can look not so far away, to Germany, and a case that was reported by Alan Simpson, the ex-Labour MP. In the small town of Schönau in the Black Forest, a feisty primary school teacher called Ursula Sladek and others decided that they wanted to buy non-nuclear energy, and consume less at that. An approach to the local energy company failed but, after a five-year battle, the community took ownership of the local grid and could supply their own energy. That idea took hold and there are now 600 community energy companies democratising Germany’s energy market. Several years ago, Germany too was dominated by its own big four but now, more than half of the 60GW of renewable energy that has been installed in less than a decade is citizen or community-owned. That is delivering cheaper, cleaner energy, but importantly, it is an energy market that is not dominated by a few players but is owned and controlled by citizens. That is a vision that we in Scotland should aspire to.

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will make statutory a universal entitlement to services from health visitors. (S4O-02083)

The Royal College of Nursing, the Royal College of General Practitioners and Children in Scotland are among the notable bodies that are calling for statutory entitlement to universal services. There is a concern that, if that does not occur, some vulnerable children might not be identified and could miss out on interventions in the early years. The cabinet secretary will agree that prevention is central to improvements that we can make to Scotland’s health. How will the cabinet secretary prevent an increase in direct public costs over the long term if that right does not become statutory?

The freshwater pearl mussel has joined the panda on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s red list of endangered species, which many people regard as the barometer of life. However, it is fair to say that the freshwater pearl mussel has not received a fraction of the coverage that the panda has, so I thank Mary Scanlon for raising awareness of the importance of the species in this debate. I, too, have no doubt that Scottish Environment LINK’s innovative species champion initiative has already raised awareness of the challenges that many of our native wildlife species face. The freshwater pearl mussel finds itself on the red list of endangered species due to its unprecedented worldwide decline during the latter part of the 20th century. As we have heard—it is worth repeating—pollution from pesticides, fertilisers and other contaminants, siltation, climate change and declines in host-fish populations are all partly responsible for that. These rare and long-living mussels—they commonly reach ages of over 120 years—are also very vulnerable to disturbances from engineering works in rivers. Silt contamination makes it difficult for the mussels to feed and it can kill adults. Buglife has reported cases of river disturbance that have resulted in animals that were born when Charles Darwin was alive floating out of their beds and being swept into the sea. As Jamie McGrigor commented, it is all the same ecosystem. I am honoured to champion the brown hare, but the point is that all species depend on a clean, protected and safe environment. The pearl mussel is on the brink in Scotland. Its population—like ours—is ageing. The youngest individuals in some rivers are 40 years old. Despite the fact that it is an offence to intentionally kill, injure, take or disturb freshwater pearl mussels or their habitat, criminal activity remains a major threat. As we have heard, enforcement is wanting and deterrents are often too weak to deter, so we need to ensure that there are sufficient resources in place to prevent criminal activity from further decimating this endangered species, and that such action is taken seriously. I thank Buglife and RSPB Scotland for ensuring that we understand the importance of a too-often-overlooked species. Members will note—Mary Scanlon commented on this—that the RSPB welcomes in its very helpful briefing the wider range of sanctions that are proposed in the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, including fixed and variable monetary penalties, but it is concerned that the duty that is proposed for SEPA to promote sustainable economic growth will conflict with strong protection for the water environment. The United Nations environmental programme reported previously that there are some 46,000 pieces of plastic in each square mile of ocean. Much of that rubbish began its journey to the sea in our local rivers and waterways. For too long, our rivers and seas have been regarded as convenient places in which to dump all manner of things. Our burns, rivers and seas are living, breathing ecosystems, but general rubbish, from shopping trolleys to the ubiquitous plastic bag, is found in too many of our waterways. We need to improve and invest in education, protection and enforcement. We need to ensure that the most stringent regulations apply to those important ecosystems. I would be very grateful if in his summing up the minister could provide details of what measures his Government is taking to improve the conservation and cleanliness of our rivers and their associated ecosystems, how we can further raise awareness of the importance of the freshwater pearl mussel species and what further controls on illegal pearl fishing might be applied—for example, limiting the trade and encouraging higher levels of reporting of suspicious activity.

I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on securing today’s debate and on enabling us to celebrate the notable achievements of Dads Rock, a charity that provides an ever-flourishing support and a lively social scene for fathers and their children. The brainchild of two Edinburgh dads—Thomas Lynch and David Marshall—Dads Rock was an inspired and innovative response to the view that there was not much in Edinburgh specifically for dads and their children. Thinking back to my time on the mother and toddler circuit, I found that to be a supportive experience. The circuit gave structure to the day and enabled mums and children alike to make friendships that have lasted to this day. I say “mother” and “mums” because I cannot recall ever bumping into a dad there, although I should say that he would have been made very welcome indeed. As often happens, the people on the ground who have experienced the lack of a necessary and important service have taken action to address the problem. Based in Sighthill, Dads Rock has now expanded into Granton and, as we have heard, is working on setting up a base in Fife. For an organisation that has celebrated only one birthday, that is truly impressive. We know that such groups provide a lifeline for many parents. In bringing together stay-at-home parents and those who have gone back to work, Dads Rock brings together people who might never bump into one another in their normal day-to-day routine. The chance to share experiences of parenthood and to compare notes is just as invaluable for fathers as it is for mothers. At the local toddler groups that I attended, I met many women who remain firm friends to this day. When one of us—not me, I should point out—had finally had that first full night’s sleep, we listened with awe to how that wonderful achievement had been arrived at. The point is that it is great to learn from people who are experiencing what we are experiencing. It is important that we make that possible for all the dads in the community, too. When I looked online prior to today’s debate to see what access dads have to such clubs, I found that I was more likely to read postings such as “My partner’s finding it tough as he doesn’t know any other stay-at-home dads” or “Some dads go to ‘normal’ toddler groups.” Such comments really highlight the need for a group such as Dads Rock. Many men feel uncomfortable at the thought of attending what are still too often regarded as mother and toddler groups. In time, that will no doubt change, given that The Daily Telegraph reported in January that the number of stay-at-home fathers reached a record high last year. It is important that we ensure that dads have access to groups in which they feel comfortable and welcome. Dads Rock notably provides opportunities at the weekend that give dads and their children the flexibility to do something different with their children when they are not in school. As we have heard, Dads Rock academy will provide local children with free music tuition. The well-documented merits of music tuition have been debated at length in the Parliament, but the Dads Rock version will involve dad learning an instrument, too. That is a fantastic example of lifelong learning. As Graeme Dey touched on, Dads Rock’s first visit of the year saw a great gathering of dads and children head to the national museum. As the membership of Dads Rock is increasing all the time, I have absolutely no doubt that the organisation will go from strength to strength. In these challenging times, the opportunities that Dads Rock provides are vital for dads and their children. No matter what their circumstances, Dads Rock gives them a place to go, relax and play, and just to be together. Dads Rock’s social media savvy shows how skilled it is at engaging with the wider community. I believe that we will hear a great deal more about this wonderful project, which is a model of real community empowerment.

With regard to neonicotinoids, the Scottish Government was unwilling to adopt the precautionary principle, which states: “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.” What steps will the Government take to ensure that Scotland is in a position to impose a ban from December 2013, in accordance with this week’s European Union decision?

Murdo Fraser may be aware that fossil fuels and nuclear are massively subsidised. For example, annual United Kingdom Government support for nuclear decommissioning is greater than £2 billion. Will he comment on those subsidies?

Lord Stern told us six and a half years ago that it is much cheaper to deal with climate change than with its consequences. Last month, the carbon tracker initiative and the Grantham institute, of which he is chair, calculated that there are more fossil fuels held in reserve around the world than we can afford to burn. Between 60 and 80 per cent of the coal, oil and gas reserves of public listed companies must be left in the ground if the world is to have a chance of not warming by more than 2°C. A balanced energy policy needs to recognise the difficult fact that we cannot burn all the fossil fuels we have and we need to plan a rapid transition away from fossil fuels. It does not make the oil in the North Sea redundant; we will continue to need oil to produce chemicals and for a whole host of other industrial purposes. In fact, using our irreplaceable fossil fuels by burning them starts to seem extremely inefficient when there are safer renewable alternatives available for power. Balanced energy supply is a nice phrase, but it is actually security of supply, affordability and environmental impact, including decarbonisation, that should remain the core outcomes that we seek in any energy policy, not just a balance of sources for balance’s sake. The Green amendment was not selected for debate, but it can be read in the Business Bulletin. We identify the cost of energy for households and business to be of key concern and the need for Scottish and UK Governments to place demand reduction at the top of the agenda for energy policy as the clearest way to reduce energy bills and environmental impact. I am happy to support the Labour amendment, which supports community ownership of renewables. Publicly owned renewables are important, too. The DECC attitudes survey that was published yesterday shows that support for renewables in the UK is at an all-time high: 82 per cent of people say that they support the use of renewable energy sources. Evidence heard by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee suggests that non-conventional gas extraction is not the fix that Alex Johnstone would have us believe. Let us not be distracted. Let us focus on the proven and real benefits of renewable energy.

I thank Kezia Dugdale for bringing this important debate to the chamber. Few people would expect that more women die or are disabled as a result of violence or rape than as a result of malaria, traffic accidents, cancer and AIDS combined, yet that is a fact. Scottish Women’s Aid and Zero Tolerance have worked long and hard to raise awareness of and tackle this blight on society. One billion rising aims to raise awareness of the fact that one in three women in the world face violence in their lifetime. Engender tells us that the number of reported cases of domestic violence is on the increase in Scotland, and one in five women are projected to be affected by domestic violence in their lifetime. However, as Malcolm Chisholm said, the rape crisis centre in Edinburgh faces an on-going struggle for sustainable funding. Violence against women does not take place in a vacuum; it takes place in a context in which women are paid less than men, even when they are doing similar work, and in which gender segregation—from toys to clothing—begins at birth. Austerity is gendered. Women are, quite simply, poorer and, consequently, have fewer choices. To what extent do women make the choices that affect them? There are too few women in politics. Women are very visible in campaigns to protect schools, hospitals and nurseries, but too few women are involved in making the decisions in our local authorities, Westminster and Holyrood. How are women represented in the media? They are underrepresented on many of the most frequently aired panel shows. Anyone who watches “QI”, “Never Mind the Buzzcocks”, “Mock the Week”, “A Question of Sport” or “8 out of 10 Cats” will be aware that gender balance is a rarity. Why is that important? Because print and broadcast media have a massive impact on how society views women. Women disappear from the cinema screen when they reach a certain age. We have even been made aware of cases in which they have been deemed to be too old to read the news. Sports media has an overwhelming male focus, but that is seldom questioned. International research has shown that, when reporting on women in sport, sporting media is focused only on winners, record holders and those with unique achievements. If those criteria were applied to male sport, newspaper back pages would shrink rapidly. Women are described as sex symbols, wives, mothers and victims. It would seem logical that, once a structural inequity has been discovered, action might be taken to address it, but there is little evidence to suggest that that is the case. Outside major global games, women are largely invisible in our sporting press. It is a rarity—which is astonishing in the 21st century—that women are pictured in the sports pages. When did members last see women’s sport televised, outside Wimbledon or major global games? What of the impact of fashion? The ex-editor of Vogue recently reported cases of models eating tissues to stave off hunger pangs and meet the whims of designers whose ideal woman is very tall, thin and young. That filters down from the catwalk to permeate our culture and results in dissatisfaction, criticism and objectification. That is why it is so important to show that there is an alternative. Let us celebrate normal women’s bodies and fit and healthy bodies. Women are too often made to feel wrong even when we know that they are very fine indeed. In Parliament and outwith, let us look at what day-to-day action we can take to bring about the systemic change that is needed. Thanks to brave men and women the world over, violence against women is receiving more attention. Rape as a weapon of war and as an everyday occurrence is being challenged. We must ensure that that awareness translates into action. Violence against women takes place in a context in which a woman’s appearance is deemed more important than her endeavours and achievements. Women’s diverse and complex lives are reduced to caricature and they are objectified. Let us do all that we can to ensure that women and girls have the freedom to exercise agency and autonomy over their own bodies and lives. Let us support, empower and resource all women and girls to know and claim their rights and to ensure that no one is in any doubt that violence against them is an unacceptable, despicable crime.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to promote film making in Scotland. (S4O-01971)

Edinburgh attracts many international productions, the benefits of which are realised across Scotland. However, that business is dependent on local expertise and a healthy film culture. Edinburgh’s ill-fated Marketing Edinburgh has decided to reduce the Edinburgh film focus team to one film officer, to the dismay of producers across the country. What steps will the cabinet secretary take, along with national film-making interests, to ensure that film making in Edinburgh and its outlying districts is protected and enhanced?

As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I was pleased to help scrutinise our section of the RPP. It was unfortunate that the final meeting took place on a day of public sector strikes against the cuts. Personally, in supporting those who were striking, I felt unable to cross the picket line. I thank the convener, my committee colleagues and the clerks for their flexibility in taking on board some of my input and comments in my absence. I share some of the concerns that were raised by Rhoda Grant that, in voting down some sensible recommendations, Scottish National Party back benchers have not assisted their own Government colleagues to ensure that the finalised RPP2 is as robust as possible. I am sure that the minister is willing and able to accept constructive input. The task of meeting our ambitious climate targets is not easy. It requires changes—small ones, bigger evolutionary ones and a few large-scale transformational ones—if we are to play a fair part in tackling the climate crisis. Transport did not form part of my committee’s scrutiny, but it is one area where poor choices are compromising the plan. It is impossible to double-think our way into a future of more motorways and to expect to meet our climate targets, too. I invite the minister to comment on what more can be done in that respect. The RPP almost entirely neglects demand management or the possibility that the policies and the investment decisions that we make can reduce the number and distance of journeys that are taken by car. Such decisions are largely devolved, but the only transport policy in the current draft RPP is based on EU directives. We can see from transport that the Government’s scale of ambition is falling away. Comparing RPP1 with RPP2, we see that 500,000 tonnes of abatement have been lost every year from 2014 to 2018. The necessary policy changes have just been pushed further into the future, and emissions from transport have risen, not fallen. We largely know what needs to change.

Although technological advances that reduce emissions will be welcome, traffic jams could still add to congestion, and not all vehicles will be so powered. What we really need to do is to spend more than just 1 per cent of the transport budget on cycling and walking. I hope that the final RPP2 will have active travel, car clubs, travel planning and ambitious demand management included as policy. As the RACCE Committee has recognised, the only way in which we will meet our future targets is if all the policies and proposals are implemented and if the EU shifts to the 30 per cent reduction target. There is no margin built into the plan. We heard real concern from witnesses that the EU will not move to 30 per cent, so the RPP needs explicitly to work out domestic actions to mitigate that risk. The EET Committee recommended that. The same risk exists for carbon capture and storage. Witnesses fear that the 2020 target will not be met. Peterhead now has preferred bidder status, but the RPP is predicated on CCS and we cannot put our heads in the sand about the risk. Electricity gets lots of attention, but the provision of cheap and clean heat is important too. After all, heat accounts for more than half of our energy demand. I hope that the final RPP will provide more ambition and detail on delivering district heating. From the evidence that we heard in scrutinising the RPP and in previous committee work, it is clear that the public sector has a key role to play in that. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee looks forward to the forthcoming heat policy and has asked the Government to provide more details on how it will support community district heating schemes and off-gas-grid properties to get out of fuel poverty. I hope that the minister will confirm that the Government will provide that in due course and will listen carefully to the recommendations of the expert commission on district heating. Cheap, low-carbon heat will be important in tackling fuel poverty, but high-quality insulated homes are essential too. Stop Climate Chaos, the existing homes alliance and others have all called for the proposal for minimum efficiency standards in the private sector to be upgraded to a policy and implemented by 2015. That would help to bring our existing housing stock up to standard, lever in investment and jobs for local trades and help to meet targets in a difficult sector. Scotland has played a leading role in setting the bar high, promoting climate justice and inspiring ambition, but we missed our first target. That is not the end of the line, but it is a clear signal that we need to match ambition with a credible plan with fully funded climate policies that have headroom built in to address the possibility of long, cold winters, clear milestones to track our success and bold Government action on the big challenges of, and opportunities for, ending our dependence on fossil fuels.

Shelter, warmth and food are the basic things that keep us alive. According to psychologist Abraham Maslow’s famous hierarchy of needs, just above those basic physiological requirements for life is the need for safety and freedom from fear. Food scares therefore affect some of the most basic needs that we have come to expect to be fulfilled in our modern, rich western society. A safe, secure supply of food is an essential prerequisite for a stable society, and Governments quite rightly place agriculture high up the list of priorities. In this context, the recent horsemeat scandal has shocked us, not only because some horsemeat found its way into some products that are advertised as beef but because retailers and producers seemed to be entirely unable to guarantee the safety of their food, because they genuinely did not know where it had come from. The meat processing industry is dominated by large companies selling meat as a commodity. In some cases, that is done with scant regard for the animal itself while it is alive, and little desire to ensure that it can be traced. Retailers and customers have no way of knowing where much of their processed food has come from, because tracing back through the convoluted supply chain would, quite frankly, boggle anybody’s heid. That glimpse into the murky corporate meat industry is deeply unsettling and has led, as the Independent and Green amendment says, to some overdue attention. On the retail side, the sector in the UK is highly concentrated. The big-four supermarket firms control three quarters of our grocery market, which means that they can largely dictate the prices that are paid to producers, even if that puts people out of business. We saw a graphic demonstration of that last year, when dairy farmers across the UK had had enough. The supermarkets and other milk buyers pushed prices down and thousands of farmers were going to be forced into the red. Farmers could not find a fair price on the market, so they were forced to collaborate and protest. Short-term goals to prevent price cuts were achieved. The challenge that we face is to stop a small number of players dominating the market and jeopardising the rural economy and the welfare of animals, and putting people out of business unnecessarily. Scotland’s food and drink policy should be focused on supporting small and independent businesses to play a greater role in our retail and supply chain. In the supply chain, that is not a seismic shift. The current food policy document recognises that the supply chain is dominated by small firms with one to 10 employees. Supporting those businesses must be the core of our policy. What the milk protests demonstrated is that to do that we need to support more diversity in the processing and retail sector. We learned today that Diageo plans to restructure its global supply chain, risking thousands of jobs in Scotland. A sector that is based largely on small businesses provides resilience against large-scale job losses in such situations. Of course, the picture is complicated and there are different issues for different parts of the industry. We are not selling a panacea, but it is clear that the dominance of a few prevents the maximum number of people in Scotland from benefiting. I have mentioned the Soil Association’s food for life scheme in the chamber previously. The Government’s support for the scheme is welcome, with one in 10 schools in Scotland being assured of the provenance of the healthy food that they provide for school dinners. Procurement in East Ayrshire Council has led the way in Scottish schools. Others, such as those in Edinburgh, are attempting to catch up. The Soil Association is working with Currie and Buckstone schools, Clovenstone care home, St John’s hospital in Livingstone—which serves 1 million meals a year—and the University of Edinburgh’s Pollock halls, to get them buying local. Indeed, Pollock halls achieved the bronze award in January—my congratulations to those involved. Our food policy should ensure that buying local is the default choice for public sector procurement and the easy choice for others. In Copenhagen, 75 per cent of food that is consumed in public kitchens is organic and locally sourced. We should make organic conversion and maintenance one of the Scotland rural development programme’s national targets when the consultation comes out in the spring. Among many other benefits, such a target would help to address serious concerns about the health of honey bees and other pollinators. There is a huge amount to learn from the transition movement, which is equipping people with the know-how to reclaim spaces in the city, grow their own food, cook affordable and healthy meals and enjoy doing so. The community garden in the Royal Edinburgh hospital has become a huge success that is enjoyed by many groups. It is encouraging to see movement in NHS Lothian towards replicating that success, with Midlothian community hospital garden now open, too. For hospital staff, the links between food and health are easy to see. The gardens teach people what eating healthy, nutritious food can do to improve health and wellbeing. The Independent and Green amendment talks explicitly of food policy playing its part in reducing obesity and improving health. Manufacturers have a huge amount of power over our diets and they should be doing more to cut down the amount of salt, fat and the additive content of processed meat products, among other products. It is not fair to just encourage people to buy better-quality cuts of meat. That excludes large numbers of people who simply cannot afford to do so. Top of the list on the excellent Fife diet’s manifesto is the soup test. Fife diet would like every child to leave school able to cook a cheap, nutritious bowl of soup. Who here could disagree with that? Our food policy should have at its heart the provision of nourishing people in Scotland, not an export strategy. It should promote a food and drink sector based on small independent companies to ensure that production remains on a human scale and provides the resilience and sustainability that we need to have true confidence in our food again. I move amendment S4M-05892.2, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “recognises the scandal that has hit the food industry across Europe in recent weeks and welcomes the overdue attention now being paid to the nature of the modern globalised food chain; considers that the growth of an industrialised and corporately controlled food chain has contributed to a fundamentally unhealthy and unsustainable food culture; believes that Scotland’s food and drink policy must recognise this crisis and begin to break the domination of multinational companies in the food system, ensure that small and independent businesses play a greater role in Scotland’s food and drink supply chain, rebuild the knowledge and skills related to growing and cooking food that have been undermined in recent years and ensure that affordable, nutritious and locally-sourced food is available to buy across the country; recognises the important role that healthy food could play in improving Scotland’s health and reducing obesity, and congratulates the multitude of community-driven initiatives underway throughout the country promoting affordable, healthy and sustainable food.”

6. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what recent discussions it has had with its catering contractor regarding the traceability of its meat supply chain. (S4O-01894)

The Soil Association’s food for life catering mark provides independent assurance on traceability and quality, not just of meat but of all food groups. Already one in 10 schools in Scotland hold the mark. Kitchens in the City of Edinburgh Council, NHS Lothian and the University of Edinburgh are working towards knowing where all their food comes from. Will the SPCB consider requiring the Parliament’s catering contractor to work towards achieving the Soil Association quality mark and join in that good work, which looks to improve food quality, localise our food and strengthen our local economy?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss these issues in the chamber today. The resources of so many organisations working together can help focus minds on important global issues such as the ones raised by the if campaign and the motion: land grabbing, tax dodging and the impact of Scotland’s public and private sectors on developing countries. Hunger is a devastating, debilitating crisis for a shocking number of people around the world and it is right that we take every action we can to make sure that people have fair access to the resources that they need to feed themselves. The problem is often framed as hunger, but really hunger is not the root problem; rather, it is a horrifying symptom. Not to investigate the root problem will lead to continual sticking-plaster solutions that we should not be content to accept. The if campaign recognises that. Its ask for global citizenship education is to increase our understanding of the complex root causes of hunger and to help people recognise their own role in tackling it. Global citizenship makes the connections between the political decisions and actions of powerful people and companies, often in rich countries, and the poverty, inequality and hunger that we see perpetuated around the globe. The powerful influence of some multinational companies, many of which are based in the UK, allows them to avoid tax here and operate in poorer countries at criminally low rates of taxation, extracting natural resources without fair reward for those countries and jeopardising their ability to develop their economies on their own terms. The issue of tax dodging is on the table today and available for large non-governmental organisations to campaign on because of the bold and creative campaigns of direct action by the likes of UK Uncut, many of whose members are treated as domestic extremists by the UK Government. The Scottish Government can set an example and provide leadership through the forthcoming procurement bill by putting ethical and fair-trade considerations at its core and through a robust, well-resourced and loophole-free revenue Scotland. This month, a light has been shone on the convoluted, murky supply chains of the meat processing industry that supplies our supermarkets. It reminds us of the power of corporate interests in the food chain, which has an impact on the poorest people in rich countries, as well as on poor countries. It is vital to remember that our approach to global food issues must be informed by the hundreds of millions of farmers in developing countries, and their communities, not just by the Department for International Development or NGOs. Food sovereignty is the unifying call of the amazing La Via Campesina and other farmers’ movements. Food sovereignty means returning control over the food system to farmers. We must learn from such movements. We can also learn from the work, perspective and experience of NGOs that are not officially part of the if campaign. Biofuels are highlighted in the motion. The if campaign says that we must stop poor farmers being forced off their land by biofuels. Demand for biofuels is driven in the UK by an ill-thought-out, mandatory policy that demands that there is a percentage of biofuel in all UK road fuel by April this year. It was introduced by the Labour Government and urgently needs to be reviewed by the European Union. The UK Government has presidency of the G8 this year. The if campaign is timed to put pressure on G8 countries to change practices that lock too many poor people into hunger. We should not allow the G8 Governments to make warm commitments but deliver little. That just fuels cynicism and anger. The G8 should not be used by David Cameron to burnish his and his Government’s credentials, while cynically promoting a toxic free-market system that widens inequality and removes people’s ability to develop on their own terms. Events at home illustrate the need to move away from immense corporate domination of our food chain, which, for too many people, does not work. We need to look outwards and use our new fair-trade nation status to promote positive choices that ensure that people throughout the world are free from a system that locks in poverty and that they are able to develop and feed themselves. The if campaign is putting world hunger on the agenda. A commitment to end world hunger will need structural change. Here in Scotland, we must play an active part in achieving that change.

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement and for its content. Who will sit on the food expert group with Ray Jones? Will there be space for groups such as the Federation of Small Businesses, Nourish Scotland and the Fife Diet, or will they continue to be squeezed out by the supermarkets?

Last week in the Parliament I highlighted the benefits of the Soil Association’s food for life catering mark, which currently offers peace of mind for one in 10 Scottish schools. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment said that he would consider how the Government could support such schemes—indeed, at the weekend he was quoted praising their work and impact. What target and timescale for roll-out will the Government commit to, to reassure parents, staff and pupils?

The First Minister will be aware of the report that was published yesterday confirming that the Forth road bridge is not about to fall into the sea and, indeed, has a long-term future. Does he now regret committing to a massively expensive additional bridge, sucking money away from other projects, before knowing the results of the repair work? What will prevent this Government or a future one from bringing ever more traffic and congestion to the Lothians by going back on the commitment to dedicate the existing bridge to public transport and to avoid an eight-lane motorway across the Forth?

This is a vast subject, which the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee dealt with in a long inquiry. I thank the clerks for their work and I thank the many witnesses who shared their expertise, to help us to scrutinise and shape policy on renewables, which is an incredibly important task. I am pleased that we have a chance to debate the committee’s report and I will concentrate on two important areas, which do not always get the attention that they deserve, although several members, including Rhoda Grant and Stuart McMillan, have helped to address the deficit during the debate. Those areas are the heat targets and community ownership of renewables. Heat accounts for roughly half of Scotland’s energy use. We are currently delivering 3.8 per cent of heat demand from renewable resources, with an estimated 5.6 per cent in the pipeline. The target is to deliver 11 per cent by 2020. There is promising progress, but as the committee’s convener said, during the inquiry we heard evidence that suggests that we will not reach 11 per cent, because incentives have been delayed, development of the necessary infrastructure is too rare and there are serious concerns about biomass sustainability. Those are challenges, but they are not insurmountable. Aberdeen Heat and Power Company’s written evidence to the inquiry told an inspirational story. The arm’s-length, not-for-profit company was set up 10 years ago by Aberdeen City Council, with the aim of providing clean, affordable energy. It provides district heating to 1,500 homes and more than 10 public buildings. Heating and water charges have dropped by 40 to 50 per cent, fuel poverty has reduced markedly, damp has been eliminated and homes have been created that people want to live in. There have been carbon savings of up to 40 per cent. The company does not even use a heating method that is renewable; it has simply found a vastly more efficient way of organising how we deliver heat. That story demonstrates the leadership role that local authorities and other public sector bodies can play, as is stressed in the report’s recommendations. The Government, as its response makes clear, agrees.

Certainly. I also like to think that the Government will take every opportunity to provide leadership in ensuring that that happens. As members will recall, the Greens dedicated debating time last year to the role that publicly owned renewable energy companies could play in delivering on our climate targets and in providing important extra revenue for public services. Given that the Government’s response demonstrates its support for the recommendation in paragraph 266 of the committee’s report, I hope that the Government will do all that it can to revitalise and support the publicly owned energy company idea. We are seeing a renewables revolution in Scotland, and it is exciting. I am really pleased that, after listening to the evidence, the committee was able to agree—by and large—a very positive report. The public favour renewables, too, but there is scant support for big companies coming in, building turbines and keeping the vast amount of benefits for themselves and their shareholders. That simply does not feel fair, and there are far better models out there. An exciting community-driven project in my region is Balerno Village Trust’s plans to build a micro-hydro electricity generator on the Harlaw reservoir in the Pentlands. The project, which has planning permission and a licence from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, is waiting for a lease from the City of Edinburgh Council and a grid connection before it can start to raise capital. The grant from Community Energy Scotland was essential in kick-starting the project, but more needs to be done to help to smooth the process of grid connection. The Edinburgh community groups Greener Leith and PEDAL-Portobello Transition Town worked hard together to secure energyshare funding to push forward their plans for a community turbine on the coast. Unfortunately, there are issues with the site. However, their commitment to the project highlights their belief in the many benefits that such an asset would bring to the community. Kirknewton is another community in my region that is champing at the bit to get renewable energy projects off the ground. Kirknewton is progressing numerous initiatives but, by an accident of geography, Edinburgh airport’s radar has frustrated the community’s attempts to build its own turbine. However, alternatives are being looked at. Those are just two communities that have come up against barriers to their renewables ambitions by an accident of geography. We need to tap into, develop and support community interest. Kirknewton’s commonsense suggestion is for a match-making scheme to help to ensure that the maximum amount of community benefit comes from renewable projects on the national forest estate. Up to 49 per cent of any national forest estate renewables project is available to the communities that live nearby—if those communities can raise enough money to buy into the scheme. However, raising the money is not always possible. In those cases, the suggestion from Kirknewton is that another community that is keen to develop renewables but is unable to do so on its own land could be brought in to help. That might be an ideal way for urban communities to participate, too. I have talked about heat and the potential role that publicly owned energy companies have in delivering heat networks and generating new revenue for public services. I have talked about the desire of communities to have renewables projects that truly benefit the local area directly. Both of those link to the debate over the fair distribution of benefit. To maintain public support for ambitious targets, the benefits of the renewables revolution must be distributed in a fair and transparent way, not just to the large companies—although they of course have a role to play—but to the public, to the co-operative sector and to the community sector, too.

We have a food industry with a long and complex supply chain dominated by huge profit-focused companies, and we have cuts in local authority inspections that mean that some plants are visited only once every three months, or less frequently, on a pre-announced basis. Re-establishing trust in that failed system requires fundamental change. The Soil Association’s food for life catering mark—an initiative that the cabinet secretary has supported—means that one in 10 schools in Scotland now know where their food comes from. What action will the cabinet secretary take to help to deliver the commonsense short supply chain that would ensure that a similar level of transparency, control and peace of mind becomes the norm and applies to all food bought and served in Scotland?

That the UK coalition has tampered with child benefit in an indefensibly inequitable way is beyond question. Sadly, though, it is a done deal, but it is right that we debate this important issue here, because it impacts on the lives of more than 90,000 people here in Scotland. This afternoon we have an opportunity to debate a vision of a Scotland that puts the welfare of our children at the heart of society. Child benefit has its origins in post-war Britain, when the ruling coalition of the time sought to ease the burden on families’ suffering amid housing shortages and food rationing. At a time when many families are struggling to make ends meet and there is an increasing need for food banks, it is difficult to understand the rationale behind the current decision. Child benefit was originally called family allowance and has been reinvented a couple of times. It became known as child benefit in the late 1970s and further changes were made in the 1990s, when a higher rate for the first child was introduced. Governments of various colours have continued to invest in that important benefit, which recognises the importance of every child in every household, not to mention the increasing cost of raising a child. According to the Centre for Economics and Business Research’s recent report, “Cost of a Child: From cradle to college”, the cost of raising a child has soared; it will have cost more than £218,000 by the time the child is 21. We know that women earn less than men, and that austerity measures, unemployment and underemployment have disproportionate impacts on women. The lack of affordable good-quality childcare is important, as Christina McKelvie said, and deserves our undivided attention, because it greatly affects women and children in Scotland. Although people who work in childcare are not well paid, we have among the highest childcare costs in Europe. That factor might force more women into economic inactivity. Barnardo’s made the point recently in its report, “Paying to work: childcare and child poverty”, and the Scottish Trades Union Congress made the same point in its evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s inquiry into underemployment in Scotland. Child benefit, as a reliable part of a family’s income, might enable some women to stay at home and look after their children and it might help others to pay for childcare. In many households, income is not shared equally, as is suggested by the direct payment of child benefit to women in 94 per cent of cases. Child benefit is an independent income on which many women rely—even women whose partners earn £50,000 and more, as Kevin Stewart said. If a family with two or three children took on a large mortgage when it was perhaps too easy to do so and is now in changed circumstances and struggling with repayments, perhaps with negative equity on the home, and if we factor in credit card debts and the usual household bills, it is quite possible that although the family appears to be comfortably off it is relying on child benefit to buy food and children’s clothing. For some women and children who are escaping domestic violence, child benefit is the only source of income. The excellent campaign work of Zero Tolerance long ago dispelled the myth that domestic abuse is experienced only by women in low-income households. The Fawcett Society has questioned the policy and has asked whether it will increase or reduce inequality between women and men. We know the answer. I want to live in a country in which policies are fully evaluated for their impact on equality and in which the impact of policies is measured and reviewed as necessary, even after decisions have been taken. The cross-party group on children and young people has discussed the extent to which Government, local authorities, health boards and key agencies have statutory duties to consult children and young people about issues that affect them. In Scotland, we have legislation that encourages engagement with and consultation of children and young people on decisions that affect their lives. How many children were consulted about the policy on child benefit? The proposed children and young people bill offers an opportunity to discuss issues fully and strengthen children’s rights. I hope that Parliament will take full advantage of that opportunity. When, in December 1991, the UK ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, it agreed to make all laws, policy and practice compatible with the convention. In 2010, the then Minster of State for Children and Families, Sarah Teather, pledged in a written statement that the Government would give due consideration to the convention when making new law and policy. However, no consideration appears to have been given to the views of children who will be affected by changes to child benefit. The UK ratified the convention, but it is not being applied properly, even when benefits for children and young people are affected. Child benefit has been a universal benefit. Its mutuality has a benefit that should not be sacrificed. Article 27 of the UN convention places an obligation on states to assist parents to meet the material needs of their children. Child benefit is society’s small contribution to its children’s welfare. The welfare of our youngest people is central as we debate our future. The UN convention, along with policies such as universal child benefit, is worthy of a place in a national constitution. It says that children matter.

The lack of local abattoirs is a major barrier to all small or large retailers that stock Scottish lamb with high welfare standards. How will a new food body for Scotland support more local slaughterhouses to be viable local enterprises, thereby reversing the trend towards mega-abattoirs and the detriment that they cause to small-scale producers and retailers, and to animal welfare?

In 2009, a team of 29 distinguished environmental and earth systems scientists sat down to work out how far human activity is stretching our planet’s ability to sustain life. They identified nine ways in which human activity has stressed and undermined what they call the “planetary life-support systems” that are vital to the healthy functioning of the planet and central to supporting the stable environment that has allowed humanity to flourish. For two of the stressors that were identified—chemical pollution and atmospheric aerosols—there is not enough data or understanding to assess how serious they are. For the rest, estimates could be made. Our use of fresh water and land is approaching the planetary limit. In some oceans, acidification is already too high. On climate change, scientists estimate that we have pushed ourselves just over the limit. Until a few years ago, the same was true of ozone, but we have successfully turned the tide on that problem and the ozone layer is slowly recovering. However, the news on biodiversity is not good, with the estimates being off the scale on the group’s graph. It is in that context that our aims for biodiversity mention halting the decline. The Government’s national performance framework uses the abundance of terrestrial breeding birds as an indicator of biodiversity. Unfortunately, progress has not been good, with abundance in 2010 being 4 per cent lower than in 2009 and 2 per cent lower than in 2006. As others have noted, as with the recent climate change target, we and others did not achieve the 2010 biodiversity target, so I welcome the opportunity to debate the refresh of the strategy and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s planned work on the topic. What needs to change to help to halt the loss of Scottish species and maintain our reputation for beautiful wild places, plants and animals? As Rob Gibson noted, 2013 is the year of natural Scotland. What better way to mark it than with a step change in our efforts? It is important that people can feel a connection with the natural environment—if that is lost there will be no public desire to protect our biodiversity. TV programmes such as David Attenborough’s “Africa” are stunning, but they are not sufficient to create that connection. Children need to experience outdoor play in wild environments and outdoor education through our schools. Not everyone will love the outdoors and not everyone will wear through a pair of hiking boots in their lifetime, but that is not the point. Understanding what biodiversity actually feels like, as a young person, is important. Initiatives such as forest schools, which offer children the chance to learn in a natural environment, should be well supported and embedded in the curriculum with eco schools. I have become a Scottish Environment LINK species champion and I know that many others have, too. My species is the rare brown hare and a few of them can be found on Arthur’s Seat, just outside the Parliament. I encourage MSPs to sign up soon, to get the species that they want, although rusty bog moss has already been taken. Rusty bog moss is vital to healthy peatland, although it may not be very photogenic—but perhaps Rob Gibson would disagree with that. On a serious note, the restoration of at least 100,000 hectares of peatland and the phasing out of its use by public bodies completely by 2015 must form part of our all-Government biodiversity strategy, as called for by LINK members. Pesticides and insecticides are another threat to biodiversity, on which the Scottish Government can and must be bolder. Pollination is an ecosystem service that is estimated by the national ecosystem assessment to be worth £43 million to the Scottish economy in cash terms. However, increasing evidence shows that neonicotinoid insecticides are harmful to honey bees and bumblebees, whereas the impact on wild pollinators is as yet completely unknown. France and other countries have banned the chemicals and I urge the Government to listen to the evidence from Scottish universities that neonicotinoids are a threat to biodiversity. I support the Scottish Wildlife Trust’s call for a moratorium and I welcome the fact that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee will focus attention on the issue in the near future. The way in which we develop our land and the importance that we place on biodiversity in our land-use planning system must also change. I have recently responded to an application for housing on Craighouse campus, which is a green city space in my region. It is designated as a local nature conservation site and a local nature reserve because it is so important to biodiversity. I believe that local people do understand and care. I have been informed that there may be more than 1,000 objections to the proposal to build on the site. If we are serious about halting biodiversity loss, green pockets in urban areas must be preserved for nature and for people to learn about and appreciate nature. Allotments, too, have multiple benefits and local gardens in our streets are all-important islands of urban biodiversity that we cannot afford to continue to lose to new driveways. Finally, I will mention food and its connections with biodiversity. Food security relies in part on diversity: interbreeding and pollination of species give an ecosystem resilience against shocks such as disease or climate change. There are hundreds of apple species in Scotland, but only four or five of them are available in shops. Our farms tend to grow monoculture crops. We are missing out on wonderful diversity and we are increasing the risk that one disease will wipe out a whole part of the food chain. Biodiversity in our food production gives us the genetic diversity and resilience that are essential to a secure food supply. As Claire Baker and others mentioned, in our politics we increasingly try to put a financial price on everything, which is tempting because it makes things easy to compare, but tends to miss out the intrinsic value of things. That was one of the most common concerns from respondents to the strategy and one that I share, and I welcome the minister’s response to those concerns. Ecosystem valuation helps us grasp its importance and hammers home the message that many economists have ignored for too long: that our economy is based within our ecosystem. We must also make sure that we place emphasis on promoting biodiversity as an end in itself. We need no more justification than the intrinsic value of the natural world.

I thank Rhoda Grant for securing the debate. Biomass certainly has a role to play in helping us to meet our renewable energy targets on electricity and heat, but we need to be extremely careful. If we install too much of it, we will completely outstrip our timber supply, as the wood panel industry and Biofuelwatch have clearly demonstrated. That will mean rising prices and supply difficulties for the wood panel and construction industries at a time when we desperately need affordable housing, and it will mean that we need to ship in vast volumes of wood from abroad. Quite simply, chopping down foreign forests to burn here in Scotland is a daft way to produce energy, and there is no way the Scottish Government should support that with taxpayers’ money. Why is importing bad? The sustainability of imported wood is incredibly difficult to establish and the existing accreditation schemes have had doubt cast on them time and again. Sustainability kite marks in no way guarantee that the imported wood has not come from monoculture forests that have been planted by multinationals on land that was once natural woodland and which was owned and managed by and for the local communities. As we have seen in Scotland’s miles and miles of Sitka spruce plantations, monoculture does not support any level of biodiversity or natural soil regeneration. The second issue is a human rights one. Stories abound of companies forcing people off their land to create an industrial forestry industry in developing countries. It is vital that Scottish Government support schemes do not promote the import of timber to burn, but that is what will happen if we do not halt some of the large biomass power stations that are in the pipeline, and if we do not vastly improve the efficiency of existing installations. I support the Government’s stated intention as detailed in the motion, but if we are to achieve it we must greatly improve efficiency. The supplementary consultation details the Government’s intention to provide ROC support to large-scale biomass projects when they involve good-quality combined heat and power stations. The motion notes that “the EU renewable energy directive calls for a minimum efficiency rating of 70% for industrial applications”. That should be the minimum definition of good quality, but under the current proposals we could see subsidies being given to power stations that achieve efficiency levels that are as low as 35 per cent. In its report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was also concerned about the issue and wished to see “substantive improvements in the efficiency of proposed biomass plants before they could attract subsidy.” The bottom line is that there is no place for large-scale plants in Scotland’s energy mix. I, too, want to congratulate the people who campaigned hard against the proposed biomass plant in Leith and who continue to oppose the plans for plants in Dundee, Grangemouth and Rosyth. Following their inquiries, it is now up to the minister to decide on the futures of the Grangemouth and Rosyth proposals. I will not ask him to comment on those, because he cannot, but I ask him to listen to the strong sustainability arguments, to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s concerns and to the concerns of the local people who are campaigning. There is a role for small-scale wood burning for renewable heat, but burning whole trees for electricity is totally inefficient and makes no sense at all in a country that has a world-leading renewables industry that needs investment. The wood panel industry has made it clear in its briefing that using wood to produce power is a good idea, but that the focus should be on creating wood products that lock away carbon for years to come. Jamie McGrigor highlighted that issue. I want a greater focus to be placed on use of community-scale renewables to heat and power our cities and homes than is placed on oversized and unsustainable proposals. Greens have been calling for the Government to support local authorities to set up public renewable energy companies to push local renewable energy generation and thereby generate much-needed revenue to pay for public services. Through the renewables revolution, we have an opportunity to give our councils the opportunity to meet climate targets and generate much-needed funds. Let us take that opportunity.

I, too, congratulate Jayne Baxter on her thought-provoking and well-measured maiden speech. I was one of the young people who took part in the YTS—I was a yopper—and from that training post I secured permanent employment, so I share her conviction regarding initiatives to lessen the impact of unemployment on young people. Youth employment is an incredibly important issue. In my time today, I want to focus on disadvantaged young people, whose routes to employment have more barriers than most, even when there are more jobs to go round. At the end of February last year, more than 16,000 children and young people were being looked after by councils in Scotland. The figure has increased annually since 2001. Some 1,408 of those leaving care in 2010-11 were between 16 and 21 years old. Those are young ages at which to deal with a major life event and strive to become a self-sufficient adult. The difficulties of such a transition are evident when we consider that a third of homeless people were formerly in care. On the whole, care leavers have poorer educational qualifications and health outcomes than their peers and, notably, they are more likely to have contact with the criminal justice system. Many companies, local authorities and other governmental institutions are offering modern apprenticeships. The City of Edinburgh Council recently announced a further 50 such apprenticeships. As there is a particular issue regarding the employment of young people leaving care—Liam McArthur mentioned the issue, too—I ask the minister to ensure that all local authorities share best practice and try to ensure that looked-after children are given every opportunity to take up such apprenticeship places where they are available, because future life chances for looked-after young people are improving where councils are focusing on getting care leavers into education or employment. Third sector organisations such as Barnardo’s and Action for Children have expertise in supporting young people to maintain college, training and work placements, and funding support for such initiatives is very much preventative spending. Research by the University of York in 2010 showed that every young person who is not in employment, education or training costs public authorities an average of £56,000 over their lifetime. Demos has demonstrated savings of more than £90,000 where children in care leave at 18 with good qualifications and good mental health, compared with those who leave care at 16 and a half with no qualifications and mental health problems. We know, too, that 23 per cent of the adult prison population has been in care. That highlights the need for holistic and personalised employment support for these young people. This week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee started an inquiry into underemployment that will investigate tackling in-work poverty without increasing overall unemployment. The issue was underlined by a Barnardo’s report this week called “Paying to work: childcare and child poverty”. It found that the introduction of the universal credit benefit system as it stands will mean that a lone parent who is in part-time, low-paid work will lose out financially if they increase their work hours, because they will need more childcare. The Scottish Government plans to increase flexibility and the number of hours of childcare, and I welcome that as it will help to remove barriers to young parents entering education or employment. That increased flexibility is urgently needed—and I raised that issue during our previous debate on colleges. I feel uncomfortable with the apparent priority that universities have been given over colleges. I am extremely supportive of the Government’s aim to base access to education on ability to learn and not ability to pay, but it does not sit well with me that universities should be supported while colleges are made to feel the pain of £34.6 million-worth of cuts to their grants. Colleges are part of the answer to employability and are essential for optimal youth employability. Notwithstanding that many people would much rather learn on the job and gain work-based qualifications, colleges are the institutions that can provide the access and flexibility that many disadvantaged young people need. I would also like to talk about enterprise. The stand-out fact in the FSB briefing this week was that the UK labour force survey demonstrates that, between 2008 and 2011, 88 per cent of people who moved from unemployment to private sector employment found work in SMEs, compared to 12 per cent who found work in large businesses. It is clear, as the FSB says, that employment in small firms is the most important route to employment for the unemployed and economically inactive. Annabel Ewing touched on that, too. Our youth employment efforts must also focus on supporting businesses to recruit and train the right young people. I ask the minister to recognise in her closing speech the importance of microbusinesses and small businesses as employers of previously unemployed people, and to listen to the FSB’s wealth of experience in how existing microbusinesses can best be supported to recruit young people. Finally, it is important to recognise the enterprising talents of young people who can, if given the chance, become very successful with their own businesses. The last motion in Parliament lodged by my predecessor, Robin Harper, called on the Government to create a microfinancing scheme for young people, and since then I have been pleased to see the Grameen microfinance model being set up in Scotland, as it has the potential to help those locked out of the financial system.

Kofi Annan, the former secretary general of the United Nations, said: “Violence against women is perhaps the most shameful human rights violation, and it is perhaps the most pervasive ... As long as it continues, we cannot claim to be making real progress towards equality”. Last autumn, there was global condemnation of and revulsion at the attempted murder of Malala Yousafzai, who is an incredible 15-year-old girl. She was targeted for campaigning for education—which is a basic human right—for girls in Afghanistan. More recently, we learned about the brutal rape and death of a young Indian woman, who was a medical student. She was attacked by six men while simply travelling on a bus. Such extreme examples of violence against women and children have drawn global attention to the issue and strengthened the demand for change. When I first became involved in politics, I listened with interest to those who discussed whether there was a need to take action for gender balance in politics and beyond. After 13 years in politics and more than 30 years in sport, I am convinced that action is needed. At the local government level, it is less likely that travel away from home will be regularly required, so we might think that that would make involvement in local politics more accessible and appealing to women with young children or women with other caring responsibilities. However, only one in five councillors is a woman. That is a great shame, because councils make many decisions that impact on women’s daily lives. As I have said before, when I was on the City of Edinburgh Council, two highly regarded nurseries were closed. All those whom I met who campaigned against closure were women. That is not surprising, because women are still much more likely to be involved with nurseries on a day-to-day basis and much less likely to be involved in the decision-making process. When leisure budgets were tight, one of the first things to be cut was crèche provision. Women campaigned hard, but they were not listened to. Subsequently, access to leisure and fitness was made more challenging. Why are there so few women in representative politics? Does the occasional hostile manner of debate put women off? In my first-ever formal full council meeting, a colleague in another party was described as a fishwife. I was astonished, but not an eye was batted by more experienced councillors. It was clearly not a big deal; rather, it was the cultural norm. Is that because council meetings take place in the evenings, when women might be dealing with food and family—with bath and bedtime, perhaps? Representation of women is better in our national Parliament, but at about a third, it is simply not good enough. Conversely, male primary school teachers are a rarity, although male headteachers are not. What does any of that matter? It matters because violence against women happens in a context. As Zero Tolerance has stated, violence against women is more than domestic abuse. During the Olympic games, we rejoiced when women succeeded, but that coverage was short term. I recently tweeted my excitement at finding a woman on the sports pages of a national newspaper, but that excitement was short lived, as she was pictured only because she was someone’s girlfriend. The long-running quiz “A Question of Sport” may be chaired by Sue Barker, but in common with panel shows such as “QI” and “Have I Got News for You” and many news discussion programmes that I am sure that we all watch, women are consistently underrepresented on it. Indeed, the Leveson inquiry raised concerns about the way in which women are portrayed in the media. Why are women so often portrayed in swimwear, frequently with a critical headline about their dismal failure to banish cellulite? Seriously, that is not what concerns the women I know. It leads to the objectification of women. We must challenge the objectification of women and the obsession with how we look. We need strong messages about what women do, what they have achieved and women succeeding in the professions, sport, art and teaching. Such women should be highly visible. All forms of violence against women happen in a cultural context. As we debate the future of Scotland, we must include debates about the prevalence of abuse and persistent and deep-rooted gender inequalities, because if we can change the culture—and we must do so—violence against women is preventable. I thank Malcolm Chisholm for bringing this important debate to the chamber and Zero Tolerance for its ground-breaking and on-going work.

I, too, am very pleased to welcome the new funding for instruments. Music tuition is a life-affirming experience and should be open to all young people who want it. However, constituents of mine have raised with me concerns that special schools may not have access to the new instruments. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the arrangements that are made with local authorities will include access for special schools?

This summer, the Commonwealth deputy secretary general said: “Sport isn’t just about competition and elite athletes ... but under the right circumstances, it can convey important democratic principles such as tolerance, solidarity, co-operation and respect. It can also foster inclusion for marginalised people and support vulnerable people, including girls and women, people with a disability, those living in conflict and those recovering from trauma.” We might expect the Commonwealth deputy secretary to have such an insight about the potential of sport to transform lives, but what about young people from across the Commonwealth? As the your commonwealth website testifies, they understand the points that he made, too. Twenty-four-year-old Tamica, from Jamaica, knows that spending on sport is commonsensical preventative spend. She says: “sports provide a fun and easy way to keep a nation healthy ... An unhealthy population is expensive ... and ... governments must spend more on healthcare instead of other social needs.” Alicia, 20, from New Zealand, says that sport “brings all people—players, teams, coaches, volunteers and spectators—together” and “establishes a shared bond”. On a legacy-minded note, Eva Maria, 21, from New Zealand, says: “It’s inspiring to see your own team win, but it’s even more important to develop a country through promoting a healthy lifestyle for all its citizens. Compulsory PE class? I’m all for it! And not just for youths. Sport is for all ages.” She is right: sport is for all. London 2012 proved that. The Olympics and the Paralympics showcased talented diversity, and people across the globe—many of whom usually do not bother much with sport—watched in awe. However, sportswomen are very much marginalised in the media. I and others have raised that issue in Parliament and elsewhere. Outwith what was a dazzlingly successful Olympics for women and the welcome coverage of women representing some nations for the first time, sportswomen are underrepresented in much of the mainstream press. That does not help to normalise active lifestyles for women in Scotland. Coverage of bikini diets abounds, but coverage of physically active sportswomen is too rare. It is extremely important that we embed physical activity at the earliest stage, so that it becomes part and parcel of everyday life and the individual gains so much from being active that the challenges that are presented by puberty, peer pressure and so on are milestones that are more ably managed due to increased self-esteem and improved body confidence. Just this week, the BBC reported that women in Sweden are far sportier and fitter than women here. It is fair to say that we are obsessed with the weather, but we often use it as an excuse for inaction. Sweden has a harsher climate and fewer daylight hours, but women in Sweden are four times more likely to be active than women here. I know that the minister will share my discomfort with our fattest-nation-in-Europe tag and agree that we need to look at nations, including those fairly close to home, whose trends are more positive. The BBC reporter was visiting a girls football club in Stockholm. It was pitch black at 4 pm, and it was wet and cold. The rain was horizontal, but she commented on the boundless enthusiasm of all involved. The coach said: “I come from work. Sometimes I feel tired, depressed, but I leave full of energy. It’s just joy - pure joy.” He thoroughly enjoys working with those young women. Half of all Swedes are members of sports clubs. That is not surprising if the attitude that was evident at that football club is the norm. The coach said: “No one is ever turned away. Everyone can play.” He never says no. Now that is a legacy. That enthusiasm does not surprise me as it is mirrored by my experience of coaching young people in Edinburgh. They are not put off by a few puddles on the track or a bitter wind. However, lack of volunteer coaches is an issue, and access to facilities is sometimes a challenge. I support the Scottish Sports Association’s call for employer-supported volunteering. The club that I mentioned was set up following the Swedish Olympics of 1912. Young girls there are following in their mothers’ and grandmothers’ footsteps. Last week, due to cold conditions, the outdoor track at Meadowbank was out of action. Edinburgh Athletic Club’s Lynsey Sharp raised concerns about the impact of the closure on athletes’ ability to train. This year, Lynsey won the silver medal at the European championships and reached the semi-final of the Olympic 800m. She is now training to compete in the next Commonwealth games, following in the footsteps of her mother Carol, who is with us in the gallery. Thanks to Lynsey’s action, the matter was resolved and the track was available the next day, but it is essential that we do all that we can to ensure that there is access to training facilities. It is frosty, we must have contingency plans and have the right machinery in place. There are particular issues about the use of the indoor track space at Meadowbank. It is the only such facility in the Lothians, yet at times it is let for antique fairs and clothing sales. Given the nature of the track surface, we need to ask whether placing chairs, tables and hanging rails on it really protects what is, after all, a public asset. Hires to raise revenue should take place in one of the region’s many halls and not in its only indoor track facility. Many local authorities rely on arm’s-length organisations to deliver leisure facilities. In Edinburgh, tensions have arisen when athletes at club and elite levels have been unable to access facilities in venues that they often use because paid-for classes and events are taking place there. I do not believe that such challenges are insurmountable and it does not have to be an either/or, but better consultation with all user groups would go a long way towards ensuring that such tensions do not occur in the first place. I realise that some of those points are matters for local authorities but, as John Mason said, these are Scotland’s games, so I would warmly welcome a commitment from the minister to speak to colleagues in local government. I would also appreciate a comment on her commitment to deliver a games that are based on attractive passenger transport that will be sustained after the games have finished. I support Patricia Ferguson’s call for assurances regarding parliamentary scrutiny of the security budget. Athletes—some household names and some who are yet to establish themselves—are training at this very moment. We will all support them in Glasgow in 2014, but it is essential that we also support them now, as they strive to get there.

Climate change compels us to act globally, in a unified manner. We must act locally too and grasp the opportunities that we have to create healthy, resilient and truly sustainable communities. It is important to recognise where we are. The international negotiating process is deathly slow and even the most mainstream NGO networks are branding Doha as a failure. What was achieved was to prevent the process from breaking down, but no new emissions cuts were committed to—not even by Qatar, which was hosting the talks and which has the highest per capita emissions in the world. PricewaterhouseCoopers recently released analysis showing that a massive six-fold increase in our rate of decarbonisation is needed to give ourselves a more than 50 per cent chance of avoiding a rise of 2°C in global temperatures. This week, the US National Intelligence Council identified climate change and its impact on food, water and natural resource supplies as a mega trend that will define the coming decade. Closer to home, thousands of people are facing the prospect of having no house insurance as climate change increases the risk of floods in the UK. The voices calling for change have broadened—I have just cited a big four audit firm, the US intelligence community and the British insurance industry. They are all concerned about the impact of our continued reliance on a high-carbon economy. As more and more parts of the economy and society get behind change, the laggards, and those blocking international agreements, will become more isolated. I hope that we will see a workable, fair and enforceable deal agreed to replace the Kyoto protocol—one that actually works this time. In the meantime, it is our job as a country that has recognised the benefits of a low-carbon economy to help lead the way. It is an exciting and challenging prospect. We must continue to show leadership, and I welcome the Government’s recognition in the motion that all sectors in Scotland “must accelerate action to reduce domestic emissions and speed the transition to a low-carbon economy.” The Green amendment that was not selected for debate is more explicit in its call for the Government to take extra steps after missing the first of our climate targets, which was relatively easy. The Greens will vote for the Government motion and the Labour amendment. I started by speaking of opportunities, and it is important to remember why we are striving for change. A low-carbon, sustainable society means a healthy society. I recently hosted a talk with a speaker from the Danish cycle embassy. He described the transformation of Copenhagen into a capital city where 37 per cent of trips are by bike. Analysis showed that, for every 10 per cent increase in the number of kilometres cycled, Denmark saves €9 million on healthcare and gains something like 61,000 years of extra life expectancy annually. A low-carbon society is one where people can heat their homes affordably. Fuel poverty statistics published today remind us of the need to implement and fund a retrofit programme and fix an energy market that is dominated by the big six companies. A low-carbon, sustainable society means a more equal society. If we tackle the shocking inequalities that we see in the world, there are enough resources and wealth to allow a meaningful and fulfilling life for so many more. We must remember that those are changes and ideals that we should be striving for anyway. At Doha, we saw the first, important recognition from rich industrialised countries that they should pay for at least some of the loss and damage that is already being felt in more vulnerable nations. Spreading Scotland’s commitment to climate justice will be key to a fair international solution. To do that, Scotland must continue to fund projects overseas that target the most marginalised communities—for instance, the projects in Zambia and Malawi that the minister and other members have mentioned—and, as Stewart Stevenson acknowledged, projects that target women. Most importantly, Scotland must demonstrate that it is seriously committed to delivering each and every one of our climate targets with domestic action here.

I apologise for not being present for the opening of the cabinet secretary’s statement and thank him for advance sight of his statement. If there is a rollover of this year’s quota, what additional measures will the Government take to ensure that fishing mortality in cod continues to decrease?

I, too, thank Iain Gray for securing this evening’s debate and welcome the opportunity to discuss this important issue. I whole-heartedly support the motion, which notes the many widely acknowledged benefits to learning that instrumental music tuition provides. The confidence, self-esteem and enjoyment gained from developing such life-enhancing—indeed, sometimes life-changing—skills are worthy of note, too. I highlight the excellent work that goes on in the City of Edinburgh music school, whose work paves the way for its students to secure positions in world-renowned colleges, ensembles and orchestras across the globe. As we have heard, an EIS investigation earlier this year reported that across the country there is a mixed picture for instrumental music tuition outwith core teaching hours. The report showed that several local authorities charge pupils for SQA-accredited courses and sometimes charge more than necessary to cover the costs of music tuition. The curriculum for excellence states: “Performing and creating music will be the prominent activities for all learners.” That will not be the case where the ability to pay is a factor in the pupil’s selection of subjects. The “EIS Charter for Instrumental Music” explains the many benefits that music provision gives us as a society and how current cuts to instrumental music tuition must be challenged if we are seriously committed to a curriculum that makes instrumental music provision a core part of our young learners’ education. In one case study in the charter, a musician tells us: “At school I was non-academic, I failed in most subjects.” However, through guitar lessons in secondary school, the learner discovered a world that is described as “non-discriminatory, enjoyable, something that fitted me like Cinderella’s slipper.” The learner describes musical instrument tuition as “vital” to enabling her to find a “positive path to follow through education.” As Jenny Marra rightly highlighted, one-size education does not fit all; variety is essential. In some local authorities where curriculum-time provision is free, budgetary constraints still mean that it is limited to the few chosen individuals who have shown an aptitude when tested and, although the tuition is free, instrument hire or purchase is still at the expense of parents or carers. That approach means that many children are persuaded of a relative lack of talent at a young age, and some might be unable to take up the offer, should the instrument cost be beyond the family budget. Instrumental music tuition makes an important contribution to the four capacities that are outlined in the curriculum for excellence. It is delivered by dedicated, highly skilled and qualified professionals, and it should play an important role in the education of the rounded citizens that the curriculum for excellence strives to develop. We have yet to achieve delivery of sufficient physical education to all pupils. If we are serious about a holistic curriculum, we must stop seeing certain subjects as less worthy of funding than others. I am sure that we all want Scottish education to encourage creativity and to value that creativity and place it at the heart of the curriculum. For many pupils whose parents and carers have work schedules, shifts or siblings to care for, and for those on tight budgets, access to music tuition outside schools, even if it is affordable, might sometimes be simply inaccessible. That is why it is vital that the importance of music is recognised and embedded totally within the curriculum. I support the aims of the “EIS Charter for Instrumental Music”, and I would welcome the minister’s comments on the entitlement or right of every school-age child to receive instrumental tuition, and not only for a period of several weeks. In response to a question in September, the minister advised me that the Government had been in touch with local authorities with a view to levelling the playing field across Scotland. I would be grateful if the minister provided an update on that in his speech.

This is an important debate to be having as we scrutinise the budget and as we work together to ensure that people have every opportunity to access education and meaningful employment—to be skilled and reskilled. Patricia Ferguson and others have raised the issue of women in college. The Herald reported that thousands of women have been hit by college cuts. Its report highlighted that female college numbers have dropped by a quarter over the four years to 2010-11, while over the same period male numbers have reduced at only half that rate. There are still more women in college than men, but changes have clearly hit them hardest—we have lost more than 40,000 women from further education in four years. Let us not get bogged down in full-time equivalents versus head count—this is about individual opportunities. Why is that the case? Although the Government has given such welcome and well-publicised support to students, anyone dropping by the debate could be forgiven for being confused. The answer lies in the Government’s decision to prioritise full-time college provision to support young people who are at risk of unemployment. It is well recognised that a key benefit of colleges is their ability to offer flexible learning. That is essential for many women as they often have multiple caring roles in their households. Not surprisingly, the stats show that evening and weekend and distance learning courses are more popular with women. The debate is about opportunity, people’s lives and the quality of those lives. It is vital that it does not become a numbers game about employment statistics. The decision to focus on 16 to 25-year-olds’ full-time courses is a reaction to youth unemployment. We all agree that bringing young people into college is important, but we must recognise the link between adult unemployment and future generations. We will not break the cycle of poverty or disadvantage with a focus on young people that may limit parental opportunities, whether those parents fit the 16 to 25-year-old age bracket or not. It is incredibly important to give people with children who want to learn the opportunity to do so. Parents are children’s first and on-going educators. Are colleges soft targets in comparison with what is too often viewed as the more elite university sector?

Yes—but be brief, please.

I will try to come on to those issues. In contrast with the Westminster Government, the Scottish Government has shown that it believes that access to education should be based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay. What the Government must do now is ensure that the benefits are available equitably to those who want to learn. My experience in Lothian tells me that that is not solely about college funding; the minister raised childcare, which is a vital part of the debate. With a local MP and councillor, I recently visited Stepping Stones children’s centre in north Edinburgh. We spent time meeting, listening to and learning from a lively group of young mums. I was struck by their burning desire to learn and improve themselves. We met on Wednesday, and one of the young mums was due to start college the following Monday, but had not been able to confirm childcare arrangements because she did not yet have a final college timetable, which she would not get until she started the course. She told me that there is a nursery connected to the college, but that she could not afford, and often did not need, the half-day minimum booking. She suggested that the nursery placements were filled by families with steady work. I have just found out that that determined young woman managed to secure childcare, although some months into her course. I am delighted that she sustained the college place; the professionals who have been working with the young woman described the start to her college career as “extremely stressful”. Most worrying, the other young mums, aware of their friend’s difficulty, said that they had simply resigned themselves to the fact that while their children were young, college might not be an option.

I think that I am about to address Aileen Campbell’s point. I appreciate that the Government is investigating the possibility of providing the current five morning or afternoon sessions in a more flexible format, and I would welcome an update on that. If childcare could be offered in the college setting so that people did not have to pay for childcare while they were travelling, that would be a great advance, and one that would be warmly welcomed by a lot of people in that position. A local English lecturer has written to me to express concerns about cuts to higher English courses at her college, which is an important access course for a great many people. The loss of more than 1,000 college staff will, of course, lead to the loss of courses. Although budget cuts mean that we ensure that there is no unnecessary duplication, we must ensure that course provision is accessible. Access to education and lifelong learning for all brings many benefits to individuals. It increases wellbeing, boosts self-esteem and confidence and is well worth protecting and funding. Education in its broadest sense is about much more than qualifications. The Greens will support the Lib Dem amendment. Confidence in the Scottish Government has been shaken and people rightly expect the education secretary to understand that his political decision to focus on full-time courses will impact on people who have different needs. We all can and do make mistakes, but people expect the education secretary to know the education budget inside out. Reassuring nods from ministers are cold comfort to those who are impacted by the reality of losing millions from the college pot.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities is doing to ensure a modal shift toward active travel. (S4O-01512)

The minister will be aware that a cyclist died yesterday in a collision in Aberdeen and that The Times reports that the cyclist death toll on United Kingdom roads is heading for a five-year high. Many organisations agree that transforming our infrastructure for cycling and walking is key to improving safety and the perception of safety, which is a barrier to modal shift. For example, a survey of 20,000 AA members found that 62 per cent wanted more cycle lanes. As Cycling Scotland has said, without a fully costed action plan, it is difficult to see how the current levels of investment will achieve the Government’s own 10 per cent target. Will the minister commit to spending a much larger proportion of the transport budget on active travel, and will he work with ministerial colleagues to get more funding from other budget areas?

Will the member give way?

Has the member considered the loss of income from Scottish tourists who travel abroad and the resulting impact on the health of the domestic tourism industry? A study in 2006 by the University of Oxford’s climate change group found that, for every £1 spent by an overseas resident in the UK, a UK resident visiting overseas spends £2.32. Has any research been done on the fact that there might be a net negative effect on the tourism industry in this country?

It has been 10 years since the Parliament passed our freedom of information laws, and the world in which Government and local authorities could withhold information at will is long gone. It is important that we acknowledge our significant progress on openness, but FOI also has its limitations. As others have said, in some places there is still an unnecessary culture of secrecy, even when there is nothing to hide. The bill will make some welcome changes to the law, such as the ability to vary the lifespan of historical records and the changes to timescales for prosecution, which also make sense given that the crimes might go unknown for a significant time. Less welcome is the inclusion of an absolute exemption for royalty. I agree with the Finance Committee that that proposal should be removed at stage 2 and I support its invitation to the Government to do that. The current set-up, in which the information can be released if it is in the public’s interest, seems to me to be the correct way to have the law structured in a modern democracy. The Information Commissioner has argued strongly against the practice of absolute exemption under FOI, and others have made the point that even if the legislation goes through as introduced, it will not cover environmental information—if the letter to the Queen is about the environment, it will not be exempt; if it is about anything else it will be—and that is inconsistent. As Gavin Brown acknowledged, that does not assist public understanding. The fact that section 5 powers to safeguard people’s right to know by designating new public bodies have not been used as we might have expected them to be has also dominated discussions. Some new bodies have been covered, such as the Scottish Human Rights Commission, which has FOI in its primary legislation, but in many cases the creation of new bodies, such as arm’s-length organisations, and the privatisation of public services have led to an erosion of people’s right to know. The Information Commissioner stated: “Since FOISA came into force in 2005, 15,000 households have lost FOI rights as a result of the transfer of local authority housing stock.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1510.] That sort of change is quite natural over 10 years, but section 5 designations are designed to address that. As discussed, the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland is calling for an amendment at stage 2 to require ministers to have regard to public views when consulting on new section 5 designations, and not just the views of those organisations affected. It is also seeking an amendment to create a recurring requirement for Parliament to consider any new bodies that are created, every year or two years, to ensure that we do not see another decade of little action. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to introduce regular review at stage 2, and to address the issue of public consultation. Willie Rennie’s comments about automatic application are certainly worthy of consideration. It feels as though now is the time to extend FOI’s coverage. The public desire is there: more than 80 per cent of people surveyed want FOI to be extended to cover new public services, and a vast 91 per cent value the right to know. I welcome the SCVO’s clear statement this week that it supports the extension of FOI to include all public services, whether they are delivered by public, private or third sector organisations, and its views that the public have a right to know all aspects of how public services are funded and run. Like Willie Rennie—and contrary to Bruce Crawford’s view—I do not believe that economic circumstances should curtail access to, and the safeguarding of, the right to know. We should have the right to information from a company that is building a local school or about a regional hospital that is being built under PPP; we should be able to scrutinise the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities; and we should be able to FOI the companies that are running Scotland’s privately managed prisons, Serco and Sodexo. Of late, we have even privatised the maintenance of our nuclear weapons at Faslane and Coulport—such contracts should remain transparent.

13. To ask the Scottish Government when the tax consultation forum will next meet and what issues will be on the agenda. (S4O-01408)

Recently, we learned that Starbucks, which according to its shareholders reports is a patently profitable enterprise, has paid a mere £8.6 million in corporation tax in the United Kingdom in the past 14 years and nothing in the past three. Clearly, the establishment of revenue Scotland and the prospect of further devolution represent a unique chance for us to take our time to build a fairer system instead of hastily importing UK problems and loopholes. Does the cabinet secretary agree that any new taxation system in Scotland should explicitly support the local economy and small businesses that pay their fair share of tax and support vital public services?

One high-risk pathway for the disease’s entry to the UK is through imported ash saplings. Many such trees are of Scottish provenance but have been grown in Europe before being imported back, potentially with the disease. Supporting such sapling nursery business in Scotland would seem more beneficial. What can the minister do to support that industry, especially now that the import ban is in place?

Will the minister give way?

Speaking about new technologies—

Speaking about new technologies, the minister may be aware that the Dutch are about to test heated cycle paths that will use heat that has been gathered during the summer. Finnish research shows that slippery roads rather than cold weather stop people cycling. Will the minister commit to making sure that cycle paths and footways receive the same attention that our roads will this winter?

The minister acknowledges that the trajectory is crucial. Does he agree that, given that we have missed the first target by more than 1 million tonnes of CO2, it is essential that we overachieve this year if we are to close the gap and avoid missing future targets? Does he also agree that we should do so by prioritising energy demand reduction, with a minimum standard of energy performance in private housing, and prioritising traffic demand measures, which are glaringly omitted from the current RPP? Can he advise when the updated RPP will be available?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that school outdoor environments promote physical activity and healthy lifestyles. (S4O-01360)

I thank the minister for the steps that have been taken and the investment that has been made so far. The link between access to natural play environments and a child’s physical and cognitive wellbeing is well demonstrated—the Government’s guidance on outdoor learning refers to much of that. However, it is often down to parents or enthusiastic teachers to fundraise in order to transform the tarmac deserts that many old school playgrounds are into stimulating green spaces. I very much welcome that individual action and community involvement. What is the minister doing to help members of the community to volunteer their enthusiasm, time and skills to improve school grounds? What action is the Government taking to ensure that, in time, all schoolchildren will have access to equally inspirational outdoor space?

I thank Sarah Boyack for bringing this extremely important topic to the chamber. The question of who has access to a career in the legal profession must be of concern to all who are interested in social and legal justice in Scotland. I congratulate the campaign for fair access to the legal profession on presenting such a clear and compelling case and thank the Law Society for its briefing on the issues that face those who aim for a career in the profession. The campaign’s steering group represents law schools in Scotland that offer undergraduate LLBs across their campuses. The campaign has been covered supportively by the SCOLAG Legal Journal, including at the start of this year, when the changes in funding to postgraduate professional legal education were announced. It is regrettable that there was no consultation prior to that announcement, as representatives from universities and the professional and student bodies would have warmly welcomed such an opportunity, and their expert input might have laid the foundations of a sustainable and practical funding arrangement. It certainly remains the case that the issue of proper and fair funding for professional legal education has not been dealt with satisfactorily, but that can be remedied. I, too, support Sarah Boyack’s call for a summit with those parties. The Government has stated that the decision is a budgetary decision, so there is a choice. It has also suggested that the decision will not be reversed, but the issue is too important to go unaddressed and unresolved. I ask the minister to look at the matter again. The lack of certainty around funding is a major issue for students. Those who undertake undergraduate study need to know just how much postgraduate study will cost. There is great uncertainty about affordability for too many students who are on courses in which such postgraduate study is compulsory. Our legal profession is an integral part of our civil and criminal justice systems. It is the source of advice and representation for our citizens. Our judiciary is drawn from it, so it is hugely important that the profession is inclusive and open to and representative of Scottish society in all its diversity. The abolition of the maintenance grant in 2010 and the replacement of the fees grant with a capped tuition fee loan of £3,400 means that that diversity is unlikely to be achieved. NUS Scotland has prioritised widening access to all levels of higher and further education. Its research shows that only just over 8 per cent of the LLB intake come from the 20 per cent most deprived areas. As we have heard, the figure for the city of the Parliament does not reach even that lowly level. With tuition fees of up to £6,000 or more and the Government’s own estimate of living costs at more than £7,000, DPLP students are required to find £9,000 of their own or their family’s money to study. For many people, that will be simply impossible without a commercial loan. Will all banks be willing to risk putting up cash when many students have no guaranteed traineeship? The students themselves must try to secure funding that will need to be repaid at commercial interest rates. As well as studying, they must try to secure a traineeship, and many will have to find work when their course timetable or possibly even their childcare arrangements permit them to do so in order to fund the majority of that compulsory qualification. We offer far greater support to other professions that have similar training requirements. It is unrealistic to suggest that the additional strain will not affect the diversity of those who seek entrance to the profession, and it is absolutely right that we continue to question whether our legal profession is fair, inclusive and representative. NUS Scotland has stated that there is a serious problem with access to law at the undergraduate level, which should concern all those who wish to see a more representative profession and judiciary. The lack of support at postgraduate level will exacerbate the problem. If financial status is a deciding factor for or bar to entry, the profession cannot be said to be open to all, unless, as the SCOLAG Legal Journal has pointed out—borrowing a phrase from Sir James Mathew LJ—it is “open to all—like the Ritz hotel!”

This is a timely debate, because we are hearing a lot about the Olympic legacy, preventative spending and community empowerment. I welcome Duncan McNeil’s comment that we must support elite and grass-roots sport, and I welcome the focus on what volunteers and local sports clubs bring to this important agenda. I support the Scottish Sports Association’s call for employer-supported volunteering. People who volunteer not only give something to the community but get a lot back. Volunteering empowers people, giving structure to their day and building skills and confidence. Supporting volunteers is a win-win approach. It is certainly not just about buildings. Colin Keir and I can testify to our early days in Edinburgh Athletic Club, in a little hut on Ford’s Road, where it was about a community of people taking part in a sport about which they were passionate. However, buildings matter. When Liz McColgan spoke at the festival of politics recently, she said that just after the Olympics 112 youngsters came to her local club, where there was only one toilet—and they had each paid £3. If we are going to build on the legacy, and as we build towards the Commonwealth games, we need to be ready for such an inspired rush to take part in sport. Groups of cyclists are running the velodrome in Edinburgh—they are not a geographical community, but they are very committed to looking after what can only be described as a fairly neglected asset. I ask that buildings that are built for the 2014 Commonwealth games be better maintained than those that were built for Edinburgh’s Commonwealth games have been. It is one thing to unveil a plaque and say, “Wow, look at this!”; it is quite another to invest in the facility for the long term. Community sport hubs have a great part to play in complementing existing sports provision, but we have to back that up with other activity. We are still striving to reach two hours of PE each week, delivered by a qualified PE teacher. It is important that children have access to such quality provision by someone who has been trained for several years; volunteers have their place, but sometimes we see very young volunteers who simply do not have the experience, as yet, to take on classes on their own. In Edinburgh Athletic Club, we have a waiting list for juniors who want to get involved in track and field—that waiting list is purely because we do not have enough volunteer coaches—and that is a club that supports volunteer coaches and pays fees to take them through their coaching qualifications. Brian Whittle, a former Olympic medallist, has asked that we look at better funding for coaches, and that is worth investigating, given the demands on time and finance that many volunteers face, which some can afford, but some simply cannot. We need to look at the fact that our elite athletes often have to compete with organisations. We have arms-length companies delivering sports facilities, as we do in Edinburgh, that have commercial interests and, sometimes, for example, the indoor track in Edinburgh is let out for antiques fairs and children’s clothes sales, which prevents athletes who desperately need access to the only indoor facility in the region from training in that way that day. I thank the committee and all the witnesses for their work. We are all committed to ensuring that access to sport in Scotland is the norm and that it becomes part of everyday life. I warmly welcome that commitment, and I will do all that I can as we strive towards that goal.

I welcome the plans for greater clarity and transparency on how the national developments are proposed and finalised, and for targeted engagement with affected communities. On the subject of parliamentary participation, will the minister make a commitment to bring a Government debate on the main issues report, when it is published, to allow the Parliament to be consulted at that earlier stage?

I, too, welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his vital ministerial role, welcome the authors of the Fife diet to the chamber and thank Claire Baker for giving us the opportunity to debate the food manifesto. The Fife diet initiative understands the problems that society faces across a wide range of issues, from the growth and distribution of food to the impact of some of the junk foods that too many Scots consume. However, the manifesto is about far more than food. It connects a host of challenging policy areas and gives us a practical means with which to address them, but it is no hair shirt manifesto. It is bursting with positive ideas that will empower individuals and their communities. It will bring people together through community growing projects, improve our woeful national health record and highlight all that is good about seasonal Scottish produce. The Fife diet food manifesto is not a call to a utopian vision of the good life. It calls for a soda tax and highlights the impact of sugar-sweetened beverages, some of which contain known animal carcinogens. It is, to be frank, astonishing that children can easily access such drinks and that they are considered a treat. Children are also bombarded with advertising for such drinks—ironically, often linked to healthy sporting pursuits. The Government is making determined progress in tackling our national problems with tobacco and alcohol, while acknowledging that there is more work to do. However, as the manifesto points out, we are the third-fattest country in the world. We are beaten to the unwanted title only by the United States and Mexico, but we are leading the way in the fatness stakes in Europe. The Fife diet manifesto joins up policy in a simple and effective way. For example, making soup is a simple activity but is outwith the experience of too many young Scots. It teaches about selecting produce and budgeting and enables the cook to avoid the sugars and additives that are too often unavoidable in many well-known brands. That simple task increases self-reliance and, therefore, self-esteem. The manifesto calls for a right to grow, reflecting the huge and unmet demand for allotments or, simply, any space to grow our own produce. That call fits well with calls to push on with land reform and to ensure that the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill provides further opportunities to local groups. The diet also focuses on the challenge of encouraging Scots to consume even only five pieces of fruit or veg a day. In Canada, the target is 10; in Japan, it is 17. We have a real cultural barrier to overcome. Engaging people with local food, increasing access to it and increasing its affordability are essential to achieving that change. The diet understands the impact that current inefficient methods of production, consumption and distribution have on climate change. Refrigerating food and shipping it around the globe mean that we consume scarce resources and pump out CO2 into the bargain. However, planning committees throughout the country jump for joy every time a new supermarket proposal is announced. A decentralised, local food infrastructure is the only way to increase food security and build the truly resilient local systems that we need to positively confront the dual challenges of peak oil and climate change. Promoting sustainable public procurement enables the development of different scales of mills and abattoirs, so there are real opportunities to create jobs, increase the provision of affordable fresh food and improve animal welfare. Our current policies have given power over food growth and distribution to the mighty few. As Albert Einstein said: “Any intelligent fool can make things bigger, more complex … It takes a touch of genius—and a lot of courage—to move in the opposite direction.” As we strive to close the gap on climate change targets and face the challenges of peak oil, good health and increased obesity, moving in the right direction is simply common sense. The Fife diet food manifesto is a manifesto for a more connected, healthier and better Scotland. We should learn from and embrace it.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill at this early stage. The debate helps to encourage a wide range of views to be heard and, by its nature, cross-cuts policy and intersects with on-going Government work such as the recent land reform review group, the national review of town centres, the short-life working group on community councils and the continuing planning reforms. Many of those reviews and potential policy changes provide the opportunity to work together in more coherent ways to ensure that community empowerment is not promoted by one group and stifled by another. I hope that a coherent vision and framework will arise.

I thank the minister for that. As Bob Doris mentioned, it is important that the principles of decentralised powers are fully accepted and that the approach is not just about decentralisation from Westminster to Holyrood. I would go further than Bob Doris and ask that we remove the financial straitjacket that has been forced on local authorities. Financial freedom is vital, because it is not empowerment simply to give people a pot of money and say, “There you go—spend it how you like.” Empowerment means a group having the ability to raise funds and the freedom to spend it on its aims. At least to an extent, it means financial independence. The consultation talks of participatory budgeting, which is an idea that I fully support. In my region, the Leith decides initiative allocated £16,000 of council funds through a highly successful participatory budgeting event. I would like the empowerment agenda to explore how more tax-raising powers, for example in relation to allotment fees or parking charges, could be devolved to community councils or neighbourhood partnerships along with a concerted effort to build the capacity of that hyper-local democracy. On community asset transfer, I cannot speak highly enough of the efforts of the Splashback community group, which is working to reopen Leith Waterworld, which is a unique asset in north Edinburgh that is well suited to the young, old and those who are less mobile. The group’s bid to run the pool with the City of Edinburgh Council has been submitted, and the council will make a decision on 20 September. That is a fine example of a community sports hub if ever there was one, and it surely meets all the criteria for a meaningful legacy from the great games that we have just witnessed. Also in Lothian region, another community—track cyclists—has taken on the management and control of all cycling activities and equipment at the Meadowbank velodrome. That illustrates the important point that communities of interest must also be represented in our plans for the right to buy or asset transfer. The Common Ground Association has formed to help people to explore the potential of community ownership of local hills and woodlands. The aim is to enhance and protect sites such as Lothian’s Craighouse for future generations. In south Edinburgh, local people who are tired of the loss of local shops that have been steam-rollered by the supermarket juggernaut are working to set up a community greengrocer, which is to be stocked with produce from local allotments and gardens such as the Royal Edinburgh community gardens, which was once a stalled space, but is now an abundant one. Those groups are all working with others—from Senscot to sportscotland—and, to some extent, with the council. I agree with the Royal Town Planning Institute that a one-stop shop for best practice would be an invaluable aid and with its call to help folk through existing mazes, not build more. Working with the groups that I have mentioned has highlighted the need to ensure that communities have access to expertise in business planning and market research, for example. The consultation also refers to common good assets. There is a clear case for the creation of democratically controlled common good trusts, with the scope to manage the transfer of assets to community control. Local energy has been mentioned a few times. If public sector land or roofing is available for renewable energy, the community should be able to work with the council to create local energy companies to generate energy and revenue. I want to see our communities flourish, being confident to take their own decisions, cohesive and equitable, so that everyone who needs it finds support in their community, and resilient to shocks and changes that occur as part of changing environmental, social and economic circumstances. There is some focus in the consultation document’s introduction on sustainable economic growth, but that will not, as an overriding purpose, create the community development that the proposed bill describes. Opportunities for increased collective wellbeing come from letting communities decide what matters to them and letting them act on those decisions with appropriate support. In some cases, community needs will override the slavish and blind adherence to growth for growth’s sake: a community might decide that it does not want to have a large-scale supermarket move into the area and that it wants to keep existing local traders and business; it might decide that it wants a not-for-profit cafe, rather than another clone town coffee shop. Let us see communities fully involved in the decisions that affect them, from local energy generation to the provision of local sports facilities. As we debate the future of Scotland, there is no better time to do so.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it is ensuring equitable access to music tuition in schools. (S4T-00035)

The curriculum for excellence states: “Performing and creating music will be ... prominent activities for all learners.” Clearly, where music lessons are charged for—a charge that many cannot afford—or where free lessons are available only to those who excel in an aptitude test, there is no access for all. Does the minister agree that music for fun, improved self-confidence, self-respect and the many proven benefits that it gives to a child’s learning in other areas is important and that local authorities should make music lessons available to all pupils for free?

At the moment, only handfuls of children in our primary school classes are accessing music, so I am heartened to learn that the Government is looking at that. In schools in Edinburgh aptitude tests are being given to children in primary 5 and only those who pass the test have the opportunity to go on to learn a musical instrument. I would like to see that opportunity broadened to the entire class.

I thank the minister for his statement. If Scotland had been at the top table, would the minister have signed this “timid” and disappointing agreement?

6. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how it helps small charitable organisations to meet the costs of organising events in the complex. (S4O-01214)

I thank Linda Fabiani for her answer. I recognise the professional and courteous service offered by the Parliament events team to small and large organisations alike. When organisations invite people into the Parliament they like to offer hospitality. Currently, the least expensive package of canapés and drinks is more than £17 per person. Could the SPCB consider a sliding scale of charges for organisations based on their income and size?

I, too, thank Jamie Hepburn for giving us the opportunity to debate this important issue. In 1948, the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and, as part of the international bill of human rights, it has entered into our international law. It provides a universal standard of dignity that all human beings can expect, and a universal bottom line for all nations and states to be judged by. It is a truly historic document and a set of ideals on which we are making progress. Education in many parts of the world has been transformed and extended to more and more children. We have recognised gender inequalities too, and women around the world are fighting for their rights. Of course, there remain vast problems with incredible leaps and bounds still to be taken—our economic system remains hardwired for inequality and necessitates grinding poverty for some—but we are standing on the verge of a potentially historic breakthrough in human rights: an international arms trade treaty that will ban the trade of weapons where they are likely to be used to kill, to harm, to terrorise and to oppress. In 2006, we took a big step forward when 153 governments formally voted to work together on such a treaty. The notable absence was the United States, which continued to stand in the way. With the election of President Obama, the US has agreed to engage. In only 11 days’ time, the treaty conference will begin four weeks of negotiation. My hope, and the hope of millions of people around the world, is that in the end we will have a strong, binding treaty that bans the trade of arms—large and small—by states and by arms brokers, where those arms are likely to be used to violate a person’s human rights. I am sure that that is the UK Government’s hope, too, and to realise the hope I am calling for it to remain resolute in the face of challenges to water down and weaken the proposals. We must remain resolute that a bullet-proof treaty is all that we shall settle for. The treaty must retain the obligation on states to refuse to authorise the transfer of weapons where there is a substantial risk of human rights violations. If the treaty does anything less than that, I believe, along with Amnesty International and others, that it is better to walk away to negotiate another day than to sign away a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to stop some 1,500 people being killed every day as a result of armed violence. As has been mentioned, women and children are uniquely affected by this violence. The Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom is campaigning for the treaty to recognise the role that gender plays: weapons facilitate trafficking, forced prostitution and sexual violence, and arms are used to kill, threaten, or intimidate women and children in their homes and communities. What can be done to ensure that we deal with the reality that two bullets for every person on the planet are produced each year? The groundwork has been done. It is now up to our political leadership at the highest level, the Prime Minister, David Cameron, to make a strong public statement for a bullet-proof treaty. I sincerely hope that he will take the floor this week.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many of its employees have their salaries paid off-payroll. (S4O-01124)

I am pleased that action has been taken since I lodged the question. The issue of tax avoidance in the public sector is incredibly important. Will the minister advise when the 20 employees who were off-payroll will come on-payroll? Going beyond individual employees, will the cabinet secretary consider action to ensure that fear of legal action does not discourage public bodies from contracting private firms that have responsible tax arrangements?

I welcome the agreement on regionalisation, the principle of a discards ban and the removal of mandatory tradable fishing rights, which would have benefited those with the biggest pockets. After regionalisation—which I hope will come sooner rather than later—will the Scottish Government commit to the principle of allocating our fishing rights to the boats that can fish most sustainably and selectively, thus rewarding those with the fewest discards?

Fishing our seas sustainably means maintaining a healthy ecosystem that supports more fish and more fishing jobs. It is worth saying that at the start, because it is the common ground for, and of common benefit to, all parties that are involved in the debate on fisheries policy. We face the challenge of moving to a truly sustainable model. A difficult transition period is ahead of us but, in the medium term, we will reap many benefits. People who care about the sustainability of our communities and ecosystems must make science the basis of our decisions on fisheries management and resist a race to the bottom that risks leading to silent seas and harbours. Top-down decision making from the EU has failed. Fishermen think that the regulations have opposed rather than supported their interests. The decentralisation proposals have merit, because they can promote co-management, whereby fishermen, scientists and conservation interests are involved at regional and, I hope, local level. Fishermen often pass their skills, ships and tackle down to the next generation, and decentralisation offers a chance for users to become stewards of the sea for the next generation. Scotland has the experience to develop good co-management, and the catch credits scheme is a successful example that should be more widely applied. Sustainability will not happen magically or automatically on regionalisation. The fishing industry does not have a history of stewardship or compliance. There has been in-fighting between sectors, there have been incredible levels of black fish landings, and controls have too often been called for only when livelihoods were threatened by other fishermen’s practices. Good co-management must have science as its basis. We know for sure that many stocks are overfished. In 2010, the Government’s independent report, “The Future of Fisheries Management in Scotland”, said that of the 12 Scottish fish stocks that had been assessed, “only four are without immediate concern.” On a longer timescale, we know that the seas used to be full of fish, but the current level of large predatory fish biomass is only about 10 per cent of the pre-industrial level. British trawlers now need 17 times more effort to catch the same volume of fish than they needed at the start of the 19th century. Between 2003 and 2011, total allowable catches were set by the Council at a rate that was, on average, 47 per cent higher than the rate that scientists advocated. The Government’s motion talks about promoting conservation, but that is not enough to safeguard fishing jobs in future. A decentralised approach can work only if there is a clear decision-making structure that puts scientific advice at its heart. What can we gain from putting in place such a structure? We can build a resilient fishery ecosystem, which is able to deal with climate change and increased ocean acidity, and which will support more jobs. The New Economics Foundation, as we heard, calculated that if we achieved maximum sustainable yield, we would create 3,000 extra jobs for fishermen and 7,700 extra processing jobs across the UK, as a result of having healthier stocks. Another important question is who should have the right to fish the seas. The privilege to exploit fish stocks should be conditional on fishing in an environmentally and socially responsible, as well as legal, manner. “Fishermen should be required to demonstrate that their fishing operations do not damage the marine environment”, and that they “make significant contributions to coastal fishing communities.” Member states should use such criteria when they allocate the right to fish. That might sound miles away from the motion’s language of safeguarding “Scotland’s historic fishing rights”, but that is the principle behind the conservation credit scheme and I was quoting from a policy document adopted by the Green and European free alliance in the EU—of which the SNP is a member. Many of our fishing communities are long gone. There is hardly a fishing boat to be seen in Hopeman, Burghead or Lossiemouth. Modern technology means that what fish there are can be traced electronically. Modern machinery on super-trawlers is such that one ship can land as many fish in a year as the whole Dutch fleet could land in the 1700s. There is a view that Scottish fishermen are in crisis as a result of regulation. There is no argument but that there is a crisis, but it is a crisis born of overcapacity, overfishing, poor policy and the near destruction of an ecosystem. It is true that the pelagic fleet has been reduced. In 1991, there were 54 boats whose main fishing method was pelagic—today there are 24. However, from 1991 to 2011, the fleet’s total engine power rose by 40 per cent. Over the same 20 years, the fleet’s total tonnage more than doubled. Although the number of boats has fallen, the total tonnage and engine power of the fleet have risen significantly. The pelagic boats are now massive industrial-scale concerns with a greater capacity to catch fish. Industrial-scale fishing does the most damage and contributes the least to employment and communities. It is the large-scale fishing that has large-scale lobbying power too. We must make sure that we do not listen only to the loudest voice in the industry, because there are many others. Tradeable rights should be resisted, as those with the deepest pockets will buy the rights to fish, instead of those rights being allocated to fishermen with sustainable and selective catch methods. I am heartened by the Government’s commitment to tackle discards and to reduce by-catch. We have the conservation credits scheme and the Government is right to try to widen participation to other vessels. However, a ban on discards—including seabirds, marine mammals, juveniles and non-commercial species—must be the end goal in order to promote the best selectivity possible.

I thank Aileen McLeod for securing this debate on the Rio+20 summit next month. As the motion recognises, the first Rio earth summit was a milestone in global environmental talks. In comparison with recent climate talks, the agreements made at Rio were extensive. Rio established the term “sustainable development” in the political vocabulary. The Rio declaration defined the polluter-pays principle and the precautionary principle, and recognised that women and indigenous peoples have vital roles to play in creating solutions to environmental crises. Rio also produced agreements on the agenda 21 action plan and the forest principles, and gave us the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the international environmental treaty that led to the Kyoto protocol’s mandatory emission limits and the framework for all future global climate negotiations. However, all has not been rosy since Rio. Global carbon emissions have continued to rise and the efforts to replace Kyoto have become increasingly fraught. Millennium development goals on poverty will be missed and the economic model, then and now, is based on debt-fuelled overconsumption and is hard-wired for vast levels of poverty and inequality. Twenty years on from Rio number 1, I welcome the seven issues that are mentioned in the motion—there are accords, action plans and agreements that we can have for decent jobs, low-carbon energy, food security, water scarcity and all the others—but the point that I want to make is that they all have their root causes in our choice of economic system and our approach to economic governance. The green economy is one of the key themes at Rio+20. For years, Greens and many others have called for a transition to a low-carbon economy within ecological boundaries. However, the definition of a green economy is the debate that is raging in the lead-up to Rio. The UK’s position is effectively that our economic activities trash the planet because we do not ascribe a financial value to the beneficial functions of nature, such as clean air, fresh water and healthy soils. That argument proposes the commodification of services that a healthy ecosystem provides for free. The argument goes that by costing ecological services or monetising the right to pollute, and bringing those into a market, we can continue with something very similar to business as usual but live within ecological limits. There are many who oppose that false green economy. The corporate green economy would lead to the privatisation of land and nature by multinational companies and take control of the resources further away from the communities that depend on them, instead of contributing to sustainable development and economic justice. The World Development Movement has called for a “real green economy, not a Trojan horse for bankers”. A true green economy would embrace economic justice—the right of poor communities to determine their path out of poverty, and an end to harmful policies that put profit before people and the environment. A true green economy would replace our focus on economic growth and unsustainable consumption with a focus on meeting everyone’s needs in a truly sustainable manner. In Scotland, there are similar debates over what is meant by “sustainable economic development”. I wish the minister and all those who are attending the Rio+20 conference every success in working for the positive outcome that is essential. I ask the minister—following his attendance at the summit—to seek to find Government time for a full debate on the summit and its outcome.

The way in which Creative Scotland funds organisations such as Drake Music and Edinburgh Mela in my region has changed. There has been a change from two-year funding for good-quality companies to produce good-quality art to a grants system that is based on project proposals. How will the Government ensure that the new system delivers sufficient financial certainty and continuity for arts organisations and ensure the widest possible participation in the arts?

I am very pleased that we are introducing minimum pricing of alcohol. The Scottish Greens have supported the bill in this session and we supported the similar bill in the previous session, before my time here. The bill alone will not achieve the policy aim of changing Scotland’s unhealthy drinking culture, but it is an important contribution, as the cabinet secretary pointed out. BMA Scotland, Alcohol Focus Scotland and Scottish Health Action on Alcohol Problems stated in their joint briefing for the stage 1 debate: “Without action on price, any other measures to reduce consumption and harm will be swimming against a very powerful tide. If we want to change ‘culture’ then price is a good place to start.” The bill is a good place to start, but the narrowness with which it was drafted has not allowed the fullest debate on other possible ways and complementary mechanisms to address our deep-seated issues with alcohol. It was disappointing that the Government and Labour in the previous session were unable to work constructively together to produce a better bill. Proposals for legislation to deal with caffeinated alcohol have merit and are worthy of proper consideration. I am disappointed that in this session we did not manage to have the SNP and Labour sit down and work together on the windfall to large retailers and other issues. Such legislative opportunities are rare and it is important that we use our windows of opportunity in that regard to the best of our ability. Throughout the bill process, the Greens have called for measures to tackle the structure of the drinks industry. To change our high-volume drinking culture we need to challenge the high-volume drinks industry. We also need to support community pubs and small-scale producers whose business models rely on quality produce, and we need to tackle the power of big brewers and producers, for whom shifting large volumes is the aim of the game. This is a difficult issue, but I think that we all recognise that it is not only individuals who are responsible for what they drink, because their choices are made within a wider cultural setting that is heavily influenced by the nature of the drinks industry, its marketing message and the way in which it runs and supplies pubs and clubs. So, where next? I welcome Dr Richard Simpson’s and Graeme Pearson’s members’ bill consultation, which puts some good proposals up for debate, including limiting the caffeinated alcoholic drinks that I mentioned earlier, improving community involvement in licensing decisions and banning alcoholic drinks advertising in public places. The object of the ban would be to help to “de-normalise”—to use the consultation’s language—alcohol for children. It is essential that we achieve the culture change that we all seek. I agree with Children 1st that passing the bill will be a huge step forward in beginning that process.

I really welcome this debate. It is essential that we understand the challenges that obesity currently poses to our national health and the devastating impact that it will have in future if we do not do all that we can do. We have shared—and I am sure that we will continue to share—many facts and figures during the debate, many of which cause great concern. We need to hear them, because they will act as a catalyst and a strong call to action. That is important, because obesity limits the lives and life chances of too many Scots and is costing us a fortune—socially and economically. There are many consequences of having an obese population, including human suffering and an increase in the demand for and cost of healthcare services. The British Medical Association said in its briefing for the debate that obesity-related illnesses cost the NHS in Scotland in the region of £171 million in 2003. Given the increase just in the numbers of people who have type 2 diabetes, the cost has increased markedly, as the minister noted. Scotland has one of the highest levels of obesity in the OECD countries, with more than a million obese adults and more than 150,000 obese children. Six in 10 adults and three in 10 children are obese. The increase in the obese population did not happen overnight. Earlier this week, a programme on television documented life in the 1970s. I was struck by the scenes of jubilant Scottish fans celebrating a good result in a home international football match in 1977; I was also struck by the generally trim body shape of the people who were celebrating. What has changed, and what can we do about it? Professor Philip James, the chair of the international obesity task force, thinks that we have created an obesogenic environment, which has made it difficult not to become overweight, and that factors outwith individuals’ control are having an impact. For example, designing towns and cities around the car has had an impact on the number of people who walk to and from work and to shops—Patricia Ferguson touched on that. Our lifestyles are increasingly sedentary, with the increase in desk jobs and the attraction of couch-potato recreation choices such as TV, surfing the web and video gaming. Our best intentions are constantly challenged by a marketing-savvy food industry that encourages consumption of unhealthy food items, with children being particularly manipulated. Dr Dennis Bramble and Dr Carrier of the University of Utah, and Dr Daniel Lieberman of Harvard University, have studied the impact of running on the human body and, indeed, on human evolution. Their studies investigate the impact of the fact that we no longer need to use our bodies in the way that our hunter-gatherer ancestors did, and how successful we have been in developing technology and equipment that turn lazing around into a way of life. Let us be honest: how many of us do not use the remote control to turn the TV channel? Dr Bramble notes that humans have a mind/body conflict. He says that “we have a body built for performance, but a brain that’s always looking for efficiency.” We conserve energy as a survival mechanism, so encouraging physical activity, among many Scots, is hugely challenging. However, an active life must become our way of life—physical activity is a habit that Scotland must cultivate. The western diseases that shorten so many lives were largely unknown to our ancestors, as were plasma TVs, bath-size tubs of popcorn, and super-size junk food offerings. As the Ramblers Association points out, six out of 10 adults and 28 per cent of children do not meet minimum recommended physical activity levels of moderate physical activity. Walking is free—it does not need any equipment. Living Streets notes that 22 per cent of households on less than £10,000 use walking as their main mode of transport, compared with only 8 per cent of those with income more than £40,000. On the school run every morning, I walk or cycle along the Union canal. Those 15 minutes are some of the best-quality time that I can spend in the week. I welcome the fact that 80 per cent of people joining Paths for All Partnership’s walking groups are women, because women are disproportionately uninvolved in sport and physical activity. What is to be done? We have a national plan and we have to implement it. We can reduce obesity by investing 10 per cent of our transport budget on active travel, as recommended by the Association of Directors of Public Health. We need to ensure that the Government target of 10 per cent of trips being taken by bike in 2020 is achieved. We need to ensure that all our pupils receive a minimum of two hours per week of PE. Some schools go way beyond that, but schools such as South Morningside primary school, in Edinburgh, have space constraints and high pupil numbers, which make that very difficult. It is essential that national and local government continue to work together to provide solutions if we are to achieve that target. Active schools is doing a great job, letting school pupils try a wide variety of sports and physical activities, such as street dance. Active schools’ charges are low, but if someone has two or three children and is on a tight budget, those charges for extra-curricular activity might be off-putting, or simply unaffordable. Concern around costs in local authority provision exists, too. Squeezed family budgets and reduced incomes affect the ability of people to take part in formal organised sport and fitness activity. I want the Government and local authorities to work together to ensure that such facilities are affordable. Despite many opportunities to use brownfield sites, open green space continues to be under pressure from development. Young and old alike need access to informal green space if they are to benefit from important unstructured activities—from rounders, to just pottering around, to goalie-when.

I thank the minister for her intention to support my amendment. I move amendment S4M-02904.1, to insert after the first “active”: ”; considers physical activity among children and young people to be a priority; recognises the important role that the design of the built environment, active travel and access to open space have in promoting a culture of informal physical activity; considers improving facilities and reducing costs to users to be preventative spend and key to enhancing participation in sport and physical activity”.

I welcome the generally consensual nature of the debate. There has been some disagreement, on the two hours of PE for example, but I think that it is fair to say that we all know that if children have access only to two hours of PE each week, we will not see a fit, healthy Scotland any time soon. Margaret McDougall and Hanzala Malik spoke about the importance of optimal nutrition from the very beginning of life. Patricia Ferguson and Nanette Milne noted how physical activity was part and parcel of life in the not-too-distant past. If we were to introduce more 20mph zones and the Living Streets model, that would provide far more opportunities for young people to play outside and for their parents to be more relaxed about that. Mark Griffin mentioned his recent schooldays. I welcome his recognition that football is not the only sport. Bob Doris touched on the fact that Gaelic football might be an attractive alternative—perhaps we can try that some time. I was touched by Margaret Burgess’s personal experience, which highlights the need for physical activity. This morning, I was speaking to Bill Walker, who is the head coach of Edinburgh Athletic Club. He emphasised the fact that if we obsess about diet, we will have people who are focused on what they are denying themselves, whereas if we focus on physical activity, we improve our self-esteem and wellbeing. Gil Paterson’s comments hit the nail on the head: fitness should not only be about aesthetics; it has to be about wellbeing. Dennis Robertson rightly touched on the need for a work-life balance and the fact that we in this building should lead by example. I try occasionally to get out for a walk after lunch. It is difficult, but we can try harder. I completely disagree with Mark McDonald’s comments: he clearly is in a strong position to speak on the issues, as his understanding of the issues and the need for action is obvious. We will continue to campaign on getting women on to “Question of Sport”. Nigel Don spoke about open space and whether to be physically active is a personal choice. I agree to an extent, but it is far easier to get out and exercise in a crime-free, pleasant environment than it is in some of our inner-city and peripheral housing estates. Affordability and family finance come into the issue, too. If I had not been granted an athletics scholarship in my competitive days, my family simply could not have afforded for me to train six days a week, as I was one of four children. There are other factors in play in our choices. Patricia Ferguson noted the impact of the design of our built environment. As I said at the start of the debate, there is a view that we have designed an obesogenic environment. Redesigning and rethinking our streets, workplaces and the layout of our cities will take time and require sustained effort, but that is essential to embedding physical activity into daily lives and schedules. The minister talked of the obesity route map action plan, which is a good collection of policies and actions that cut across the different areas of Government that need to take action on obesity. I am glad that it was updated at the end of last year and that it is monitored. Five of the route map action plan points refer directly to the design of our cities and built environment. Four action plan points refer to access to open space and promoting children’s play. The availability of safe outdoor space is identified as a key driver of childhood activity. Another four points refer directly to promoting walking and cycling, and several more talk of providing routes to school or work. All those points are highlighted in the Green amendment. We clearly agree on what must be done to improve physical activity and help to tackle obesity. However, that agreement needs to be followed by spending decisions that mirror it, prioritise active travel over a car culture and support sporting facilities when money is tight. That is money well spent—it is preventative spending. Nigel Don commented on cycle paths, which are a good example of such spend. Indeed, I support Malcolm Chisholm’s comments on safe cycle paths. The Scottish Government currently spends less than 1 per cent of its transport budget on active travel. That proportion has dropped for the past two years. I believe that the minister is sincere about tackling obesity. We can make great inroads if we invest more in active travel, so I ask her to raise the issue loudly in the Government. Money that is spent on active travel will cut obesity and health spending. In 2006, the “National Audit of Scotland’s Sports Facilities” found that an investment of £110 million was needed every year for the next 25 years to bring facilities up to an acceptable standard. The Commonwealth games have focused minds. Investment has been made in many facilities, and I welcome the focus on the legacy. Investment in elite sports is important, but local access to good-quality affordable sports and leisure facilities is a key part of the solution to embedding physical activity in the culture and minds of young people across Scotland. I ask the minister to speak to local government colleagues in Edinburgh to ensure that they work with the community group that hopes to run Leith Waterworld—a local pool that is a unique facility—as a community model. The debate is important. I hope that it will inform the update of the obesity action plan, but that is not enough by itself. I ask the minister to highlight in her closing speech the need for budget decisions to focus on forms of preventative spend that have multiple benefits, which include tackling obesity. Not all the solution to our obesity crisis comes from central Government, but it is clear that central Government has an important role to play. I welcome the minister’s commitment to action on the issue.

I declare an interest as a councillor on the City of Edinburgh Council. The reasons why we have long leases in Scotland are largely historical. They were created because feuing was not permitted on a particular piece of land or because the long-lease option was sometimes cheaper or just normal practice locally. I support the principle behind the bill because, following the abolition of both entail and feudalism, it makes sense for the Government to produce legislation to abolish historical long leases, many of which can be described as “feus in disguise”. There has been much debate over how the bill affects the lease on Waverley market, in my region, which is the site of the current Princes mall shopping centre. As the bill is drafted, the Princes mall site would be transferred from public to private ownership for the not-so-princely sum of 40p, and the council would relinquish a massively valuable asset that should be available to benefit future generations when the lease runs out. I have campaigned on that issue for some time, as a councillor and now as an MSP. Rob Gibson mentioned movement in the Government’s undergrowth, and I welcome the minister’s willingness to explore the options for excluding land that is already subject to statutory provision. Given that Waverley market is subject to a significant amount of statutory provision—the City of Edinburgh District Council Order Confirmation Act 1991 and three other statutes that I have here all relate to it—I suggest that the easiest and most certain way to deal with the issue is to exempt from the bill land that is under such existing statutory provision. The problem with Waverley market, and potentially with other sites, is that not all long leases are feus in disguise. Some are more like commercial leases, in which the landlord receives a non-nominal rent. The bill that was considered in the previous parliamentary session would have converted such leases to ownership. However, as a result of lobbying on behalf of property interests, such long leases are exempted from the bill that is before us on the basis that the landlord has a continuing interest in the land. The argument for exempting Waverley market is also based on interest. The council’s continuing financial interest in the ground over the period of the lease is nominal: it gets a penny a year. However, the interest that it sought to retain by issuing a long lease was the power proactively to manage the site as the owner for the benefit of Edinburgh’s citizens, as opposed to the solely negative powers that it has as the planning authority. On top of that, the council sought to retain the right to regain the valuable land in the future for the benefit of the citizens. On top of that, there is the difficult issue, which I have already mentioned, that Waverley market is subject to substantial existing statutory powers. That is the issue that the minister has recognised needs tackling, and I look forward to seeing what comes of the exemption that he is exploring. The City of Edinburgh District Council Order Confirmation Act 1991 contains special provisions to help to protect and promote the whole of the Waverley valley. Paragraph 35 of the schedule to the act enables the council to erect and maintain new buildings on Waverley market. The bill does not repeal that provision, nor was the repeal of that existing statutory regime part of the consultation. If the bill is passed as drafted, I am not sure where that will leave the 1991 act. It will certainly be stranded in limbo. The Waverley market site is subject to existing statutory provision that is not repealed by the bill. It is valuable public land that should not be transferred for the measly sum of 40p. I am pleased at the minister’s willingness to iron out problems with the bill and I ask him to confirm that exempting from it land that is under existing statutory provision would exempt Waverley market. I would welcome the opportunity to join him when he meets Marco Biagi.

I thank Kenneth Gibson for bringing the motion to the chamber. It is topical, given the increasing interest in the “grow your own” approach, and the positive solution that it provides to many of the questions that we face as we work towards a sustainable future that provides energy and food security. People are increasingly aware that local seasonal fresh food is no more expensive than supermarkets’ fresh food. They are concerned about the way in which some of the supermarkets’ food is processed, the age of the produce and the food miles that are involved, and many people are increasingly aware of the pressure that is put on producers by the supermarkets, which promote loss-leaders—all too often of the junk-food variety—that help to perpetuate the myth that supermarkets are a low-cost option. For all sorts of reasons, the popularity of allotment gardening has increased. In Lothian, thanks to the efforts of plot holders, some local authorities and other groups, we have many well-tended sites, although—as Christine Grahame pointed out—there are not as many as we need. Such is the demand in Edinburgh that more than 2,000 people are on the waiting list. Christine Grahame mentioned the 10-year-long waiting list for Deanburn allotments in Penicuick. West Lothian has no local authority-run allotments, but the Linlithgow and district allotment society proudly opened its Oakwell community plot last August. People are so keen to get their hands on land that, in this city, some are resorting to guerrilla gardening, and neglected borders in the city are sometimes transformed by those green-fingered guerrillas, which I welcome. As has been mentioned, there is also the option of greening derelict sites. Why should we let sites sit empty? With the slow-down of the property market, we have a lot of brownfield sites that are simply inactive, and they could be put to really good use. Allotments provide an opportunity for people to lead a healthy, active, outdoor lifestyle and are a form of exercise that can last a lifetime. I had no time to go running the other night, so I got out my trusty old push-pull lawnmower, which provides fantastic exercise that anyone can enjoy. Most people think that the push-pull lawnmower is a relic of the past, but I heartily advocate its use. Allotments operate with due consideration to the environment, and many of them provide habitats on or around their plots for indigenous wildlife. Boundaries can be formed by planting natural hedgerows, and allotments also contain log piles next to rich flower beds and beetle banks. As has been said, if we grow locally, we reduce our carbon footprint. Fruit and vegetables arrive in our kitchens in only their natural packaging, so we reduce the demand for resources and for waste disposal. Trees and plants grow and absorb CO2, and cultivated land produces soakaway, which plays a part in reducing flooding. Allotments promote social inclusion; they have tenants from all walks of life and of all ages, from very young children gardening with their parents, to people who are well beyond retirement age. Allotment gardening also does much that the Government and the national health service advocate. In some areas, councils provide tenants with sheds or other garden buildings, but in other areas there is not such generous spending. Allotments are a great example of preventative investment because they help with the challenges of peak oil and the need to provide pollen-rich sites for beleaguered bees. They provide the benefits—for both mental and physical wellbeing—of being outside and they offer financial savings to people who grow their own. Allotments are, indeed, a win-win. I have visited allotments in Bridgend, Redhall, Midmar and the Royal Edinburgh community gardens, and I have been inspired by what is going on. The Transition Network movement is active on this front and the Scottish Association for Mental Health knows the many benefits that are accrued. In summary, we must ensure that we do all we can to support allotment growth. If we fail to do that, an opportunity will have been missed. Instead of growing potatoes, we will risk producing couch potatoes who drain the NHS budget.

I was a member of the committee that scrutinised the UK Government’s Scotland Bill and its potential impacts on Scotland and, in the end, I supported the majority of the majority report. I associate myself with colleagues’ comments and I thank the committee’s convener, its staff team, the witnesses and other committee members. After all the intergovernmental negotiations, I have been left with some concerns, which I raised at our last committee meeting, when we looked at the legislative consent memorandum. I remain concerned about the lack of joint commencement powers for the financial provisions—the income tax powers and the subsequent reduction in the block grant. As the cabinet secretary said, we as a Parliament have an important duty to ensure that Scotland is not left in a worse position as a result of the financial changes. I welcome the fact that the Government has been exercised about that issue in negotiating agreements on the principles—if not yet all the detail—of how our block grant will be amended. I also welcome the statutory duty to report regularly to Parliament and the assurances that the two Governments should reach agreement on implementation issues, as was described in the letter of 21 March to the committee. However, what is on the table is not joint commencement powers but letters that have been exchanged between our two Governments and agreements on scrutiny. I asked at the last committee meeting what weight those letters hold, as they seem to be no more than a gentleman’s agreement. Since then, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has given further assurances in his letter of 14 April, which confirms that “By convention, such a public undertaking by a UK or Scottish Government is regarded as a commitment, even in the absence of legal agreement or statutory provisions. We would expect future UK and Scottish Governments—of any complexion—to uphold the agreement until the new arrangements are in place.” I value the flexibility that such mutual trust and good faith give our Governments and I have absolutely no reason not to trust the sentiments that were expressed in the letters about joint agreement, but a public commitment is clearly less than what the Scottish Government asked for. On 17 November, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth told the committee that, in light of the fact that “the mechanism for adjusting the block grant has yet to be decided ... We are ... in the dark about how to forecast the financial effects of the bill on future Scottish budgets, never mind the uncertainties inherent in forecasting.”—[Official Report, Scotland Bill Committee, 17 November 2011; c 563.] We now have agreement on the principles of the mechanism to amend the block grant, but I register my concern that the precise detail is vital, too. I, too, am keen to note that the world has moved on since the bill started its progress. I guess that that is inevitable for a bill that started life as a commission in 2007. The constitutional issues that we are addressing are important, but they are somewhat superseded by debates on independence and other options that might be put to the people in a referendum. I am concerned that the devolution of powers under the bill is partial and piecemeal. The devolution of speed limits for cars but not heavy goods vehicles and on some but not all roads is the clearest example of the unnecessarily piecemeal approach, and I am glad that there is agreement in Westminster to address that. There is no point in partial devolution of regulations, which would add unnecessary complexity for the people who are affected. As others have noted, there are lost opportunities that should have been grasped. Unfortunately, I cannot attend David Stewart’s members’ business debate tonight on devolution of the Crown estate, but I fully support his motion. The Crown estate issue is emblematic of the case for devolving power and highlights the point that devolution should not stop in Edinburgh. More powers for Scotland should not simply mean more powers for Holyrood; they may mean double devolution to the local authority and community level. The Scottish Affairs Committee report, “The Crown Estate in Scotland”, which was published on 19 March, concluded that simply handing the Crown’s marine responsibilities to Holyrood would not address the fundamental problems that have been identified and that the assets are not being managed to maximise the public good. The committee concluded that devolution of the powers should be based on “further decentralisation to the maximum extent possible ... to local authority and local community levels”. I repeat that devolution should be about not securing more power for the Scottish Parliament but ensuring that decisions are taken as close as possible to the people who are affected by them. Many members are in a bind. The SNP is in a bind, because it wants Scotland to be a nation state and the bill contains some of the tax-raising powers that characterise a state. Greens are unhappy with the bill, but we do not want to reject further devolution, however limited it is. We have missed opportunities, largely because the process has not been fully participative, whatever Michael Moore thinks. Therefore, it will be with zero real enthusiasm that we will support the legislative consent motion at decision time. The important driver is the devolution of decision making to as close as possible to the people whom it affects.

It is often the case that the public are ahead of the politicians. In our capital city, on certain routes and at certain times of day, up to 20 per cent of the vehicles on the roads are bikes. Cycling rates in Edinburgh are becoming respectable, but the picture nationally is more mixed. The official estimate of the percentage of journeys that are taken by bike is a lowly 1 per cent. However, if we can achieve promising cycling rates in this city of seven hills, there is no reason not to aim high across Scotland. I welcome the Government’s target of 10 per cent of journeys being made by bike by 2020. However, as members would expect, Greens believe that we could and should be going faster and further towards sustainable travel, although we recognise the significant work that has gone into producing the “Cycling Action Plan for Scotland”. In the rest of my speech, I will focus on the specific calls that we make in our motion on issues on which we think Government action has fallen short of ambition. All members will be only too aware when a tragic cycling accident happens in their region. Since 2000, there have been 16 cycling deaths on Lothian roads, almost all of which involved another vehicle. The ages of those who lost their lives range from nine to 75. On Monday, I met the parents of Andrew McNicoll, an experienced cyclist who lost his life in January on the way to work. In his memory, the McNicolls have set up a website, www.andrewcyclist.com, to raise funds for campaigning for safer cycling. As many cycling organisations do, they call for mutual tolerance and respect and greater safety on our roads to result from education. At the start of this month, Bryan Simons was tragically killed following a collision and, in the past week, serious cycle accidents have been reported in Dumfries and near Elgin. In highlighting those tragedies, we risk fuelling the perception that cycling is a dangerous activity that is to be avoided, but I share the view of Spokes, the Lothian cycle campaign, that it is essential that we learn from those tragic fatalities. My motion welcomes the gradual downwards trend in cycle casualties in the latest statistics, despite there being more cyclists on the roads. The benefits of cycling vastly outweigh the risks, and it cannot be repeated enough that the single biggest thing that we can do to build a safe cycle culture on our roads is to get more cyclists on them and, thereby, to build a critical mass in favour of active and healthy travel. However, I am sure that no one will argue today that we have a road network that is adequate for cyclists. It could be much improved for vulnerable users. We must acknowledge, as the Government’s consultation has done, that safety issues and perceived safety issues are barriers to meeting the 2020 target. I acknowledge the minister’s action last week in dedicating a meeting to cycle safety and inviting representatives from cycling and walking organisations to meet transport experts to share experience and views on how we can greatly increase cycle use while reducing casualties. It is vital that those goals be seen in unity and considered together in every policy. In that meeting, there was much consensus on the need for mutual tolerance and respect among all users. In calling the debate, my hope and intention is that we keep up the momentum and convert the talk and plans into real street-level action. I was surprised to learn that the meeting was the first time that active travel champions had attended that particular road safety group in Government. I ask the minister to ensure that they have a permanent place on the group in the future. Speaking of momentum, I give my full support for the pedal on Parliament event that is planned for 28 April. It is a grass-roots initiative that involves a diverse group of cyclists. I urge every member to read the group’s “Making Scotland a cycle-friendly nation: a manifesto”, which makes a set of well-researched demands and goes into far more detail than I have time to do here.

Absolutely, I will. We all commend the work of Spokes, pedal on Parliament, and Sustrans. They have all played very important parts in raising the profile of cycling. It certainly feels to me that the cycling community is raising its voice louder than ever. For example, The Times’s cycle campaign is bringing the issue into the national domain. I urge the minister and other members who are around on 28 April to attend the pedal on Parliament rally, if possible. Last Friday, the speed limit for many streets in the south of Edinburgh was reduced from 30mph to 20mph, as part of a pilot zone that was first proposed by my Green council colleague Steve Burgess. Way back in 2003, the previous Scottish Executive cited research that showed that injuries fell by 60 per cent and child accidents fell by 48 per cent in areas where 20mph zones were introduced. Nine years later, the Edinburgh pilot is still the most ambitious in Scotland, which suggests that progress is far too slow. We need to move to a situation where 20mph is the norm in residential areas. I would also like a broader review of speed limits in urban and rural areas. The recent accidents happened on 40mph limit roads. Those roads had parked cars, pedestrians, traffic islands and cyclists, so we must ask why they are 40mph limit roads. We must also look at the rural situation. Cars travel at 60mph through Newlandrig and residents there are calling for a 30mph zone. If we are going to have in Scotland the type of cycle culture that we see in a number of similar-sized European countries, we need to train every child how to cycle safely on the road. The number of off-road cycle routes is growing every year, thanks to the great work that is being led by Sustrans, but the reality is that most everyday trips will involve cycling on shared road space. Currently, around 30 per cent of Scots children receive on-road training, whereas the figure is around 60 per cent in England. I think that the cycle plan needs to be more ambitious on on-road cycle training. I hope that the minister will agree to introduce a plan and resources to give all children access to on-road cycle training by 2015. My motion also calls for more training for other road users. Just as there are careful cyclists and careless cyclists, there are careful drivers and careless drivers. We must do all that we can to build more mutual respect and tolerance on our roads. We must ensure that roads are safe spaces. Education and awareness raising are essential. I urge the Government to develop more resources for cycle awareness training for all professional and fleet drivers. I mention Lothian Buses in particular, as an example of best practice in that regard. We should also investigate the use of mirrors and sensors for some of the large vehicles on our roads. In our Parliament city, the number of air quality management areas has doubled in recent months: they are areas where the local authority is in danger of breaching European Union air pollution limits. Breaches of the limits carry a hefty fine, not to mention their having health implications and negative impacts on people who suffer from respiratory conditions. Investment in active travel is savvy preventative spend of the best kind for any council and yet, according to Spokes—which is much-respected for its research—half of Scottish councils spend zero pounds of their budget on cycling investment. A number of parts of my motion would require working with local authorities, but this is not an opportunity to pass the buck: it is a call for stronger leadership from the Scottish Government. Pedal on Parliament is pedalling on Parliament because the campaign sees Parliament as having a leading role. Anyone who has tried to navigate central Edinburgh recently knows the disruption that road works can cause. We desperately need a long-term plan and money for segregated cycle lanes in urban areas, which are the norm in some European cities, and we must get better at improving our road infrastructure. Every time a road is dug up, a junction is changed or new signs are installed, let us seize the opportunity to make the area better for cyclists. If a road is being dug up, let us lay a cycle lane at that point. Government action is needed to simplify the current traffic regulation order process. It can take a council months simply to remove a parking space for a cycle lane, which is a significant barrier to councils that want to respond by increasing cycling rates. We can address that kind of bureaucratic barrier now. I could not open a debate about active travel without addressing funding. During the budget process, many members raised concerns and I acknowledge that the Government made last-minute changes. Yesterday, the Minister for Housing and Transport announced that the total cost of improving motorways in central Scotland will be more than £500 million, but the sums that are invested in low-carbon travel are tiny and will still be only 0.8 per cent of the transport budget in 2013-14. If we get this right, we will reap a long list of rewards in terms of health, air quality, jobs, carbon emissions, congestion and more. As a country, we need to shift up a few gears and match our words and ambition with action. I look forward to hearing speeches from across the chamber. I will be pleased to accept the SNP and Labour amendments, but I cannot accept the Conservative amendment, which would delete much of the motion. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the growing number of cyclists in Scotland and the 12% drop in cycling accident casualties between 2000 and 2010; believes that investing far more in infrastructure for cyclists and pedestrians will boost jobs, reduce business costs, cut congestion and climate-changing pollution and improve Scotland’s health by improving air quality and reducing obesity; recognises the central importance of cycling safety and the perception of safety on the road to encouraging more people to cycle; considers that active travel is a cross-cutting priority for central and local government and that active travel champions should be represented on relevant transport and land-use forums, and calls on the Scottish Government to place active travel at the heart of the planning system, to work with local authorities to implement a rolling programme to upgrade infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists as part of every road improvement, to expand the use of 20 mph zones in residential and shopping streets, to consider reviewing all urban speed limits and simplifying the Traffic Regulation Orders process, to provide the necessary support to ensure that all road users have access to increased cycling safety training and to work with local authorities to ensure that every child in Scotland has the opportunity to undertake on-road cycle training by 2015.

Will the minister take an intervention?

First of all, I should mention that I am a new member of Spokes. I thank colleagues for taking part in the debate. Clearly there is much that the chamber agrees on and I welcome members’ recognition of the fact that active travel is well worth the investment. The minister referred to the provision of active travel in the M8 project. However, I am sad to say that the same kind of provision has been omitted from the development of the Forth replacement crossing, and cycle path provision en route to the bridge requires urgent investment. I ask the minister to consider the latter point in particular. I echo Helen Eadie’s point about the need for good cycle infrastructure between Edinburgh and Fife. I welcome the minister’s positive input, particularly his commitment to look at streamlining and simplifying the TRO system. I also agree with Claudia Beamish that we could do a bit better than the current target of 40 per cent of children having on-road cycle training. I ask the minister to revisit the target. Elaine Murray focused on twenty’s plenty, the campaign to reduce traffic speeds, which provides so many benefits for vulnerable users and encourages walking and cycling. We also heard about John Lamont’s athletic prowess. I take my hat off to you—your passion for cycling is obvious. It is certainly the world’s most efficient form of transport and has so many benefits. For example, it reduces obesity and cuts congestion—which in turn can cut business costs. You also talked about the culture of respect in other countries and the considerate behaviour shown by some of our European neighbours. As a qualified athletics coach, I agree that we should try to gain as much as we can from the Commonwealth and Olympics games. I have to say that I like the Conservative amendment; I just do not like what it seeks to delete. Marco Biagi recognised the leadership role that Government can play and the need to normalise cycling. You pointed out the great work that Transform Scotland has done with its document “Civilising the Streets”, and you referred to the need for cycle lanes. Such provision would have an impact. Clare Adamson touched on the underrepresentation of women in cycling, and I think that we would see more of both genders on the roads if we had more segregated cycle lanes. Malcolm Chisholm was right to put safety at the heart of a successful cycling culture, recognising some of the excellent paths that we have in the city, but also the overwhelming support for more segregated paths and better infrastructure. Fiona McLeod touched on the impact that social enterprise has in increasing cycling confidence and referred to the excellent work that is going on in Bishopbriggs. Here in Edinburgh, The Bike Station has done much to boost cycling. It takes in old bikes, refurbishes them and sells them at a reasonable price. It has queues round the corner in south Edinburgh on a Saturday morning. You also pointed out the tourism-boosting potential of cycling and the opportunity to attract tourists and locals to use forest tracks. I look forward to John Lamont taking up Helen Eadie’s challenge to join competitors in her constituency. I am certainly going to take up the challenge and join the minister and others at the pedal for Scotland event in September. The importance of better cycle parking at railway stations was also raised. Clare Adamson focused on the fact that many young people—often males—are involved in cycle accidents. Cycle training and education have a big part to play in improving the situation. You also referred to the impact that the introduction of 20mph zones has had on accident rates. I say to Nanette Milne that the Association of Directors of Public Health has called for far greater investment in active travel, notably for public health spend reasons. It is calling for 10 per cent of transport budgets to go to active travel. Its report is endorsed by more than 110 specialist and professional bodies, from the Institute of Highway Engineers to the British Heart Foundation. I do not share Nanette Milne’s view that Boris Johnson is the nation’s favourite cyclist. I will perhaps keep my views on my favourite cyclist to myself. I do not intend the motion to be prescriptive. I am simply seeking focus on the issues. Claudia Beamish was right to point out that any fatality and accident is one too many. We could have a look at Sweden’s zero fatality approach. You spoke about people cycling home with guitars and so on on their backs. It is important that we normalise cycling as part of everyday life. It is notable that, in 1950s Britain, the cycling rate was 15 per cent, which is higher than Germany’s current 9 per cent. Perhaps that is because the roads were less congested. We can take heart from that. Cycling has so much to offer. It is cheap, it is healthy and it benefits local economies. Parts of the United States have not just business improvement districts but bike-friendly business improvement districts. They have sussed out that one car parking space can take 10 to 20 bikes. In that way, they get more people in the shops, and people on bikes are more likely to stop and engage with their local independent stores. I would not often think of looking to the United States for green initiatives, but some excellent things are happening across the water. As Nanette Milne pointed out, cyclists are less prone to the western diseases that afflict far too many Scots. I just think that cycling has so much to offer us as a nation. It does not all have to be about big investment. Small-scale local interventions can be highly cost effective. Confidence is delivered by safe routes to school projects, and workplace travel plans can reduce peak-hour congestion in a way that new large-scale road projects will never be able to compete with. When a committee held an inquiry into active travel in the previous session of Parliament, there was cross-party agreement on the need to increase funding and resources to make our ambitions for cycling a reality. Members might wish to know not only that the bicycle is generally agreed to have been invented by Kirkpatrick Macmillan but that the first cycling offence, which was recorded in 1842, was by the same man. He knocked over a girl in the Gorbals area and was fined 5/-. It is my hope that, long before 2042—200 years since that dubious milestone—Scotland will be able to stand tall and compare itself to those countries that have already turned their vision into reality. I hope that, at decision time, we will show again that all parties in the Parliament are serious about and committed to transforming the way in which we travel in Scotland.

I, too, thank Jim Hume for securing a debate on the topic of community transport. Community transport plays an extremely important role in keeping potentially excluded people connected with their friends and the services that they need. Importantly, it helps them to retain their independence for longer than they may otherwise do. The motion recognises the role that community transport plays in allowing people to stay in their homes as they grow old. Community transport also takes children to school and folk to work and to healthcare. In rural areas, the public transport system cannot reach every house and every person who needs a lift into town for the shopping or into the village for a social evening. That is where the flexibility of the community transport model most clearly fills the gap. I live in and represent a fairly urban region, where we have an excellent bus service, but even here community transport plays a vital role. I whole-heartedly support Sarah Boyack’s comments. I have an elderly neighbour who is almost 90. She is very independent and asking neighbours for help makes her miserable. She resents doing that; it has a real impact on her wellbeing. I stay three minutes from a bus stop. That is nothing for me, but such distances make bus stops absolutely inaccessible to the many people like her, which is why community transport is so important. In Edinburgh, valuable community transport services are provided by several organisations, including Dove transport, the South Edinburgh Amenities Group, the Pilton Equalities Project, Lothian Community Transport Services and Handicabs, which provides the dial-a-ride service. All of them are doing great work, but the sector faces significant pressures. For that reason, I was pleased to host the launch of the CTA’s state of the sector report in Parliament. It is clear that this diverse sector is made up of lots of very small community-rooted groups that understand local need. I was struck by figures in the report predicting the growth in demand from our changing demographic. The number of people over 75 will rise by 20 per cent by 2020 and will continue to rise. At the same time, the Scottish Ambulance Service has reduced the number of lifts that it provides for non-emergency appointments. Clearly, the ambulances must prioritise emergency trips, because there will always be accidents that require immediate attention. However, as the Christie commission made clear, it is cheaper in the long term to ensure that we tackle problems before they become crises. People still need access to non-emergency health services and the community transport sector is well placed to provide it, but not without more support and a strategic approach from the national health service to working with the community transport sector. The need for the health service to work collaboratively with the CTA was made very clear to me yesterday. It is also clear that the community transport model lends itself to the future that Christie envisaged of a bottom-up approach to the design and delivery of local services. Age Scotland’s hustings last night emphasised the need for community connectedness for elderly people in terms of health and wellbeing, which can make a massive difference to their lives. The community transport sector is incredibly important and we must support it. The sector is perhaps a little like aspects of the cycling sector, in that a little money can go a long way and make a big difference. As Jim Hume said, the CTA has valued the time given in volunteering to be the equivalent of about £1.79 million every year at the minimum wage. However, it is worth more than that to the people who use the service to stay connected to their friends and retain their independence.

I, too, welcome the news that the GIB will be headquartered in Edinburgh and congratulate all those involved in this achievement. Scotland has a unique mix of natural resources and access to cutting edge research and practical engineering expertise. It is right that the bank should have good connections to the many businesses here. The bank will be capitalised with £3 billion of Government finance over the period to 2015 and that significant level of cash is welcome, too. A bank is one of the best ways to invest in the revolutionary changes that we need in our energy systems, the way we deal with our waste and our water infrastructure. Those changes will be a challenge. According to the UK Government’s own figures we will need £200 billion of investment in our energy sector alone. How will we meet this? The GIB plans to use its £3 billion to leverage commercial money on to projects to bring into the green economy private money that might not otherwise have had the confidence to invest here. There are three ways we could ensure that the GIB maximises the green economy opportunity and helps us meet the levels of investment needed. Some are possible today, or will be very soon at least, and one in particular is even more possible because of the bank’s situation in Edinburgh. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills—the UK Government department responsible—envisages the bank investing in “near-commercial” projects. It will then be investing along lines very similar to a normal commercial bank. I would like us to be a little more ambitious with key technologies that will help us reach our climate change targets. Early-stage marine technologies in particular should come under the investment strategy of the bank. I recognise that there are other moneys to help develop early-stage marine renewables. The Scottish Government has pledged £18 million to fund the deployment of commercial arrays, but if the GIB is not able to invest in higher risk projects, bringing the risk down and therefore enabling more private investment, it is not maximising its potential. I hope that over the years, as the institution matures, we will see its remit grow in ambition. As it matures and graduates to a full bank, the institution will be able to raise some of its own finance. The current plans are that it will do that in April 2015. I agree entirely with the members who have already spoken and hope that that will happen much sooner. To meet the financial challenge, it is really important that the bank can borrow and issue bonds. Future borrowing powers will only be given if the structural deficit is eliminated and that enhances the uncertainty that the bank will mature. I hope that the UK Government can give more certainty on that point soon. Finally, to leverage private money will require good working relations with other banks. The GIB will be in a good position in Edinburgh to build relations with the RBS, which is also headquartered here. The RBS is a specialist energy financier. According to a report from Platform using Bloomberg figures, in the years from 2008 to 2010 inclusive, the RBS was involved in providing finance worth almost €8 billion to companies listed in the world’s 20 biggest operators of coal mines and generators of coal-based electricity. That makes the RBS the UK high street bank that has been most heavily involved in financing the hydrocarbon industry. Obviously, I would rather see that €8 billion being diverted from fossil fuels towards cleaner energy production, but it serves to illustrate that the RBS is an energy specialist and could have a very beneficial partnership with our newest bank in Scotland. The fact that the RBS is 84 per cent Government-owned gives that extra incentive for us to ensure that its future energy investments are green. It is time to address the risks inherent in business-as-usual banking behaviour. Let us be ambitious and optimise the GIB’s potential to provide social, environmental and economic benefits.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to ensure that, following the end of parental maternity leave, there is equitable access to early childhood education and care for all children. (S4O-00783)

We agree that implementing the early years framework is important. There is no statutory Scottish Government funding for childcare for children under the age of three, although local authorities provide discretionary free or subsidised services that help to provide equitable access for low-paid families. Those non-statutory services are most at risk from budget cuts. Will the minister commit to working with local authorities to ensure that low-paid families will still be able to access childcare for children under three?

I welcome the debate and the committee’s inquiry into the living wage. Arguments for a living wage have been well expressed by many colleagues, and I agree with almost every colleague who has spoken. I was pleased to hear John Wilson raise the issue of the citizen’s income and Sarah Boyack’s comments on the benefits of the living wage for local areas. I congratulate all those who have campaigned for the living wage and the councils who have implemented it. In the climate justice debate this morning, we talked about gender inequality; in this debate, the issue is still key. As the inquiry heard, 76 per cent of the employees who were affected by the introduction of the living wage in East Renfrewshire were women. In the Scottish Government and its agencies, women represented 71 per cent of the people whose wages were improved. A vital group to consider in this debate is children. UNICEF’s “Report Card 7” found that the United Kingdom was at the bottom of the league table for child wellbeing, beneath 20 other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries—including some that are substantially poorer than the UK. UNICEF identified two key things that are important to a child’s wellbeing: quality time and relationships with family and friends, and a range of engaging activities. However, UNICEF’s central and priority 1 recommendation to improve the quality time that parents are able to give to their children was the living wage. The living wage is that important. UNICEF recommended that Governments work with organisations such as the CBI to encourage them to adopt the living wage. Like others, I was disappointed that CBI Scotland did not attend the inquiry’s oral evidence sessions to speak to its written submission. We have debated the need to tackle in-work poverty, which is a massively important task. However, we must also aim to combat inequality and to acknowledge how wage differentials between the lowest paid and the highest paid in society matter too. In the previous session of Parliament, my colleague Patrick Harvie brought to the chamber a debate on the living wage. I will quote a point that he made, because it is clear and it remains relevant: “We must not be distracted from dealing with the underlying structural causes of poverty in the way that we run our economy. We must go beyond that and recognise not only that poverty matters but that inequality matters. It is about not only the level of wealth that people have, but their relative wealth. It is about how well we share wealth in society, not just how much economic growth we achieve as a whole.”—[Official Report, 29 April 2010; c 25815.] It is as unjust to pay somebody a pittance for valuable work as it is to pay millions to a company chief executive officer. Reams of reports track poverty in Scotland and abroad, but we spend far less effort reporting on the rich and the super-rich. A maximum wage, or a limit on differentials within an organisation, may seem like a sledgehammer solution, but there are ways in which to celebrate good practice. The London Green Party is currently running a campaign for a fair pay kitemark for companies that pay the London living wage and have no employees earning more than 10 times that rate. In many councils, work continues. Unison figures show that 1,800 council workers are paid less than £7.20 an hour, here in Edinburgh. However, as Sarah Boyack said, councils that implement the living wage will see benefits, because people on low incomes spend most of what they earn in the local economy, supporting local businesses and services. I agree with the Scottish living wage campaign that a clause should be included in public sector contracts to ensure that the benefits of the living wage are extended to voluntary sector and private sector workers who deliver services that are paid for from the public purse. I welcome the minister’s assurance that his Government will continue to pursue that issue. We must not forget the people who work in the retail and hospitality sectors, which traditionally are in the private sector. Embedding a living wage across the public sector shows that Government, at national and local level, regards the issue as a priority. The debate has been fairly consensual so far, but I may be about to break that consensus a little. The minister suggested that councils are autonomous, independent bodies, which are responsible for their own decisions. However, as Neil Findlay suggested, they are less autonomous than they used to be when it comes to setting the council tax. Local authorities have been hamstrung by a council tax freeze. I look forward to discussing the issue when we get into the debate for the independence referendum. I would like us to consider greater devolution—

Absolutely.

The Green group does not take part in the council’s budget-setting process, because—as we have documented many times—it is a complete and utter waste of time. If every party in here set a budget, most of the work would go nowhere. I look forward to discussing the need for meaningful tax-raising powers—at both local authority and local community level—when we get into the independence debate.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that it has appropriately balanced its efforts to prevent cancer between lifestyle and environmental risks. (S4O-00713)

I thank the minister for the actions that are being taken. In 2009, the expert President’s cancer panel published serious concerns that “the true burden of environmentally induced cancer has been grossly underestimated.” In 2010, a peer-reviewed paper in the British Journal of Cancer found that four key lifestyle factors—tobacco, diet, being overweight and alcohol consumption, which the minister mentioned—accounted for approximately one third of cancers. That leaves a very large proportion of cancers being accounted for by other risk factors, including environmental risks. Will the minister commit to placing a greater focus on primary prevention of cancer and recognise that a large proportion of cancers cannot be blamed on individuals’ choice of what they eat and whether they smoke, but on other factors, including exposure to carcinogens in the land, air and water of Scotland?

I welcome the youth employment strategy, as action to address the startling number of young unemployed people is essential. I also welcome the fact that we have a dedicated minister to drive that work forward. As has been mentioned, the number of 18 to 24-year-olds claiming jobseekers allowance for at least 12 months has doubled in the past six months and has increased by more than 225 per cent in the past 12 months. We have heard about the social and economic costs of long-term unemployed young people becoming long-term unemployed adults. There are personal costs, such as the effect on people’s confidence, and costs to their families and wider relationships. We all know and agree that the issue must be tackled, and there is cross-party consensus on the urgency that is required. We have heard about support for new jobs, skills mismatches and the impact of funding cycles when third sector expertise is used not to deliver outcomes, but to seek funding extensions. I will offer some practical ideas to help. A recent survey that was commissioned by Elizabeth Finn Care suggested that access to public transport is a major barrier to people finding work. Of the 1,110 people who were surveyed, about 40 per cent expressed serious concerns that linked limited public transport and transport costs to finding job opportunities. Elizabeth Smith highlighted the fact that all policies are interlinked. In the current jobs market, the provision of an affordable and attractive public transport system will remove a major structural barrier and must be a useful thing that the Government can do. I have written to the minister suggesting that approach. The youth employment strategy recognises the importance of maintaining local access to colleges, but the ability to get to your job or place of learning reliably and affordably is important. The second practical issue that I want to raise is the fact that some young people need help with application forms. As members will be aware, most job-seeking young people maintain a curriculum vitae, but employers often ask applicants to fill out an application form. The feedback that I have received suggests that the forms are often not as universally accessible as they might be and that they work differently on different computers. Completing large sections of the forms involves time-consuming and repetitive copying and pasting or the rewriting of information from a CV on to the form. This may seem a minor issue, but the young people to whom I have spoken have convinced me that it is making it more difficult in some cases for them to apply for jobs, especially when they are desperately keen to complete and send off as many applications as possible every week. Several people have told me that on occasion they have simply been unable to complete an application form, which was entirely unusable with the limited access that they had to information technology. Members can be assured that they are determined young people whose frustration at such processes adds to the on-going stress that they feel as they try to find their own productive role in society. I can understand that employers want to ensure that they get all the information that they need, but a universal approach would be helpful. I would be grateful if the minister could explore what the Government can do to assist in that regard. We have talked much about support for education in the debate. I recently met college students in Edinburgh who raised issues such as reduced tutorial time and cuts to higher English courses. They were also keen to help their fellow students and spoke about broadening awareness among the student body of credit unions as well as of the astronomically high rates that are offered by pay day lending companies that were appealing to some of their fellow students who are struggling on tight budgets. I would welcome any action that the minister might take to increase awareness of appropriate financial assistance for young people. I met, too, the first wind turbine apprentices in Scotland. Their belief in the value of what they are doing and the part that they will play in Scotland’s low-carbon economy was clear. There is no doubt that their skills will be in great demand. They were largely young men, but there are encouraging signs that young women, too, are keen to take up places on that course. Barnardo’s has raised the issue of the even greater difficulties that are faced by young people leaving care. I welcome the minister’s comment regarding that group and look forward to learning more of the proposals in that regard. There is a wider point about how we value work and volunteering. Concerns were expressed at the most recent meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on children and young people that job centres are not supporting young people who want to volunteer. There were stories of staff refusing to accommodate volunteering placements when arranging meetings. As members will know, such placements can offer a pathway into paid employment that will provide the stability and finance that those people need to build a successful future. I would welcome action on that, too.

There is no doubt that effective engagement is essential when decisions are being made that may impact on a community’s use of its local environment, and I am in no doubt that SNH must do better in that regard with the community in Barra. It is crucial that authorities work with communities, involve them fully in the decision-making process, and explain why they are proposing action and how to influence decisions. SNH has certainly scored a must-try-harder mark on community engagement. However, SAC designation decisions must ultimately be made according to the criteria that are laid out in the habitats directive—and those criteria alone. That is the case for a very good reason: the interests of industry and big business have run roughshod over the conservation requirements of our natural environment for too long. I accept that those are not the circumstances that are faced in Barra, but the principle remains correct. Decisions on whether to protect our priceless natural assets must be based first and foremost on the needs of the environment. As we are all aware, we rely on a healthy environment for a productive economy. Once it has been decided that a site requires protection, decisions that relate to how it will be managed must be made. In making those decisions, how the area is used must be considered. Local communities are absolutely central to those decisions and discussions. It must be stressed that designation does not mean a no-take or a no-go zone—far from it. However, it does mean that activities that risk harming the features will be managed. The case for protecting the two sites is beyond doubt. Mingulay is home to the only example of Lophelia pertusa in United Kingdom waters—potentially even in European Union inshore waters. As Scottish Environment LINK has highlighted, its being inshore means that it is subject to completely unique conditions, which makes it incomparable with any examples that are found in deeper water. The reefs shelter and support more than 400 different species, including commercially important fish and shellfish. The same can be said for the maerl and sea grass habitats in the Sound of Barra. It is simply not correct to suggest that SNH sought out other features to compensate for the decline in seal numbers. The Sound of Barra contains the largest maerl beds in the UK. In and of itself, that should justify SAC designation. By protecting those habitats, we will also help to ensure that the fish that rely on them can thrive, and help to secure the future of a sustainable fishing industry in the area, which we all want. Those relatively rare habitats are incredibly fragile. Just one pass of a dredge could cause irreparable damage to the reefs. If the Lophelia were damaged, it would be lost for ever. There is no getting away from the fact that bottom-contact gear would have to be restricted around those features, but I cannot imagine that there is any trawling or dredging near the reefs anyway because of the risk of gear damage. It is common practice to zone the restrictions of activities within sites. That does not necessarily mean that all bottom trawling would be banned within the SACs; it would simply be restricted around the most sensitive parts of the site. Furthermore, there is no intention to restrict creeling, pelagic or dived fisheries, which make up by far the biggest economy in the sound. There is surely a workable compromise that will respect both the natural environment and the community of Barra's relationship with those two areas. I completely understand the concerns of fragile and remote communities such as those on Barra about their future. That is why I support the designations of the Sound of Barra and east Mingulay. Designation of protected areas on land and sea is about protecting our assets for future generations. Without a healthy and well-functioning marine environment, we directly jeopardise the future of our island communities.

I would like to draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests as a member of the City of Edinburgh Council. I thank Colin Keir for bringing this debate to the chamber. I, too, thank all the community volunteers and council officers who have brought this multifaceted project to fruition. It has been a real partnership project that has involved local people from the start. It is fitting that we highlight the good work that has gone on at Drumbrae and it is important that we proudly welcome the refurbishment, renewal and new provision of libraries. The wonderful transformation of the traditional old library in Edinburgh’s Morningside has also delighted many dedicated users of what was a much-loved but very tired library. Our libraries provide so many opportunities to so many people that it is essential that we maintain and enhance what they offer, and I am sure that Drumbrae and its one-stop shop approach will be used as an inspirational model for future projects. The cafe is a welcome addition. Commercial booksellers have offered such facilities for some time, and now we have one to rival them. The current funding pressures mean that local authorities across the board are considering what kind of library service they can offer, as well as what kind of library service increased IT literacy and IT usage demand. I am sure that Colin Keir and other Lothian colleagues are aware that the City of Edinburgh Council’s consultation on a strategy to inform the next three years of library usage has just concluded. It is important that we hear and listen to current views. I have already been contacted by constituents who are concerned by proposals that would close libraries across Edinburgh on Sundays and would end late-night Thursday opening. They are concerned that an effort to standardise opening hours will result not in standardisation, but in reduction. I am sure that there is agreement across the parties that, with household budgets being squeezed ever tighter and with increased unemployment, the opportunity that our libraries provide to access knowledge and increase learning has never been so important. Libraries have an important part to play in reducing inequality. Increasing digital access to our libraries is welcome. The way that people access information is changing, but we must bear in mind the fact that many homes do not yet have internet access for a variety of reasons—low income being one of them. Many students—young and old—do not have access to a quiet and appropriate place to study and work without interruption. Therefore, although Edinburgh’s proposed strategy focuses on use of technology and the internet, it is important that we ensure that people across Lothian—and, indeed, throughout Scotland—have the kind of library access that Drumbrae provides. We must ensure that they are able to access services outwith standard workplace and learning hours in order to optimise the potential benefits that our libraries provide. Our libraries are an essential part of all our communities, and I am pleased to contribute to a debate that celebrates their value to us all.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what action the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy is taking to reduce the health impact of air pollution in cities. (S4O-00556)

The minister will be aware that in Edinburgh and Glasgow the reach of the air quality management zones is being extended as a result of continued breaches of air pollution objectives. In Glasgow, the entire city will be such a zone due to numerous breaches of pollution targets for particulates. Air pollution reduces life expectancy and exacerbates breathing and heart conditions in thousands of people. We know that roads are the source of up to 70 per cent of the air pollution that affects people in urban areas. Has the Scottish Government assessed the costs to the health budget of poor air quality? Does the minister agree that a shift in the transport budget from road building to higher spending on cycling and walking would reduce that further burden on health budgets and is therefore highly preventative spend?

I declare that I am a member of the City of Edinburgh Council’s corporate parenting group. This issue is surely one of the most important to be debated in the chamber, and I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute. If we are serious in our desire to ensure that there is genuine equity of opportunity for all, we must provide our looked-after young people with the ability to succeed in education and in life. However, we know that that is no small challenge, as the great divide in educational attainment between looked-after children and other school leavers testifies. We heard from other members that people who have been looked after are 60 times more likely to be imprisoned than to have achieved five or more standard grades at credit or better. The challenge continues to grow. The number of children who require to be looked after continues to increase, and it is essential that resources are in place for those who need such care. That is clearly a challenge in the current financial climate, but it is one that we cannot afford not to meet. There are many reasons behind the growing number, but an increase in parental drug and alcohol misuse is among them, and we must continue to tackle that. Having spent several years on the City of Edinburgh Council’s corporate parenting group, I have experienced strong support across the parties for improving all outcomes for our looked-after young people, and the same strong support exists in the Parliament. HMIE reported in 2010 that awareness of corporate parenting among senior council staff and members had improved, and that is encouraging. It is essential that there is widespread understanding that all local authorities must have the same interest in the progress and attainment of looked-after children that a good parent has for their children, and that local councillors and officers must clearly demonstrate that commitment. In his submission to the inquiry, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People told the Education and Culture Committee that it is worth noting what the Social Work Inspection Agency’s report “Extraordinary Lives: Creating A Positive Future For Looked After Children and Young People In Scotland” stated: “We have concluded that the single most important thing that will improve the future of Scotland’s looked after children is for local authorities to focus on and improve their corporate parenting skills.” I welcome the evidence that that is happening. Corporate parenting groups are doing more. For example, they are involving elected members in meetings with staff from the national health service, the third sector and private foster care providers. Those meetings are educational and informative, although I agree with other members that hearing directly from young people themselves is invaluable. I attended a meeting that was organised by the young people in care council, which really brought those messages to life. We heard directly about the challenges that are faced by young people who have not experienced the secure and settled home life that we would wish for them. The young people showed us a video entitled “Running Alone”, which they had made and starred in. It highlighted quite starkly the challenges that they faced in leaving care and moving into flats on their own as 16-year-olds who had no stable routine to fall back on. The challenges mirrored those that they had faced throughout their young lives. They voiced fears. They were self-aware, and they were concerned that, without supportive adult voices telling them, probably for the umpteenth time, that it was time to get up, they simply would not have the self-discipline to get to the job interview, work, college or whatever the first appointment of the day was, to make that packed lunch, or to balance their tight budgets. They lacked confidence, as they often had at school, to deal with problems as they arose. From the video, their loneliness was palpable and their need for support was clear. That need can be addressed, as witnesses such as the Scottish Parent Teacher Council suggested, by providing advocates for children and ensuring strong support for identifying lead professionals in our schools and ensuring that they receive the best training available. We also need to ensure that the support continues into throughcare and aftercare as the 16 to 19-year-olds make life-changing decisions on education and employment without the support that we would give our own children. We all appreciate that patience, understanding, creativity and positivity are essential in building a child’s sense of confidence and achievement, and we need to bear it in mind that the starting points for children in education are very different. However, we must always be as ambitious for our looked-after young people as we are for our own children. I welcome the committee’s inquiry, which raises awareness of the complex challenges that looked-after young people face and emphasises the role that we as corporate parents must play. As the inquiry goes on I ask that it look at the different rates of pay for those fostering across the local authorities and at the difficulties that authorities have in attracting foster carers. I think that Edinburgh sits midway on the scale of the 32 local authorities in that regard, but accommodation in Edinburgh is perhaps the most expensive in the country. As I said, I welcome the inquiry and I hope that it leads to the positive results for our looked-after young people that we all wish to see.

I am sure that fellow members are aware that no women are in the top 10 nominations for this year’s sports personality of the year award, and perhaps members are aware that the award’s 27-strong nominations panel of newspaper sports editors and Zoo and Nuts magazine staff was entirely male. It is not as if there was no female success this year—Kath Grainger, who is the single most successful female rower in British history, won her sixth world championship gold in the double sculls together with Anna Watkins. I am reassured by the public criticism of that award’s glaring oversight and I believe that the Commonwealth games can address the woeful lack of recognition of women’s significant achievements in sport. As John Mason and others have noted, the built legacy of the games is extremely important. The new facilities such as the community sports hubs in local authority areas are extremely welcome. Grass-roots access to the more elite facilities is also essential to make those facilities work after the games have gone. However, a culture change of gender equality in sport could be the most valuable legacy of all. We must take the opportunity to inspire more women—young and old—into sport. Women and girls play much less sport than men and boys—12 per cent of women play sport regularly, compared with 20 per cent of men. There are many reasons for that. Women’s sports coverage makes up just 2 to 5 per cent of all sports media coverage. Women appear all too infrequently in the sports pages. It is important to address that by increasing positive images of women participating in sport, and raising awareness of what is going on in women’s sport at all levels, week in and week out. However, few sports journalists in Britain are women. A report for the Commission on the Future of Women’s Sport shows that only 0.5 per cent of all sponsorship in the UK goes to women’s sport. We must therefore use the games as an opportunity to give equal coverage to male and female sports. We need active programmes to target women, as well as to change the media portrayal of female success. More female sports in the media and gender equality in sports participation, with the health and wellbeing benefits that come along with that, will be a legacy worth delivering. I ask the minister to ensure that the Commonwealth games legacy enhances the role of women in sports in Scotland. It is essential to work directly with Government bodies to ensure that we have a meaningful legacy of participation. Financial and practical support for coaching programmes across the sporting disciplines to ensure that opportunities are made available to those who are inspired by our games are also crucial. The minister will be aware that, in the Lothians, there have been campaigns to ensure the retention of Edinburgh’s neglected track stadium and velodrome—the much-loved grass-roots home of track cycling—and although less elite, no less important, Leith waterworld. We must also ensure that any new buildings are maintained to a decent standard. As Jenny Marra highlighted, modern games are not just about sport, unfortunately. Members will no doubt be aware of the controversy surrounding the London Olympic committee’s decision to appoint Dow Chemical as sponsor of the Olympic stadium wrap. As many members know, Dow Chemical is the legal owner of Union Carbide, the company that is responsible for one of the world’s worst industrial disasters—the Bhopal gas disaster in 1984. It is hard to think of a less appropriate sponsor for a life-affirming, health-promoting, global sports event. That is why the community that is still living in Bhopal and the Indian Olympic Association—

Many people in Scotland are in solidarity with the Indian Olympic Association and it is important that the global Olympic association looks at those issues. We have an opportunity to do things differently in Scotland. I am sure that the minister will agree that ethical considerations should be part of the sponsor selection process. I would be grateful if, in closing, the minister would confirm that she agrees that Dow is a wholly unsuitable company to sponsor sporting events of this type. A modern, global games provides challenges and opportunities. I warmly welcome the practical progress that has been made to date and the positive visions that are being shared by members across the chamber of a fitter and more sporting Scotland throughout ages and genders.

While I recognise the Scottish Government’s conservation efforts, it is clear that fish stocks are still in crisis. Will the minister commit to enhanced conservation measures to ensure a sustainable future as part of the conservation credits scheme?

The autumn budget signalled the day that the coalition Government finally dropped its pretence of being the greenest Government ever. In his statement, George Osborne was blatant in his support for energy-intensive industries while pulling the rug from under the fledgling solar industry. In Scotland, we welcome Government commitments to an ambitious renewables programme and climate emission reduction targets. We support the moves announced in yesterday’s capital spending plans relating to district heating schemes that will provide cheap heat to households where before it was wasted, and broadband infrastructure that will connect people and businesses and reduce the need to travel. Projects such as investment in rail transport infrastructure are key to reducing our dependence on private cars. We must make more of opportunities such as those available via a subsea grid connection across the North Sea to let us trade electricity efficiently with the rest of Europe, and closer to home we must help to enable the creation of local energy companies in every council area in Scotland. There is a great opportunity to generate energy locally and renewably, boosting both jobs and revenue for vital public services. We must demonstrate a commitment to a fitter, healthier and cleaner Scotland by properly funding cycling infrastructure—a spend-to-save measure on many levels. If we are to tackle the climate crisis, we need more such projects, phasing out dependence on carbon-intensive industries while increasing desperately needed employment opportunities. Political will should divert finance away from fossil fuels and towards viable alternative jobs for workers from the carbon-intensive industries, and all government spending plans should reflect that. What does the autumn statement have to say about challenging inequality? Er, not a lot. Although it is surely a central pillar of the economic recovery, the UK Government fails even to address it in the autumn statement, while taking £250 million away from hard-pressed families. The UK Government has confirmed that it will not support a financial transactions tax, such as the Robin Hood tax, or offer anything new to tackle tax avoidance and evasion. Big businesses and millionaires will not feel the pinch in the way that those on low earnings will. Although we do not have the power to raise a transaction tax, the lack of social justice shown by the UK Government cannot be replicated in Scotland. There is a green alternative to the public sector cuts, which are damaging the private sector, too, as consumer confidence plummets and businesses suffer. There is an alternative to the gloomy financial forecasts: fairer taxation, more equal distribution of wealth, a radical energy efficiency programme and an economy on a local scale. Land value tax, which is a fairer form of taxation, is a progressive alternative to council tax that would bring more land into useful social and economic activity. The jobs deficit must be addressed. Jobs are key and we have to create a new generation of them for young people. In Scotland we appreciate and understand that ripping up regulation is not the way to create new jobs. We must target our efforts where they will make the biggest difference: on new green jobs in the fledgling energy efficiency sector and the green industries and green technologies of the future.

I will not take that long. Scotland has committed itself to ambitious climate targets, with 80 per cent emission reductions by 2050. The Greens believe that our targets should be met as a result of our efforts in Scotland, through important actions such as widespread energy efficiency schemes and the promotion of walking and cycling. However, the order enables us to buy in carbon credits that represent promised carbon reductions in other countries, which is something that we consistently opposed during the passage of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. The Government says that it does not intend to use those powers. We welcome that commitment but, in that case, why lay the order? If we end up spending money on buying the credits that the order allows us to, it will make our carbon accounts look good but will not provide for the people of Scotland the many other social, environmental and economic benefits that low-carbon investment can bring. For example, investment in cycling would improve people’s health through physical activity and reduced air pollution. Some argue that carbon credits can support developing countries and that we have a moral obligation to support others to take a low-carbon development path. That support should be provided not through carbon credits, but grants to support community-level projects, and the Government has promised to explore that through a climate adaptation fund. We look forward to seeing its proposals on that. For those reasons, we oppose the order.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria were used by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency in granting a licence to Greenpark Energy to begin hydraulic fracturing to extract shale gas. (S4O-00384)

The minister may be aware of a report from the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research setting out concerns about ground and surface water contamination as a result of hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, and the recent Caudrilla Resources report on the impact of the process in Blackpool, which stated that it is “highly probable” that fracking triggered the seismic tremors there. Those concerns and others have led some states in the United States to place a moratorium on fracking operations. Quebec has suspended fracking, New South Wales has introduced a moratorium, and—

France has banned fracking. Is the minister listening carefully to the evidence, and will his Government take action at the very least to support a moratorium on fracking in Scotland?

I thank Margaret Mitchell for bringing the motion for debate. There is no doubt that this is an extremely important issue in terms of both reducing avoidable waste and saving the NHS money. Indeed, it could simply be described as a no-brainer to make progress on an issue that avoids unnecessary waste and saves money at the same time, especially money that can be used in the NHS at a time of such great need. I read in advance of the debate that the Scottish Executive raised the very same issue in a strategy in 2002. The Scottish Government has now raised the issue in a strategy in 2011. That is recognition that medicines and money are still being wasted and welcome recognition that we need to do more to address that. What are the solutions? The lack of progress could be down to the fact that, although it is a no-brainer to tackle the problem, only a combined and concerted effort will resolve it. Recent research means that we now have a better understanding of the causes of waste medicine, so we are best placed to act. General practitioners and pharmacies must combine forces to tackle the problem and they must be supported by backing from Government. I agree with Nanette Milne that community pharmacies have a vital role to play in reducing the amount of waste medicine. We must also improve the quality of medicine management and make better use of medicine reviews, as well as make prescribers fully aware of the consequences of overprescribing. Responsibility lies with the patients receiving medicines, too. We must encourage a greater take-up of medicine use check-ups. Of course, that does not apply to all patients. For example, for care homes in particular, we must ensure that the necessary action is taken to reduce and avoid medicine waste. Even with the best information technology, under present arrangements we cannot prevent the waste of all medicines, as we have heard. There are prescribed medicines that are never used. Even medicines in pristine, untouched packaging that, for whatever reason, have not been collected from pharmacies must be destroyed, as must pristine medicines that have never left professional care. We must explore alternatives to disposing of or incinerating that so-called waste medicine. Currently, prescribed medicine can be used only by the person who is named on the medicine. As we have heard in the debate, there are many circumstances in which prescribed medicine can no longer be used by the named person but could be perfectly safe for another person to use. I ask the minister what action has been taken to consider how prescribed medicines in such circumstances could be recycled or reused rather than be incinerated and whether the current system could be changed so that, in a safe and regulated environment, the medicines could be used by another patient. I agree whole-heartedly with colleagues that we should study practices around the globe where medicine waste has been reduced. I hope that the minister will be open to addressing this issue with the UK Government, where required. I also ask that he follow the example of Sweden, where clear labelling ensures that, to better ensure safe disposal, people are aware of the medicines that are most toxic to the environment.

Rob Gibson raises important issues in this members’ business debate, and I thank him for bringing it to the chamber. The Lothians, too, are well placed to contribute to, and benefit from, a real commitment to renewably produced electricity. Here in Edinburgh, we have world-leading educational establishments and local community groups such as PEDAL—Portobello Transition Town, which is highlighting the practical benefits with a proposal for a community wind turbine. We all welcome the progress that is being made on renewable energy production. We can and must complement that with an increase in renewable heat and by growing the community-owned and small-scale renewables sector. Of course, such technologies will bring optimal benefit only when they are located within well-insulated buildings. The Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism told Parliament that there was a rational case for extending the life of Scotland’s two nuclear power plants and that the SNP was “perfectly open” to the continued use of the Hunterston and Torness power stations. I am sure that the minister realises that new nuclear is an unnecessary choice and that, instead of dangerous and expensive energy production being given yet more time in Scotland, the time is now right for the Government to commit to producing a nuclear shutdown timeline. Germany has shown us all the way. We have also heard that Switzerland intends to be offline by 2034 and that Italy has cancelled all new nuclear plants in a legally binding referendum. Some of the reactors that those countries are shutting down are younger than Hunterston B, but we are extending its life. The lifetime extension of old plants carries greater safety concerns. That is part of the concern that I raise. The events at Fukushima should be taken as a warning about keeping crumbling plants with patchy safety records going. I will not go over all the points that members have made and with which I agree entirely. I ask the minister to write to the UK Government opposing any lifespan extension at Hunterston on the ground of safety concerns. I also ask him to commit to producing a timeline for nuclear shutdown in Scotland.

Is the minister aware of the current threat to the much-loved and well-used arts venue, the Forest, in Edinburgh city centre? Would she be prepared to meet representatives of the Forest as they work to secure a long-term home?

I welcome this members’ business debate and thank Elaine Murray for raising the matter, especially given the UK coalition Government’s decision not to introduce a ban on the use of wild animals in travelling circuses. It is timely that members of the Scottish Parliament have been given the opportunity to debate the issue and voice our opinions on it. The Scottish Green Party has been consistent in voicing its opposition to many abhorrent animal welfare matters, whether that be the use of wild animals in travelling circuses or bringing pandas to Edinburgh zoo. We have continually supported a complete ban on the practice of snaring, and my predecessor Robin Harper worked to strengthen the protection for seals during the passage of the Marine (Scotland) Bill in the previous session. Animal welfare campaign groups have worked hard throughout Scotland to raise those matters, and they should be applauded for their work. As a newly elected MSP, I look forward to working alongside them in this parliamentary session. There can be no justification whatsoever for the use of wild animals in circuses. Such practices should be relegated to where they belong: well and truly in the past. In Scotland in the 21st century, there should be no tolerance or complacency shown towards the abuse of those animals, which are held captive for some supposed entertainment value. An outright ban is the only way to secure that, especially within an industry that does not seem to take animal welfare concerns seriously. The UK Government has dilly-dallied around the topic for too long. My Westminster colleague, Caroline Lucas MP, recently pressed the matter with UK ministers. She called their position “extraordinarily cowardly”. The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the British Veterinary Association, Animal Defenders International and the Born Free Foundation are among the groups that support the ban, and the majority of the public has also supported an outright ban. The University of Bristol study that reviewed the scientific studies concluded: “there is no evidence to suggest that the natural needs of non-domesticated animals can be met through living conditions and husbandry offered by circuses.” The Independent’s petition has collected tens of thousands of signatures. The UK Government may have done many unpopular things, but this is not a difficult decision for it to take when a ban has such breadth and depth of support. I hope that the Scottish Government can demonstrate its support for ending the animal cruelty that we are discussing and for the wishes of the public. What have the Scottish ministers done to press the UK Government on an outright ban? We must ensure that we end the unnecessary suffering of those animals without delay, and I hope that the Scottish ministers will speak out against that animal cruelty with decision makers in Westminster.

Strong cross-party support for Edinburgh as the home for the green investment bank is a very positive development, and Marco Biagi deserves our thanks for bringing the debate to the Parliament. Scotland has the most extraordinary renewables potential, especially for wind, wave and tidal power. We are a nation of serial innovators and we know what the opportunities of an energy bonanza feel like. Similarly, despite a difficult few years, Edinburgh has particular expertise in developing financial markets. The real talent that will be needed will be readily available here, and readily committed to Scotland’s future as a home and funder for low-carbon technologies. We want to see Edinburgh win the battle, but we have a couple of concerns about the institution itself. Will it be a proper bank that invests in green technology? Will it have the key strengths of a real bank and be able to borrow and lend, or will it be just another grant-giving body? Without proper financial powers, the money will not come back, ready to be lent out again. The greenness is also in question. In January, my colleague at Westminster, Caroline Lucas, asked Vince Cable whether he could guarantee that the bank would not be used to fund the new wave of nuclear power stations that has been backed by both the current UK Administration and its predecessors. He was unable to do so, and said: “in the very long run we are not ruling out particular possibilities, including nuclear. It is not part of the bank’s immediate planning, however.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 May 2011; Vol 528, c 794.] I am grateful to hear that, but that approach would be an absurdity, especially given the clear majority in this chamber against the dead end that nuclear power represents. A green investment bank needs to help us to prepare for the post-nuclear era, just as we must prepare for the post-oil era. As Rob Gibson touched on, it would be equally absurd if, in the name of low-carbon energy, the green investment bank were to pour its money—which is to say our money—into unconventional fossil fuel extraction, such as shale gas and deepwater oil drilling, on the pretext that the speculative technology of carbon capture and storage might one day get off the drawing board. Successive UK Governments have form on the issue. We, the taxpayers, own a substantial slice of the banking industry, yet UK ministers have yet to require those banks to operate on a greener basis, for example, by forcing the Royal Bank of Scotland to ditch dirty projects such as tar sands extraction in favour of projects that are of genuine public benefit. If the UK Government had sufficient political will on the issue, just think what a powerful institution RBS could become if we turned it into a green investment bank, with access to the new Government funds as well as its already vast lending and investment portfolio. My concerns are genuine and I hope that the Scottish Government shares them. I ask the minister to open discussions on them with UK counterparts and to keep the Parliament informed of progress.

I begin by saying how privileged I feel to follow in the footsteps of Robin Harper, the UK’s first and longest-serving Green parliamentarian. Robin is totally irreplaceable and his is a big scarf to fill, but I will do my best in representing the people of Lothian. It is heartening to hear such positive contributions and a commitment to sport from across the chamber. There is obviously agreement that we want to be part of an active and healthy nation. I really do welcome the chance to speak in the chamber on this motion, as sport has been and continues to be an important part of my life, as it is for many Scots. The debate so far has highlighted the opportunities that we have and the challenges that we face in ensuring that Scotland becomes the healthy and active nation that we all know it can be. Our Commonwealth games bid was entitled “People, Place, Passion”, and its success was due in no small part to the recognition of Scots’ extraordinary passion for sport. The challenge that we have now is to transform that passion into a nation of physically active individuals. Many sports associations and countless volunteer coaches are looking for the support that will enable them to best help their sportspeople to fulfil their potential. I welcome the fact that that responsibility is acknowledged. Governing bodies are working hard to provide an increased number of coaching training programmes. Waiting lists do exist in clubs. At Edinburgh Athletic Club we have a group of young children who are desperate to get started, which demonstrates desire to be involved. We must ensure that we have the coaches we need, so that young people have the earliest possible access to involvement in the sport of their choice.

I think it is partly because people get involved when their children are young, but when their children have passed through the system they lose interest. We are seeing more professional coaching programmes, and there is a real sense of attainment for coaches, which I hope will address that shortage in the future. In order to make the most of the opportunity that the two great games that are coming to the UK give us in terms of a lasting legacy, we need to ensure that the fostering of active, fit, healthy and ready-for-sport young people is at the heart of national and local decision making. Progress towards that aim can be increased by creating a national culture of walking and cycling to school, which we can achieve by investing in attractive, safe, well-maintained walkways and cycleways, with schools and other local facilities as the community hubs for a wide range of activities. I welcome the minister’s commitment to such hubs and to community involvement and engagement. We need to ensure that green spaces for free and informal activities are within easy reach of homes and that they are afforded the protection that they deserve in planning legislation. In cities such as Edinburgh, local parkland is increasingly attractive to developers and community sports facilities are threatened. Access to local spaces where children can kick a ball about, climb a tree and run around enables them to develop the basic skills and fitness that are needed for more structured activities and increases their physical literacy. Of course, we need action in association with local authorities to deliver at least two hours of physical education a week to pupils. That runs alongside active schools. We need to ensure that active schools include families who might find even the minimal fees that are charged to be a barrier to participation for their young people. I agree that obesity and its many associated health risks can be addressed by embracing the opportunities that we have within the next few years. The fact that the United Kingdom is hosting two world games in such a short period provides a unique platform to push towards a healthy Scotland. Those global events will have very local consequences for space and place, and not simply in terms of new facilities. The capacity of international sporting events to aid social cohesion and promote a positive message and a positive lifestyle is well documented. We have a once-in-a-lifetime chance to tackle social exclusion through promoting sport and encouraging more people of all ages, abilities and backgrounds to participate. We must ensure that there are enough suitable sporting venues, whether pools, halls, courts or pitches, to enable local sporting participation by those who are inspired by the great global events that are coming to the UK. The minister noted that spending on sport reduces spending on physical and mental poor health. It does indeed: it increases our national wellbeing and our individual self-esteem. We have many talented elite sportsmen and women who are exciting role models and who inspire our young people—although it is still too unusual to find coverage of talented sportswomen in the sports pages of our newspapers. We must strive to develop an active sporting Scotland, where grassroots sport and community participation form the bedrock of national success and good health and where all our talented people, regardless of background or gender, are given the chance to shine through sport. Sport is the great leveller and, as the Scottish Sports Association reminds us, our greatest social movement.

I, Alison Johnstone, do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm, that I will be faithful and bear allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, Her heirs and successors, according to Law.